Quantum. Einstein, Bohr, and the great debate about the nature of reality. By Manjit Kumar.
Chapter 8. The Quantum Magician
On a quantum theoretical reinterpretation of kinematics and mechanical relations, was the paper that everyone had been waiting for, and some, had hoped to write.
The editor of the Zeitschrift für Physik received it on 29th of July, 1925. In the preamble, that scientists call an abstract, the author boldly stated his ambitious plan.
To establish a basis for theoretical quantum mechanics, founded exclusively on relationships between quantities which, in principle, are observable.
Some, fifteen pages later, his goal achieved, Werner Heisenberg had laid the foundations for the physics of the future.
Who was this young German Wunderkind, and how had he succeeded where all others had failed?
Werner Karl Heisenberg was born on 5th of December 1901 in Würzburg, Germany.
He was eight when his father was appointed to the country's only professorship of Byzantine philology at Munich University, and the family moved to the Bavarian capital.
For Heisenberg and his brother Irwin, almost two years older, home became a spacious apartment in the fashionable suburb of Schwabing on the northern outskirts of the city.
They attended the prestigious Maximilian's Gymnasium, where Max Planck had been a student forty years earlier.
It was also the school where their grandfather was now in charge.
If the staff were tempted to treat the headmaster's grandsons more leniently than other pupils, then they quickly discovered there was no need.
He has an eye for what is essential and never gets lost in details, Werner's first-year teacher reported.
His thought processes in grammar and mathematics operate rapidly and usually without mistakes.
August Heisenberg's father, forever the teacher, devised all manner of intellectual games for Werner and Irwin.
In particular he always encouraged mathematical games and problem-solving.
Pitting one brother against the other as they raced to solve them, it was evident that Werner was the more mathematically talented.
Around the age of twelve he started learning calculus and asked his father to get him maths books from the university library.
Seeing this as an opportunity to improve his son's grasp of languages, he started supplying him with books written in Greek and Latin.
It was the beginning of Werner's fascination with the work of the Greek philosophers.
Then came the First World War and the end of Heisenberg's comfortable and secure world.
The end of the war brought in its wake political and economic chaos throughout Germany, but few places experienced this more intensely than Munich and Bavaria.
On 7 April 1919 radical socialists declared Bavaria a Soviet republic.
As they waited for troops sent by Berlin to arrive and restore the deposed government, those opposed to the revolutionaries organized themselves into military-style companies.
Heisenberg and some friends joined one of these. His duties were largely confined to writing reports and running errands.
Our adventures were over after a few weeks Heisenberg recalled later.
Then the shooting died down and military service became increasingly monotonous.
By the end of the first week in May the Soviet republic had been ruthlessly crushed, leaving over a thousand dead.
The harsh post-war reality led young middle-class teenagers like Heisenberg to embrace the romantic ideals of an earlier age,
as they flocked to join youth organizations such as the Pathfinders, the German equivalent of the Boy Scouts.
Others, wanting more independence, set up their own groups and clubs.
Heisenberg led one such group formed by younger pupils at his school.
Gloop Heisenberg as they styled themselves went hiking and camping in the Bavarian countryside and discussed the new world their generation would create.
In the summer of 1920, after graduating from the gymnasium with such ease that he won a prestigious scholarship, Heisenberg wanted to study mathematics at Munich University.
When a disastrous interview ended any chance of doing so, a despondent Heisenberg sought his father for advice.
He made an appointment for his son to see an old friend, Arnold Sommerfeld.
Although the small squat man with his martial dark mustache looked rather austere, Heisenberg did not feel intimidated.
He sensed that despite his appearance, here was a man with a genuine concern for young people.
August Heisenberg had already told Sommerfeld that his son was particularly interested in relativity and atomic physics.
You are much too demanding, he told Werner. You can't possibly start with the most difficult part and hope that the rest will automatically fall into your lap.
Always eager to encourage and recruit raw talent to mold, he softened.
It may be that you know something. It may be that you know nothing. We shall see.
Sommerfeld allowed the 18-year-old to attend the research seminar intended for more advanced students. Heisenberg was lucky.
Together with Bohr's Institute in Copenhagen and Bohr's group in Göttingen, Sommerfeld's institute would form the golden triangle of quantum research in the years to come.
When Heisenberg attended his first seminar, he spotted a dark haired student with a somewhat secretive face in the third row.
It was Wolfgang Pauli. Sommerfeld had already introduced him to the portly Viennese during a tour around the institute on his first visit.
The professor had been quick to tell Heisenberg once Pauli was out of earshot that he considered the boy to be his most talented student.
Recalling Sommerfeld's advice that he could learn a great deal from him, Heisenberg sat down next to Pauli.
Doesn't he look the typical Hasar officer? whispered Pauli as Sommerfeld entered.
It was the beginning of a lifelong professional relationship that never quite blossomed into a closer personal friendship.
They were simply two different. Heisenberg was quieter, friendlier, less outspoken and critical than Pauli.
He romanticized nature and loved nothing more than hiking and camping with his friends.
Pauli was drawn to cabarets, taverns and cafes.
Heisenberg had done half a day's work while Pauli still slept soundly in his bed.
Yet Pauli exerted a strong influence on Heisenberg and never passed up a chance to tell him with tongue in cheek.
You are a complete fool.
In the middle of writing his dazzling review of relativity it was Pauli who steered Heisenberg away from Einstein's theory and towards the quantum atom as a more fertile area of research in which to make his name.
In atomic physics we still have a wealth of uninterpreted experimental results, he told Heisenberg.
Nature's evidence in one place seems to contradict that in another and so far it has not been possible to draw an even halfway coherent picture of the relationship involved.
It was likely, thought Pauli, that everyone would still be groping about in a thick mist for years to come.
As Heisenberg listened he was inexorably drawn into the realm of the quantum.
Sommerfeld soon assigned Heisenberg a little problem in atomic physics.
He asked him to analyze some new data on the splitting of spectral lines in a magnetic field and to construct a formula that replicated the splitting.
Pauli warned Heisenberg that Sommerfeld hoped that deciphering such data would lead to new laws.
It was an attitude that for Pauli bordered on a kind of number mysticism but then he admitted no one has been able to suggest anything better.
The exclusion principle and electron spin still lay in the future.
Heisenberg's ignorance of the accepted rules and regulations of quantum physics allowed him to tread where others wedded to a more cautious and rational approach feared to.
It enabled him to construct a theory that appeared to explain the anomalous Zeeman effect.
Having dismissed an earlier version, Heisenberg was relieved when Sommerfeld sanctioned the publication of his latest effort.
Although it was later shown to be incorrect, his first scientific paper brought Heisenberg to the attention of Europe's leading physicists.
Bohr was one of those who sat up and took notice.
They first met in Göttingen in June 1922 when Sommerfeld took some of his students to hear Bohr's series of lectures on atomic physics.
What struck Heisenberg was how precise Bohr was in his choice of words.
Each one of his carefully formulated sentences revealed a long chain of underlying thoughts, of philosophical reflections, hinted at, but never fully expressed.
He was not alone in sensing that Bohr reached his conclusions more by intuition and inspiration than by detailed calculations.
At the end of the third lecture Heisenberg rose to point out some difficulties that remained in a published paper that Bohr had praised.
As people began to mingle after the question-and-answer session, Bohr sought out Heisenberg and asked the twenty-year-old if he would like to accompany him on a walk later that day.
Their hike to a nearby mountain lasted some three hours and Heisenberg later wrote that my real scientific career only started that afternoon.
For the first time he saw that one of the founders of quantum theory was deeply worried by its difficulties.
When Bohr invited him to Copenhagen for a term, Heisenberg suddenly saw his future as one full of hope and new possibilities.
Copenhagen would have to wait.
Sommerfeld was due to go to America and in his absence had arranged for Heisenberg to study with mocks born in Göttingen.
Although he looked like a simple farm boy with short, fair hair, clear bright eyes and a charming expression, Bohr quickly discovered that there was much more to him than met the eye.
He was easily as gifted as Pauly, Bohr wrote to Einstein.
When he returned to Munich Heisenberg finished his doctoral thesis on turbulence.
Sommerfeld had chosen the topic to broaden his knowledge and understanding of physics.
During the oral examination his inability to answer simple questions such as the resolving power of a telescope almost cost him his doctorate.
Wilhelm Wien, the head of experimental physics was dismayed when Heisenberg struggled to explain how a battery worked.
He wanted to fail the upstart theorist, but reached a compromise with Sommerfeld.
Heisenberg would get his doctorate, but would be awarded the second lowest mark, grade 3.
Pauly had passed with grade 1.
Feeling humiliated, that evening he packed his bags and caught the overnight train.
He could not bear to stay in Munich a minute longer and fled to Göttingen.
I was astonished when one morning long before the appointed time he suddenly appeared before me with an expression of embarrassment on his face, recalled Bohrn later.
Heisenberg anxiously recounted the tale of his oral exam, worried that his services would no longer be required as an assistant.
Eager to cement Göttingen's growing reputation for theoretical physics, Bohrn was confident that Heisenberg would bounce back and told him so.
He was convinced that physics had to be rebuilt from the ground up.
The mishmash of quantum rules and classical physics that was at the heart of the Bohr-Sommerfeld quantum atom had to give way to a logically consistent new theory that Bohrn called quantum mechanics.
Some of this was new for physicists trying to disentangle the problems of atomic theory, however, it signaled the awareness of a creeping sense of crisis in 1923 at the inability of physicists to cross the atomic Rubicon.
Pauly was already loudly proclaiming to anyone who would listen that the failure to explain the anomalous Zeeman effect was evidence that we must create something fundamentally new.
After meeting him, Heisenberg believed that Bohr was the one most likely to make the breakthrough.
Pauly had been in Copenhagen as Bohr's assistant since the autumn of 1922.
He and Heisenberg kept each other informed about the latest developments at their respective institutes through a regular exchange of letters.
Heisenberg like Pauly had also been working on the anomalous Zeeman effect.
Just before Christmas 1923 he wrote to Bohr about his latest efforts and received an invitation to spend a few weeks in Copenhagen.
On Saturday, 15th of March 1924, Heisenberg stood in front of the three-story neoclassical building with its red tiled roof at Blegdansve 17.
Above the main entrance he saw the sign that greeted every visitor.
Universitets Institute for Theoretisk Physics, better known as the Bohr Institute.
Heisenberg soon discovered that only half of the building, the basement and the ground floor was used for physics.
The rest was set aside for accommodation.
Bohr and his growing family lived in an elegantly furnished flat that occupied the entire first floor.
The family maid, the caretaker and honored guests were housed on the top floor.
On the ground floor, besides the lecture hall with its six long rows of wooden benches, was a well-stocked library and offices for Bohr and his assistant.
There was also a modest-sized workroom for visitors.
Despite its name the institute had two small laboratories on the first floor, with the main laboratory housed in the basement.
The institute was struggling for space with a permanent staff of six and almost a dozen visitors.
Bohr was already making plans to expand.
Over the next two years the adjacent land was bought and two new buildings were added that doubled the capacity of the institute.
Bohr and his family moved out of their flat into a large purpose-built house next door.
The extension meant a substantial renovation of the old building that included more office space, a dining room and a new self-contained three-room flat on the top floor.
It was here that Pauley and Heisenberg often stayed in later years.
There was one thing that no one at the institute wanted to miss, the arrival of the morning post.
Letters from parents and friends were always welcome but it was correspondence from far-flung colleagues and the journals that were seized upon for the latest breaking news from the frontiers of physics.
However, not everything revolved around physics, even if much of the talking did.
There were musical evenings, games of table tennis, hiking trips and outings to watch the latest motion picture.
Heisenberg had arrived with such high hopes, but his first few days at the institute left him feeling frustrated.
Expecting to spend time with Bohr almost as he stepped through the front door, he had hardly seen him.
Used to being the best, Heisenberg was suddenly faced with Bohr's international posse of brilliant young physicists.
He was intimidated.
They all spoke several languages while he sometimes struggled to express himself clearly in German.
Enjoying nothing more than walks in the countryside with his friends, Heisenberg thought that everyone at the institute possessed a worldliness that he did not.
However, nothing left him as despondent as the realization that they understood much more of atomic physics than he did.
As he tried to shake off the blows to his self-esteem, Heisenberg wondered if he would ever get the chance to work with Bohr.
He had been sitting in his room when there was a knock on the door and in strode Bohr.
After apologizing for being so busy, he proposed that the two of them go on a short walking tour.
There was little chance Bohr explained of him being left alone long enough at the institute for the pair of them to talk at any length.
What better way of getting to know one another than a few days of walking and talking?
It was Bohr's favorite pastime.
Early the following morning they caught the tram to the northern outskirts of the city and began their walk.
Bohr asked Heisenberg about his childhood and what he remembered about the outbreak of war ten years earlier.
As they headed north instead of physics they talked about the pros and cons of war, Heisenberg's involvement in the youth movement and Germany.
After spending the night at an inn they walked to Bohr's country cottage in Tisvilde before heading back to the institute on the third day.
The 100-mile walk had the effect that Bohr desired and Heisenberg craved.
They got to know each other more quickly.
They had talked about atomic physics, yet when they finally returned to Copenhagen it was Bohr the man rather than the physicist that had captivated Heisenberg.
I am of course absolutely enchanted with the days I am spending here, he wrote to Pauli.
He had never before met a man like Bohr with whom he could discuss just about anything.
Despite his genuine concern for the welfare of everyone at his institute,
Sommerfeld upheld the traditional German role of professor, one step removed from his subordinates.
In Göttingen, Heisenberg would not have dared to broach with Bohr the range of subjects he and Bohr had discussed so freely.
Unknown to him, it was Pauli in whose footsteps he always seemed to be following, who was behind Bohr's warm reception.
Pauli always took a keen interest in what Heisenberg was doing, as the pair kept each other informed about their latest ideas.
Pauli had returned to Hamburg University when he learned that Heisenberg was going to spend a few weeks in Copenhagen, and he wrote to Bohr.
For a man already notorious for his scathing wit, the fact that he described Heisenberg as a gifted genius, who would one day advance science greatly, made a deep impression on Bohr.
But, before that day arrived, Pauli was sure that Heisenberg's physics had to be underpinned by a more coherent philosophical approach.
Pauli believed that to overcome the problems besetting atomic physics, it was necessary to stop making arbitrary ad hoc assumptions whenever experiments yielded data in conflict with existing theory.
Such an approach could only paper over the problems without ever leading to their solution.
Given his deep understanding of relativity, Pauli was an ardent admirer of Einstein, and the way in which he had constructed the theory using a few guiding principles and assumptions.
Believing that it was the correct approach to adopt in atomic physics too, Pauli wanted to emulate Einstein by setting up the underlying philosophical and physical principles before moving on to develop the necessary formal mathematical nuts and bolts that held the theory together.
By 1923, it was an approach that had left Pauli in despair. Having avoided introducing assumptions that could not be justified, he nevertheless failed to find a consistent and logical account of the anomalous Zeeman effect.
Hopefully you will then take atomic theory forward in good measure and solve several of the problems with which I have tormented myself in vain, and which are too difficult for me, Pauli wrote to Bohr.
I hope also that Heisenberg will then bring back home a philosophical attitude in his thinking.
At the time the young German arrived Bohr had been well briefed. Throughout the two-week visit the principles of physics rather than any particular problem was the focus of their discussions, as Bohr and Heisenberg strolled through Filet Park next to the institute or chatted over a bottle of wine in the evenings.
Many years later, Heisenberg described his time in Copenhagen in March 1924 as a gift from heaven.
I shall of course miss him. He is a charming worthy very bright man who has become very dear to my heart, but his interest precedes mine, and your wish is decisive for me, Bohr wrote to Bohr, after Heisenberg received an invitation for an extended stay in Copenhagen.
Due to spend the forthcoming winter semester teaching in America, Bohr would not need the services of his assistant until May the following year. At the end of July 1924 having successfully completed his habilitation thesis and gained the right to teach at German universities, Heisenberg left for a three-week hiking tour around Bavaria.
When he returned to Bohr's institute on 17 September 1924, Heisenberg was still only 22 years old but had already written or co-written an impressive dozen papers on quantum physics.
He still had much to learn and knew that Bohr was the man to teach him.
From Sommerfeld I learned optimism. In Göttingen, mathematics, from Bohr, physics, he said later.
For the next seven months Heisenberg was exposed to Bohr's approach to overcoming the problems that plagued quantum theory. While Sommerfeld and Bohrn were also troubled by the same inconsistencies and difficulties, neither man was haunted like Bohr by them. He could hardly bring himself to talk of anything else.
From these intense discussions, Heisenberg realized how difficult it was to reconcile the results of one experiment with those of another.
Among these experiments was Compton's scattering of x-rays by electrons that supported Einstein's light quanta.
The difficulties just seemed to multiply with de Broglie's extension of wave-particle duality to encompass all matter. Bohr, having taught Heisenberg all that he could had great hopes for his young protégé.
Now everything is in Heisenberg's hands to find a way out of the difficulties.
By the end of April 1925 Heisenberg was back in Göttingen, thanking Bohr for his hospitality and, sad about the fact that I must carry on wretchedly alone by myself in the future.
Nevertheless he had learned a valuable lesson from discussions with Bohr and in his ongoing dialogue with Pauli, something fundamental, had to give.
Heisenberg believed he knew what that might be as he tried to solve a long-standing problem, the intensities of the spectral lines of hydrogen.
The Bohr-Sommerfeld quantum atom could account for the frequency of hydrogen's spectral lines, but not how bright or dim they were.
Heisenberg's idea was to separate what was observable and what was not.
The orbit of an electron around the nucleus of a hydrogen atom was not observable, so Heisenberg decided to abandon the idea of electrons orbiting the nucleus of an atom.
It was a bold step, but one he was now ready to take, having long detested attempts at pictorial representations of the unobservable.
As a teenager in Munich Heisenberg was enthralled by the idea that the smallest particles of matter might reduce to some mathematical form.
At about the same time he came across an illustration in one of his textbooks that he found appalling.
To explain how one atom of carbon and two atoms of oxygen formed a carbon dioxide molecule, the atoms were drawn with hooks and eyes by which they could hang together.
Heisenberg found the idea of orbiting electrons inside the quantum atom similarly, far-fetched.
He now abandoned any attempt to visualize what was going on inside an atom.
Anything that was unobservable, he decided to ignore, focusing his attention only on those quantities that could be measured in the laboratory.
The frequencies and intensities of the spectral lines, associated with the light emitted or absorbed, as an electron jumped from one energy level to another.
Even before Heisenberg adopted this new strategy, Pauli had already expressed his doubts about the usefulness of electron orbits, more than a year earlier.
The most important question seems to me to be this. To what extent may definite orbits of electrons in stationary states be spoken of at all, he had written in italics to Bohr in February 1924.
Even though he was well on the road that led to the exclusion principle, and concerned about the closure of electron shells, Pauli nevertheless answered his own question in another letter to Bohr in December.
We must not bind atoms in the chains of our prejudices, to which in my opinion also belongs the assumption that electron orbits exist in the sense of ordinary mechanics, but we must on the contrary, adapt our concepts to experience.
They had to stop making compromises and cease trying to accommodate quantum concepts within the comfortable and familiar framework of classical physics. Physicists had to break free.
The first to do so was Heisenberg, when he pragmatically adopted the positivist credo that science should be based on observable facts and attempted to construct a theory based solely on the observable quantities.
In June 1925 a little more than a month after returning from Copenhagen, Heisenberg was miserable in Göttingen.
He was struggling to make headway in calculating the intensities of the spectral lines of hydrogen and admitted as much in a letter to his parents.
He complained that, everyone here is doing something different and no one anything worthwhile.
A very severe attack of hay fever contributed to his low spirits.
I couldn't see from my eyes, I was just in a terrible state, Heisenberg said later.
Unable to cope, he had to get away and a sympathetic born granted him a two-week holiday.
On Sunday, 7th of June, Heisenberg caught the night train to the port of Cuxhaven on the coast.
Arriving early in the morning, tired and hungry, Heisenberg went in search of breakfast at an inn and then boarded a ferry to the island of Helgoland, an isolated barren rock in the North Sea.
Originally owned by the British until it was traded for Zanzibar in 1890, Helgoland was 30 miles from the German mainland and less than a square mile in size.
It was here that Heisenberg hoped to find relief amid the bracing, pollen-free sea air.
On my arrival I must have looked quite a sight with my swollen face.
In any case, my landlady took one look at me, concluded that I had been in a fight and promised to nurse me through the after-effects, Heisenberg recalled when he was 70.
The guesthouse was high on the southern edge of the distinctive island carved out of red sandstone rock.
From the balcony of his second floor room Heisenberg had a wonderful view of the village below, the beach, and the dark brooding sea beyond.
In the days that followed he had time to think about, Bohr's remark that part of infinity seems to lie within the grasp of those who look across the sea.
It was in such reflective mood that he relaxed by reading Goethe, taking daily walks around the small resort and swimming.
Soon, he was feeling much better, with little to distract him Heisenberg's thoughts turned once more to problems of atomic physics.
But here on Helgerland, he felt none of the anxiety that had recently plagued him.
Relaxed and carefree he quickly jettisoned the mathematical ballast he had brought from Goettingen as he tried to solve the riddle of the intensities of the spectral lines.
In his quest for a new mechanics for the quantized world of the atom, Heisenberg concentrated on the frequencies and relative intensities of the spectral lines produced when an electron instantaneously jumped from one energy level to another.
He had no other choice, it was the only available data about what was happening inside an atom.
Despite the imagery conjured up by all the talk of quantum jumps and leaps, an electron did not jump through space as it moved between energy levels like a boy jumping off a wall onto the pavement below.
It was simply in one place and an instant later, it popped up in another without being anywhere in between.
Heisenberg accepted that all observables or anything connected with them were associated with the mystery and magic of the quantum jump of an electron between two energy levels.
Lost, forever was the picturesque miniature solar system in which each electron orbited a nuclear sun.
On the pollen-free haven of Helgeland, Heisenberg devised a method of bookkeeping to track all possible electron jumps or transitions that could occur between the different energy levels of hydrogen.
The only way he could think of recording each observable quantity associated with a unique pair of energy levels was to use an array.
This was the array for the entire set of possible frequencies of the spectral lines that could theoretically be emitted by an electron when it jumps between two different energy levels.
If an electron quantum jumps from the energy level E2 to the lower energy level E1, a spectral line is emitted with a frequency designated by V21 in the array.
The spectral line of frequency V12 would only be found in the absorption spectrum since it is associated with an electron in energy level E1, absorbing a quantum of energy sufficient to jump to energy level E2.
A spectral line of frequency Vmn would be emitted when an electron jumps between any two levels whose energies are Em and En, where Em is greater than N.
Not all the frequencies Vmn are exactly observed. For example, measurement of V11 is impossible since it would be the frequency of the spectral line emitted in a transition from energy level E1 to energy level E1, a physical impossibility.
Hence, V11 is 0, as are all potential frequencies when Em equals N. The collection of all non-zero frequencies Vmn would be the lines actually present in the emission spectrum of a particular element.
Another array could be formed from the calculation of transition rates between the various energy levels. If the probability for a particular transition Amn from energy level Em to En is high, then the transition is more likely than one with a lower probability.
The resulting spectral line with frequency Vmn would be more intense than for the less probable transition.
Heisenberg realized that the transition probabilities Amn and the frequencies Vmn could, after some depth theoretical manipulation, lead to a quantum counterpart for each observable quantity known in Newtonian mechanics such as position and momentum.
Of all things, Heisenberg began by thinking about electrons, orbits. He imagined an atom in which an electron was orbiting the nucleus at a great distance, more like Pluto orbiting the Sun rather than Mercury.
It was to prevent an electron spiraling into the nucleus as it radiated away energy that Bohr had introduced the concept of stationary orbits. However, in accordance with classical physics, the orbital frequency of an electron in such an exaggerated orbit, the number of complete orbits it makes per second, is equal to the frequency of the radiation it emits.
This was no flight of fancy, but a skillful use of the correspondence principle, Bohr's conceptual bridge between the quantum and classical realms. Heisenberg's hypothetical electron orbit was so large that it was on the border that divided the kingdoms of the quantum and the classical.
Here in this borderland, the electron's orbital frequency was equal to the frequency of the radiation it emitted. Heisenberg knew that such an electron in an atom was akin to a hypothetical oscillator that could produce all the frequencies of the spectrum.
Mach's Planck had adopted a similar approach a quarter of a century earlier. However, while Planck had used brute force and ad hoc assumptions to generate a formula that he already knew to be correct, Heisenberg was being guided by the correspondence principle onto the familiar landscape of classical physics.
Once it was set into motion, he could calculate properties of the oscillator such as its momentum, p, the displacement from its equilibrium position, q, and its frequency of oscillation.
The spectral line with the frequency Vmn would be emitted by one of a range of individual oscillators. Heisenberg knew that once he worked out the physics in this territory, where the quantum and the classical met,
he could extrapolate to explore the unknown interior of the atom.
Late one evening on Helga land, all the pieces began falling into place. The theory built completely out of observables appeared to reproduce everything, but did it contravene the law of the conservation of energy?
If it did, then it would collapse like a house of cards. Excited and nervous as he edged ever closer to proving that his theory was both physically and mathematically consistent, the 24 year old physicist began making simple errors of arithmetic as he checked his calculations.
It was almost three in the morning before Heisenberg could put down his pen, satisfied that the theory did not violate one of the most fundamental laws of physics. He was elated, but troubled.
At first I was deeply alarmed Heisenberg recalled later, I had the feeling that through the surface of atomic phenomena, I was looking at a strangely beautiful interior and felt almost giddy at the thought that I now had to probe this wealth of mathematical structures nature had so generously spread out before me.
Sleep was impossible, he was too excited. So as a new day dawned Heisenberg walked to the southern tip of the island, where for days he had been longing to climb a rock jutting out into the sea.
Fueled by the adrenaline of discovery he climbed it without too much trouble and waited for the sun to rise.
In the cold light of day, Heisenberg's initial euphoria and optimism faded. His new physics appeared to work only with the help of a strange kind of multiplication, where x times y did not equal y times x.
With ordinary numbers it did not matter in which order they were multiplied, 4 times 5 gives exactly the same answer as 5 times 4, 20.
Mathematicians called this property where the ordering in multiplication is unimportant, commutation.
Numbers obey the commutative law of multiplication so, 4 times 5 minus 5 times 4 is always, 0.
It was a rule of mathematics that every child learned, and Heisenberg was deeply troubled by the discovery that when he multiplied two arrays together, the answer was dependent on the order in which they were multiplied.
A times B minus B times A was not always 0.
As the meaning of the peculiar multiplication he had been forced to use continued to elude him.
On Friday 19th of June Heisenberg traveled back to the mainland and headed straight to Hamburg and Wolfgang Pauli.
A few hours later having received words of encouragement from his severest critic, Heisenberg left for Göttingen and the task of refining and writing up what he had discovered.
Only two days later, expecting to make quick progress, he wrote to Pauli that attempts to fabricate a quantum mechanics advance only slowly.
As the days passed his frustration grew as he failed to apply his new approach to the hydrogen atom.
Whatever doubts he harbored, there was one thing Heisenberg was certain about.
In any calculation only relationships between observable quantities or those that could be measured in principle if not in reality were permissible.
He had given the observability of all quantities in his equations the status of a postulate and devoted his entire meager efforts to killing off and suitably replacing the concept of the orbital paths that one cannot observe.
My own works are at the moment not going especially well, Heisenberg wrote to his father at the end of June.
A little more than a week later he had finished the paper that ushered in a new era in quantum physics.
Still uncertain about what he had done and its true significance, Heisenberg sent a copy to Pauli.
Apologizing he asked him to read and return the paper within two or three days, the reason for the haste was that Heisenberg was due to give a lecture at Cambridge University on 28th of July.
With other commitments he was unlikely to return to Göttingen until late September and wanted either to complete it in the last days of my presence here or to burn it.
Pauli greeted the paper with jubilation. It offered, he wrote to a colleague, a new hope and a renewed enjoyment of life.
Although it is not the solution to the riddle, Pauli added, I believe that it is now once again possible to move forward.
The man who took those steps in the right direction was Moxborn.
He had little inkling of what Heisenberg had been doing since returning from the little island in the North Sea.
Bourne was therefore surprised when Heisenberg gave him the paper and requested that he decide whether it was worth publishing or not.
Tired by his own exertions, Bourne put the paper to one side.
When a couple of days later he sat down to read it and passed judgment on what Heisenberg had described as a crazy paper, Bourne was immediately captivated.
He realized that Heisenberg was being uncharacteristically hesitant in what he was putting forward.
Was it a consequence of having to employ a strange multiplication rule?
Heisenberg was still groping even at the conclusion of the paper.
Whether a method to determine quantum mechanical data using relations between observable quantities such as that proposed here can be regarded as satisfactory in principle.
Or whether this method after all represents far too rough an approach to the physical problem of constructing a theoretical quantum mechanics,
an obviously very involved problem at the moment, can be decided only by a more intensive mathematical investigation of the method which has been very superficially employed here.
What was the meaning of the mysterious multiplication law?
It was a question that so obsessed Bourne, he could think of little else during the days and nights that followed.
He was troubled by the fact that there was something vaguely familiar about it, but he could not pinpoint exactly what.
Heisenberg's latest paper soon to be published appears rather mystifying, but it is certainly true and profound, Bourne wrote to Einstein,
even though he was still unable to explain the origin of the strange multiplication.
Praising the young physicists at his institute, especially Heisenberg, Bourne admitted that merely to keep up with their thoughts demands at times considerable effort on my part.
After days of considering nothing else, the effort on this occasion was rewarded.
One morning, Bourne suddenly recalled a long forgotten lecture he had attended as a student and realized that Heisenberg had accidentally stumbled across matrix multiplication in which x times y does not always equal y times x.
On being told that the mystery of his strange multiplication rule had been solved, Heisenberg complained that, I do not even know what a matrix is.
A matrix is nothing more than an array of numbers placed in a series of rows and columns, just like the arrays that Heisenberg constructed in Helgeland.
In the mid 19th century, the British mathematician Arthur Cayley had worked out how to add, subtract and multiply matrices.
If a and b are both matrices, then a times b can yield a different answer from b times a.
Just like Heisenberg's array of numbers, matrices do not necessarily commute.
Although they were established features of the mathematical landscape, matrices were unfamiliar territory for the theoretical physicists of Heisenberg's generation.
Once Bourne had correctly identified the roots of the strange multiplication, he knew that he needed help to turn Heisenberg's original scheme into a coherent theoretical framework that embraced all the multifarious aspects of atomic physics.
He knew the perfect man for the job, one well versed in the intricacies of both quantum physics and mathematics.
As luck would have it, he too would be in Hanover, where Bourne was due to attend a meeting of the German Physical Society.
Once there, he immediately sought out Wolfgang Pauli.
Bourne asked his former assistant to collaborate with him.
Yes, I know you are fond of tedious and complicated formalisms, came the reply as Pauli refused.
He wanted no part in Bourne's plans.
You're only going to spoil Heisenberg's physical ideas by your futile mathematics.
Feeling unable to make progress alone, he turned in desperation to one of his students for help.
In choosing 22-year-old Pasquale Jordan, Bourne had unwittingly found the perfect collaborator for the task ahead.
Entering the Technische Hochschule in Hanover in 1921 with the intention of studying physics, Jordan found the lectures rather poor and turned instead to mathematics.
A year later he transferred to Göttingen to study physics.
However, he rarely attended the lectures because they were too early in the morning, starting at either 7am or 8am.
Then he met Bourne.
Under his supervision, Jordan began to study physics seriously for the first time.
He was not only my teacher, who in my student days introduced me to the wide world of physics.
His lectures were a wonderful combination of intellectual clarity and horizon widening overview, Jordan later said of Bourne.
But he was also, I want to assert, the person who next to my parents exerted the deepest, longest lasting influence on my life.
With Bourne as his guide, Jordan soon began concentrating on problems of atomic structure.
Somewhat insecure and with a stutter he appreciated Bourne's patience whenever they discussed the latest papers touching on atomic theory.
Fortuitously, he had moved to Göttingen in time to attend the Bohr-Fescht Spiele and like Heisenberg was inspired by the lectures and the discussions that followed.
After his doctoral dissertation in 1924 Jordan worked briefly with others before being asked by Bourne to collaborate with him on an attempt to explain the width of spectral lines.
Jordan is exceptionally intelligent and astute and can think far more swiftly and confidently than I, Bourne wrote to Einstein in July 1925.
By then, Jordan had already heard of Heisenberg's latest ideas.
Before he left Göttingen at the end of July Heisenberg gave a talk to a small circle of students and friends about his attempt to construct a quantum mechanics based solely on the relations between observable properties.
When Bourne asked him to collaborate, Jordan jumped at the chance to recast and extend Heisenberg's original ideas into a systematic theory of quantum mechanics.
Unknown to Bourne, as he sent Heisenberg's paper to the journal Zeitrift für Physik, Jordan was well versed in matrix theory through his background in mathematics.
Applying these methods to quantum physics in two months, Bourne and Jordan laid the foundations for a new quantum mechanics that others would call matrix mechanics.
Once Bourne identified Heisenberg's multiplication rule as a rediscovery of matrix multiplication, he quickly found a matrix formula that connected position, q, and momentum, p, using an expression that included Planck's constant.
pq minus qp equals ih over 2 pi i, where i is what mathematicians call a unit matrix.
It allowed the right hand side of the equation to be written as a matrix.
It was from this fundamental equation using the methods of matrix mathematics that all of quantum mechanics was constructed in the months that followed.
Bourne was proud to be the first person to write a physical law in terms of non-commuting symbols, but it was only a guess and my attempts to prove it failed, he recalled later.
Within days of being shown the formula, Jordan came up with the rigorous mathematical derivation.
No wonder Bourne was soon telling Bourne that aside from Heisenberg and Pauli he considered Jordan to be the most gifted of the younger colleagues.
In August, Bourne went on his summer holiday to Switzerland with his family, while Jordan stayed in Gertigan to write up a paper by the end of September for publication.
Before it appeared in print they sent a copy to Heisenberg who was in Copenhagen at the time.
Here I got a paper from Bourne which I cannot understand at all, Heisenberg said to Bourne as he handed him the paper.
It is full of matrices and I hardly know what they are.
Heisenberg was hardly alone in not being familiar with matrices, but he said about learning the new mathematics with gusto and mastered enough to begin collaborating with Bourne and Jordan while still in Copenhagen.
Heisenberg returned to Gertigan in the middle of October in time to help write the final version of what became known as the Dreimannabyte, the three-man paper in which he, Bourne and Jordan, presented the first logically consistent formulation of quantum mechanics.
The long sought after new physics of the atom.
However, there were already reservations being expressed about Heisenberg's initial work. Einstein wrote to Paul Ehrenfest, in Gertigan they believe it.
I don't. Bourne believed it was a step probably of fundamental importance but it has not yet been possible to apply the theory to questions of atomic structure.
While Heisenberg, Bourne and Jordan had been concentrating on developing the theory, Pauli had been busy using the new mechanics to do just that.
By early November while the three-man paper was still being written, he had successfully applied matrix mechanics in a stunning tour de force.
Pauli had done for the new physics what Bourne had done for the old quantum theory, reproduced the line spectrum of the hydrogen atom.
For Heisenberg, to add insult to injury, Pauli had also calculated the stark effect, the influence of an external electric field on the spectrum.
I myself had been a bit unhappy that I could not succeed in deriving the hydrogen spectrum from the new theory, Heisenberg recalled. Pauli had provided the first concrete vindication of the new quantum mechanics.
The fundamental equations of quantum mechanics read the title. Bourne had been in Boston for nearly a month as part of a five-month lecture tour of the United States when one December morning he opened his post and received one of the greatest surprises of his scientific life.
As he read the paper by one P. A. M. Dirac, a senior research student at Cambridge University, Bourne realized that everything was perfect in its way.
Even more remarkably Bourne soon discovered that Dirac had sent his paper to the proceedings of the Royal Society containing the nuts and bolts of quantum mechanics a whole nine days before the three-man paper was finished.
Who was Dirac and how had he done it? wondered Bourne.
Paul Adrien Maurice Dirac was 23 years old in 1925. The son of a Swiss French-speaking father, Charles, and an English mother Florence, he was the second of three children.
His father was such an overbearing and dominant figure that when he died in 1935 Dirac wrote, I feel much freer now.
It was the trauma of having to remain silent in the presence of his father, a teacher of French, as he grew up that made Dirac a man of few words.
My father made the rule that I should only talk to him in French. He thought it would be good for me to learn French in that way.
Since I found that I couldn't express myself in French, it was better for me to stay silent than to talk in English.
Dirac's preference for silence, the legacy of a deeply unhappy childhood and adolescence, would become legendary.
Although interested in science, in 1918 Dirac acted on his father's advice and enrolled to study electrical engineering at the University of Bristol.
Three years later, despite graduating with a first-class honors degree, he could not find a job as an engineer.
With his employment's prospects looking bleak as Britain's post-war depression continued, Dirac accepted the offer of free tuition for two years to study mathematics back at his old university.
He would rather have gone to Cambridge, but the scholarship he had won did not cover all the expenses of studying at the university.
However, in 1923, after gaining his mathematics degree and receiving a government grant, he finally arrived in Cambridge as a PhD student.
His supervisor was Ralph Fowler, Rutherford's son-in-law.
Dirac had a thorough grasp of Einstein's theory of relativity, which had generated a firestorm of publicity around the world in 1919 while he was still an engineering student.
But he knew very little about Bohr's decade-old quantum atom.
Until his arrival in Cambridge, Dirac always considered atoms as very hypothetical things, hardly worth bothering about.
He soon changed his mind and set about making up for lost time.
The quiet, secluded life of a budding Cambridge theoretical physicist was tailor-made for the shy and introverted Dirac.
Research students were largely left to work alone in either their college rooms or in the library.
While others might have struggled with a lack of human contact day after day, Dirac was perfectly happy to be left alone in his room to think.
Even on a Sunday as he relaxed by walking in the Cambridgeshire countryside, Dirac preferred to do it alone.
Like Bohr, whom he met for the first time in June 1925, Dirac chose his words, written or spoken, very carefully.
If he gave a lecture and was asked to explain a point that had not been understood, Dirac would often repeat word for word what he had said before.
Bohr had gone to Cambridge to lecture on the problems of quantum theory, and Dirac had been impressed by the man, but not by his arguments.
What I wanted was statements which could be expressed in terms of equations, he said later, and Bohr's work very seldom provided such statements.
Heisenberg, on the other hand, arrived from Göttingen to give a lecture having spent months doing just the sort of physics that Dirac would have found stimulating.
But he did not hear about it from Heisenberg, who chose not to mention it as he spoke about atomic spectroscopy.
It was Ralph Fowler, who alerted Dirac to Heisenberg's work, by giving him a proof copy of the Germans' soon-to-be-published paper.
Heisenberg had been Fowler's house guest during his brief visit and had discussed his latest ideas with his host, who asked for a copy of the paper.
When it arrived, Fowler had little time to study it thoroughly and so passed it on to Dirac, asking him for his opinion.
When he first read it in early September he found it difficult to follow and failed to appreciate what a breakthrough it represented.
Then, as one week turned into two, Dirac suddenly realized that the fact that A times B did not equal B times A, lay at the very heart of Heisenberg's new approach and provided the key to the whole mystery.
Dirac developed a mathematical theory that also led him to the formula PQ minus QP equals IH over 2 pi I, by distinguishing between what he called Q numbers and C numbers.
Between those quantities that do not commute, AB does not equal BA, and those that do, AB equals BA.
Dirac showed that quantum mechanics differs from classical mechanics, in that the variables, Q and P, representing the position and momentum of a particle do not commute with one another, but obey the formula that he had found independently of Born, Jordan, and Heisenberg.
In May 1926 he received his PhD with the first-ever thesis on the subject of quantum mechanics. By then physicists were beginning to breathe a little easier after being confronted by matrix mechanics, which was difficult to use and impossible to visualize, even though it generated the right answers.
The Heisenberg-born concepts leave us all breathless and have made a deep impression on all theoretically-orientated people, Einstein wrote in March 1926. Instead of dull resignation there is now a singular tension in us sluggish people.
They were roused out of their stupor by an Austrian physicist who found time while conducting an affair to produce an entirely different version of quantum mechanics that avoided what Einstein called Heisenberg's veritable calculation by magic.
Chapter 9 A Late Erotic Outburst
I do not even know what a matrix is, Heisenberg had lamented when told of the origins of the strange multiplication rule that lay at the heart of his new physics. It was a reaction widely shared among physicists when they were presented with his matrix mechanics.
Within a matter of months, however, Erwin Schrödinger offered them an alternative that they eagerly embraced. His friend, the great German mathematician Hermann Weil, later described Schrödinger's astonishing achievement as the product of a late erotic outburst.
A serial womanizer the 38-year-old Austrian discovered wave mechanics while enjoying a secret trist during Christmas 1925 at the Swiss ski resort of Arosa.
Later, after fleeing Nazi Germany he first scandalized Oxford and then Dublin when he set up home with his wife and yet another mistress under the same roof.
His private life seemed strange to bourgeois people like ourselves born wrote some years after Schrödinger's death in 1961, but all this does not matter. He was a most lovable person, independent, amusing, temperamental, kind and generous, and he had a most perfect and efficient brain.
Erwin Rudolf Josef Alexander Schrödinger was born in Vienna on 12th of August 1887. His mother wanted to name him Wolfgang, after Goethe, but allowed her husband to honor an older brother of his who had died in childhood.
This brother was the reason why Schrödinger's father inherited the thriving family business manufacturing linoleum and oil cloth, ending his hopes of being a scientist after studying chemistry at Vienna University.
Schrödinger knew that the comfortable and carefree life he enjoyed before the First World War was possible only because his father had sacrificed his personal desires on the altar of duty.
Even before he could read or write Schrödinger kept a record of the day's activities by dictating it to a willing adult. Precocious he was educated at home by private tutors until the age of 11 when he began attending the Akademische's Gymnasium.
Almost from the very first day until he left eight years later, Schrödinger excelled at the school. He was always first in his class without appearing to make much of an effort.
A classmate recalled that, especially in physics and mathematics, Schrödinger had a gift for understanding that allowed him, without any homework, immediately and directly to comprehend all the material during the class hours and to apply it.
In truth, he was a dedicated student who worked hard in the privacy of his own study at home.
Schrödinger, like Einstein, had an intense dislike of rote learning and being forced to memorize useless facts. Nevertheless, he enjoyed the strict logic that underpinned the grammar of Greek and Latin.
With a maternal grandmother who was English, he began learning the language early and spoke it almost as fluently as German. Later he learned French and Spanish and was able to lecture in these languages whenever the occasion demanded.
Well-versed in literature and philosophy, he also loved the theater, poetry and art. Schrödinger was just the sort of person to leave Werner Heisenberg feeling inadequate.
Paul Dirac, when asked once if he played an instrument, replied that he did not know, he had never tried, nor had Schrödinger, who shared his father's dislike of music.
After graduating from the gymnasium in 1906, Schrödinger looked forward to studying physics at Vienna University under Ludwig Boltzmann.
Tragically, the legendary theoretician committed suicide weeks before Schrödinger started his course.
With his grey-blue eyes and shock of swept-back hair, Schrödinger made quite an impression despite being only 5 feet 6 inches.
Having shown himself to be an exceptional student at the gymnasium much was now expected from him. He did not disappoint, coming top of the class in one exam after another.
Surprisingly, given his interest in theoretical physics, Schrödinger gained his doctorate in May 1910 with a dissertation entitled,
On the conduction of electricity on the surface of insulators in moist air.
It was an experimental investigation showing that Schrödinger was, unlike Pauli and Heisenberg, perfectly at ease in the laboratory.
23-year-old Dr. Schrödinger had a summer of freedom before reporting for military service on 1st of October, 1910.
All able-bodied young men in Austria-Hungary were required to do three years of military service.
But, as a university graduate, he was able to choose a year's officer training, leading to a commission in the reserve ranks.
When he returned to civilian life in 1911, Schrödinger secured a position as an assistant to the professor of experimental physics at his old university.
He knew he was not cut out to be an experimenter but never regretted the experience.
I belong to those theoreticians who know by direct observation what it means to make a measurement, he later wrote.
Me thinks it were better if there were more of them.
In January 1914, Schrödinger, aged 26, became a Privatdotsand.
Like everywhere else, opportunities in theoretical physics in Austria were few.
The road to the professorship he desired seemed a long and difficult one.
So, he toyed with the idea of abandoning physics.
Then, in August that year the First World War began and he was called up to fight.
He had luck on his side from the very beginning.
As an artillery officer he served in fortified positions high on the Italian front.
The only real danger he faced during his various postings was boredom.
Then he began receiving books and scientific journals that helped to relieve the tedium.
Is this a life? To sleep? To eat? And to play cards? He wrote in his diary before the first consignment arrived.
Philosophy and physics were the only things that kept Schrödinger from total despair.
I no longer ask when will the war be over, but will it be over?
Relief came when he was transferred back to Vienna in the spring of 1917
to teach physics at the university and meteorology at an anti-aircraft school.
Schrödinger ended the war as he wrote later, without getting wounded and without illness and with little distinction.
As for most others the early post-war years were difficult for Schrödinger and his parents, with the family business ruined.
As the Habsburg Empire fell apart the situation was made worse, as the victorious allies maintained a blockade that cut off food supplies.
As thousands starved and froze during the winter of 1918 to 1919 in Vienna, with little money to buy food on the black market,
Schrödinger's were often forced to eat at a local soup kitchen.
Things began to improve slowly after March 1919, when the blockade was lifted and the emperor went into exile.
Salvation for Schrödinger arrived early the following year, with the offer of a job at the University of Vienna.
The salary was just enough for him to marry 23-year-old Annemarie Bertel.
Arriving in Jena in April, the couple stayed just six months before Schrödinger was appointed to an extraordinary professorship in October at the Technische Hochschule in Stuttgart.
The money was better and after the experiences of the past few years that mattered to him.
By spring 1921 the universities of Kiel, Hamburg, Breslau and Vienna were all looking to appoint theoretical physicists.
Schrödinger who had by then earned a solid reputation, was being seriously considered by all of them.
He accepted the offer of a professorship at Breslau.
At the age of 34, Schrödinger might have achieved the ambition of every academic.
However, in Breslau he had the title, but not the salary to go with it, and he left with the University of Zurich, came calling.
Not long after arriving in Switzerland in October 1921, Schrödinger was diagnosed with bronchitis and possibly tuberculosis.
Negotiations surrounding his future and the deaths of his parents during the previous two years had taken their toll.
I was actually so caput that I could no longer get any sensible ideas, he later told Wolfgang Pauli.
On Dr. Sorter's Schrödinger went to a sanatorium in Arosa.
It was in this high altitude alpine resort, not far from Davos, that he spent the next nine months recuperating.
He was not idle during this time but found the energy and enthusiasm to publish several papers.
As the years passed Schrödinger began to wonder if he would ever make a major contribution that would establish him among the first rank of contemporary physicists.
At the beginning of 1925 he was 37, long having celebrated the 30th birthday that was said to be the watershed in the creative life of a theorist.
Doubts over his worth as a physicist were compounded by a marriage in trouble because of affairs on both sides.
By the end of the year Schrödinger's marriage was shakier than ever, but he made the breakthrough that would ensure his place in the pantheon of physics.
Schrödinger was taking an ever more active interest in the latest developments in atomic and quantum physics.
In October 1925 he read a paper that Einstein had written earlier in the year.
A footnote that flagged up Louis de Bois thesis on wave particle duality caught his eye.
As with most footnotes virtually everyone ignored it.
Intrigued by Einstein's stamp of approval, Schrödinger set about acquiring a copy of the thesis
unaware that papers by the French prince had been in print for nearly two years.
A couple of weeks later on 3rd of November he wrote to Einstein.
A few days ago I read with the greatest interest the ingenious thesis of de Bois which I finally got hold of.
Others were also beginning to take note, but in the absence of any experimental support few were as receptive to de Bois ideas as Einstein and Schrödinger.
In Zürich, every fortnight, physicists from the university got together with those from the Igenosische Technische Hochschule, ETH, for a joint colloquium.
Peter Debye, the ETH professor of physics ran the meetings and asked Schrödinger to give a talk on de Bois's work.
In the eyes of his colleagues Schrödinger was an accomplished and versatile theoretician who had made solid but unremarkable contributions in his 40 odd papers
that spanned areas as diverse as radioactivity, statistical physics, general relativity and color theory.
Among these were a number of well-received review articles that demonstrated his ability to absorb, analyze and organize the work of others.
On 23rd of November, Felix Bloch, a 21-year-old student was present when Schrödinger gave a beautifully clear account
of how de Bois associated a wave with a particle and how he could obtain the quantization rules of Niels Bohr and Sommerfeld
by demanding that an integer number of waves should be fitted along a stationary orbit.
With no experimental confirmation of wave particle duality, which would come in 1927, Debye found it all far-fetched and rather childish.
The physics of a wave, any wave from sound to electromagnetic, even a wave traveling along a violin string, has an equation that describes it.
In what Schrödinger had outlined there was no wave equation. De Bois had never tried to derive one for his matter waves,
nor had Einstein after he read the French Prince's thesis.
Debye's point sounded quite trivial and did not seem to make a great impression, Bloch still remembered 50 years later.
Schrödinger knew that Debye was right. You cannot have waves without a wave equation.
Almost at once he decided to find the missing equation for De Bois' matter waves.
After returning from his Christmas holiday, Schrödinger was able to announce at the next colloquium held early in the new year.
My colleague Debye suggested that one should have a wave equation. Well, I have found one.
Between one meeting and the next, Schrödinger had taken De Bois' nascent ideas and developed them into a fully blown theory of quantum mechanics.
Schrödinger knew exactly where to start and what he had to do. De Bois had tested his idea of wave particle duality
by reproducing the allowed electron orbits in the Bohr atom, as those in which only a whole number of standing electron wavelengths could fit.
Schrödinger knew that the elusive wave equation he sought would have to reproduce the three-dimensional model of the hydrogen atom with three-dimensional standing waves.
The hydrogen atom would be the litmus test for the wave equation he needed to find.
Not long after starting the hunt, Schrödinger thought he had bagged just such an equation.
However, when he applied it to the hydrogen atom the equation turned out the wrong answers.
The root of the failure lay in the fact that De Bois had developed and presented wave particle duality in a manner consistent with Einstein's theory of special relativity.
Following De Bois' lead, Schrödinger started out by looking for a wave equation that was relativistic in form and found one.
In the meantime, Eulen Beck and Goudsmit had discovered the concept of electron spin, but their paper did not appear in print until the end of November 1925.
Schrödinger had found a relativistic wave equation, but, unsurprisingly, it did not include spin and therefore failed to agree with experiments.
With the Christmas vacation fast approaching Schrödinger began to concentrate his efforts on finding a wave equation without worrying about relativity.
He knew that such an equation would fail for electrons traveling at speeds close to that of light where relativity could not be ignored.
But for his purposes such a wave equation would do. Soon, however, there was more than just physics on his mind.
He and his wife Annie were having another of their sustained bouts of marital turbulence, one that was lasting longer than most.
Despite the affairs and talk of divorce each seemed incapable and unwilling to permanently part from the other.
Schrödinger wanted to escape for a couple of weeks. Whatever excuse he gave his wife he left Zurich for the winter wonderland of his favorite alpine resort, Arosa, and a rendezvous with an ex-lover.
Schrödinger was delighted to be back in the familiar and comfortable surroundings of the Villa Herwig.
It was here that he and Annie had spent the previous two Christmas holidays, but there was hardly time enough over the next two weeks to feel guilty as Schrödinger spent his passion with his mysterious lady.
However distracted he may have been, Schrödinger made time to continue the search for his wave equation.
At the moment I am struggling with the new atomic theory he wrote on 27th of December. If only I knew more mathematics. I am very optimistic about this thing and expect that if I can only solve it it will be beautiful.
Six months of sustained creativity were to follow during this late erotic outburst in his life. Inspired by his unnamed muse Schrödinger had discovered a wave equation but was it the wave equation he was seeking?
Schrödinger did not derive his wave equation there was just no way to do it from classical physics that was logically rigorous. Instead he constructed it out of Du Bois wave particle formula that linked the wavelength associated with a particle to its momentum and from well established equations of classical physics.
As simple as it sounds it required all of Schrödinger's skill and experience to be the first to write it down. It was the foundation on which he built the edifice of wave mechanics in the months ahead, but first he had to prove that it was the wave equation. When applied to the hydrogen atom would it generate the correct values for the energy levels?
After returning to Zurich in January Schrödinger found that his wave equation did reproduce the series of energy levels of the Bohr-Sommerfeld hydrogen atom. More complicated than Du Bois one dimensional standing electron waves fitted into circular orbits.
Schrödinger's theory obtained their three dimensional analogues, electron orbitals. Their associated energies were generated as part and parcel of the acceptable solutions of Schrödinger's wave equation.
Banished once and for all were the ad hoc additions required by the Bohr-Sommerfeld quantum atom. All the previous tinkering and tweaking that sat uneasily now emerged naturally from within the framework of Schrödinger's wave mechanics.
Even the mysterious quantum jumping between orbits by an electron appeared to be eliminated by the smooth and continuous transitions from one permitted three dimensional electron standing wave to another.
Quantization has an eigenvalue problem was received by the Analynder Physic on 27th of January 1926. Published on 13th of March it presented Schrödinger's version of quantum mechanics and its application to the hydrogen atom.
In a career that spanned some 50 years Schrödinger's average annual output of research papers amounted to 40 printed pages. In 1926 he published 256 pages in which he demonstrated how wave mechanics could successfully solve a range of problems in atomic physics.
He also came up with a time dependent version of his wave equation that could tackle systems that changed with time. Among them were processes involving the absorption and emission of radiation and the scattering of radiation by atoms.
On 20th of February as the first paper was being readied for the printers Schrödinger used the name, Velen Mechanic, wave mechanics for the first time to describe his new theory.
In stark contrast to the cold and austere matrix mechanics that proscribed even the hint of visualizability Schrödinger offered physicists a familiar and reassuring alternative that offered to explain the quantum world in terms closer to those of 19th century physics than Heisenberg's highly abstract formulation.
In place of the mysterious matrices Schrödinger came bearing differential equations, an essential part of every physicist's mathematical toolbox. Heisenberg's matrix mechanics gave them quantum jumps and discontinuity and nothing to picture in their minds eye as they sought to glimpse the inner workings of the atom.
Schrödinger told physicists they no longer needed to suppress intuition and to operate only with abstract concepts such as transition probabilities, energy levels and the like. It was hardly surprising that they greeted wave mechanics with enthusiasm and quickly rushed to embrace it.
As soon as he received complimentary copies of his paper, Schrödinger sent them out to colleagues whose opinions mattered most to him.
Planck wrote back on 2nd April that he had read the paper, like an eager child hearing the solution to a riddle that had plagued him for a long time.
Two weeks later Schrödinger received a letter from Einstein, who told him, the idea of your work springs from true genius.
Your approval and Planck's mean more to me than that of half the world, Schrödinger wrote back.
Einstein was convinced that Schrödinger had made a decisive advance, just as I am convinced that the Heisenberg-born method is misleading.
Others took longer to fully appreciate the product of Schrödinger's late erotic outburst.
Sommerfeld initially believed that wave mechanics was totally crazy before changing his mind and declaring, although the truth of matrix mechanics is indubitable, its handling is extremely intricate and frighteningly abstract.
Schrödinger has now come to our rescue.
Many others also breathed easier as they learned and began using the more familiar ideas embodied in wave mechanics, rather than having to struggle with the abstract and alien formulation of Heisenberg and his Goettingen colleagues.
The Schrödinger equation came as a great relief, wrote the young spin-doctor George Eulenbeck.
Now we did not any longer have to learn the strange mathematics of matrices.
Instead, Aaron Fest, Eulenbeck and the others in Leiden spent weeks standing four hours at a time in front of the blackboard in order to learn all the splendid ramifications of wave mechanics.
Pauly may have been close to the Goettingen physicists, but he recognized the significance of what Schrödinger had done and was deeply impressed.
Pauly had strained every ounce of gray matter he possessed as he successfully applied matrix mechanics to the hydrogen atom.
Everyone was later amazed by the speed and virtuosity with which he had done so.
Pauly sent his paper to the Zeitschrift für Physik on 17 January, only ten days before Schrödinger posted his first paper.
When he saw the relative ease with which wave mechanics allowed Schrödinger to tackle the hydrogen atom, Pauly was astonished.
I believe that the work counts among the most significant recently written, he told Pascal Jordan, read it carefully and with devotion.
Not long afterwards in June, Born described wave mechanics as the deepest form of the quantum laws.
Heisenberg was not very pleased, he told Jordan, by Born's apparent defection to wave mechanics.
Although he acknowledged that Schrödinger's paper was incredibly interesting with its use of more familiar mathematics, Heisenberg firmly believed that when it came to physics,
his matrix mechanics was a better description of the way things were at the atomic level.
Heisenberg from the very beginning did not share my opinion that your wave mechanics is physically more significant than our quantum mechanics,
born confided to Schrödinger in May 1927.
By then, it was hardly a secret, nor did Heisenberg want it to be. There was too much at stake.
As spring had given way to summer in 1925, there was still no quantum mechanics, a theory that would do for atomic physics what Newtonian mechanics did for classical physics.
A year later, there were two competing theories that were as different as particles and waves.
They both gave identical answers when applied to the same problems. What, if any, was the connection between matrix and wave mechanics?
It was a question that Schrödinger began to ponder almost as soon as he finished his first groundbreaking paper.
After two weeks of searching, he found no link.
Consequently, Schrödinger wrote to Wilhelm Wien, I have given up looking any further myself.
He was hardly disappointed as he confessed that matrix calculus was already unbearable to me long before I even distantly thought of my theory.
But he was unable to stop digging until he unearthed the connection at the beginning of March.
The two theories that appear to be so different in form and content, one employing wave equations and the other matrix algebra,
one describing waves and the other particles, were mathematically equivalent.
No wonder they both gave exactly the same answers.
The advantages of having two different but equivalent formalisms of quantum mechanics quickly became apparent.
For most problems physicists encountered, Schrödinger's wave mechanics provided the easiest route to the solution, yet for others, such as those involving spin,
it was Heisenberg's matrix approach that proved its worth.
With any possible arguments about which of the two theories was correct smothered even before they could begin,
attention turned from the mathematical formalism to the physical interpretation.
The two theories might technically be equivalent but the nature of physical reality that lay beyond the mathematics was altogether different.
Schrödinger's waves and continuity versus Heisenberg's particles and discontinuity.
Each man was convinced that his theory captured the true nature of physical reality. Both could not be right.
At the beginning there was no personal animosity between Schrödinger and Heisenberg as they began to question each other's interpretation of quantum mechanics,
but soon emotions began to run high.
In public and in their papers both managed on the whole to rein in their true feelings.
In their letters however there was no need for tact and restraint.
When he initially tried but failed to prove the equivalence of wave and matrix mechanics, Schrödinger was somewhat relieved that there might be none,
since the mere thought makes me shudder if I later had to present the matrix calculus to a young student as describing the true nature of the atom.
In his paper, On the relation between Heisenberg born Jordan quantum mechanics and my own, Schrödinger was at pains to distance wave mechanics from matrix mechanics.
My theory was inspired by L. Dippoy and by brief but infinitely far seeing remarks of A. Einstein, he explained,
I was absolutely unaware of any genetic relationship with Heisenberg.
Schrödinger concluded that because of the lack of visualization in matrix mechanics, I felt deterred by it, if not to say repelled.
Heisenberg was even less diplomatic about the continuity that Schrödinger was trying to restore to the atomic realm where, as far as he was concerned, discontinuity ruled.
The more I think about the physical portion of the Schrödinger theory the more repulsive I find it, he told Pauli in June.
What Schrödinger writes about the visualizability of his theory is probably not quite right, in other words, it's crap.
Two months earlier Heisenberg had appeared more conciliatory when he described wave mechanics as incredibly interesting.
But those who knew Bohr recognized that Heisenberg was employing exactly the sort of language favored by the Dane, who always called an idea or an argument, interesting, when in fact he disagreed with it.
Increasingly frustrated as more of his colleagues abandoned matrix mechanics for the easier to use wave mechanics, Heisenberg finally snapped.
He could hardly believe it when born of all people started using Schrödinger's wave equation in a fit of anger Heisenberg called him a traitor.
He may have been envious of the growing popularity of Schrödinger's alternative, but after its discovery, it was Heisenberg who was responsible for the next great triumph of wave mechanics.
He might have been annoyed at born, but Heisenberg had also been seduced by the mathematical ease with which Schrödinger's approach could be applied to atomic problems.
In July 1926 he used wave mechanics to account for the line spectra of helium.
Just in case anyone read too much into his adoption of the rival formulation, Heisenberg pointed out that it was nothing more than expediency.
The fact that the two theories were mathematically equivalent meant he could use wave mechanics while ignoring the intuitive pictures Schrödinger painted with it.
However, even before Heisenberg posted his paper, Born had used Schrödinger's palette to paint an entirely different picture on the same canvas when he discovered that probability lay at the heart of wave mechanics and quantum reality.
Schrödinger was not trying to paint a new picture but attempting to restore an old one.
For him there were no quantum jumps between different energy levels in an atom but only smooth, continuous transitions from one standing wave into another, with the emission of radiation being the product of some exotic resonance phenomenon.
He believed that wave mechanics allowed the restoration of a classical, intuitive picture of physical reality, one of continuity, causality and determinism.
Born disagreed.
Schrödinger's achievement reduces itself to something purely mathematical, he told Einstein. His physics is wretched.
Born used wave mechanics to paint a surreal picture of a reality with discontinuity, a causality and probability instead of Schrödinger's attempt at a Newtonian inspired old master.
These two pictures of reality hang on different interpretations of the so-called wave function symbolized by the Greek letter psi in Schrödinger's wave equation.
Schrödinger had known from the very beginning that there was a problem with his version of quantum mechanics.
According to Newton's laws of motion, if the position of an electron is known at a certain time together with its velocity, then it is theoretically possible to determine exactly where it will be at some later time.
However, waves are much more difficult to pin down than a particle.
Dropping a stone into a pond sends ripples of waves across its surface. Exactly where is the wave?
Unlike a particle, a wave is not localized at a single place, but is a disturbance that carries energy through a medium.
Like people taking part in a Mexican wave, a water wave is just individual water molecules bobbing up and down.
All waves, whatever their size and shape, can be described by an equation that mathematically maps their motion, just as Newton's equations do for a particle.
The wave function, psi, represents the wave itself and describes its shape at a given time.
The wave function of a wave rippling across the surface of a pond specifies the size of the disturbance, the so-called amplitude of the water, at any point x at time t.
When Schrödinger discovered the wave equation for de Broglie's matter waves, the wave function was the unknown part.
Solving the equation for a particular physical situation, such as the hydrogen atom, would yield the wave function.
However, there was a question that Schrödinger was finding difficult to answer.
What was doing the waving?
In the case of water or sound waves, it was obvious, water or air molecules.
Light had perplexed physicists in the 19th century.
They had been forced to invoke the mysterious aether as the necessary medium through which light traveled until it was discovered that light was an electromagnetic wave with interlocked electric and magnetic fields doing the waving.
Schrödinger believed that matter waves were as real as any of these more familiar types of waves.
However, what was the medium through which an electron wave traveled?
The question was akin to asking, what does the wave function in Schrödinger's wave equation represent?
In the summer of 1926, a witty little ditty summed up the situation that confronted Schrödinger and his colleagues.
Erwin with his psi can do calculations quite a few, but one thing has not been seen, just what does psi really mean?
Schrödinger finally proposed that the wave function of an electron, for example, was intimately connected to the cloud-like distribution of its electric charge as it traveled through space.
In wave mechanics, the wave function was not a quantity that could be directly measured because it was what mathematicians call a complex number.
4 plus 3i is one example of such a number and it consists of two parts, one real and the other imaginary.
4 is an ordinary number and is the real part of the complex number 4 plus 3i.
The imaginary part, 3i has no physical meaning because i is the square root of negative 1.
The square root of a number is just another number that multiplied by itself will give the original number.
The square root of 4 is 2 since 2 times 2 equals 4.
There is no number that multiplied by itself equals negative 1.
While 1 times 1 equals 1, negative 1 times negative 1 is also equal to 1 since by the laws of algebra, a minus times a minus generates a plus.
The wave function was unobservable. It was something intangible that could not be measured.
However, the square of a complex number gives a real number that is associated with something that can actually be measured in the laboratory.
The square of 4 plus 3i is 25.
Schrödinger believed that the square of the wave function of an electron, psi x t, was a measure of the smeared out density of electric charge at location x at time t.
As part of his interpretation of the wave function, Schrödinger introduced the concept of a wave packet to represent the electron as he challenged the very idea that particles existed.
He argued that an electron only appeared to be particle-like but was not actually a particle, despite the overwhelming experimental evidence in favor of it being so.
Schrödinger believed that a particle like electron was an illusion. In reality, there were only waves.
Any manifestation of a particle electron was due to a group of matter waves being superimposed into a wave packet.
An electron in motion would then be nothing more than a wave packet that moved like a pulse sent, with a flick of the wrist traveling down the length of a taut rope tied at one end and held at the other.
A wave packet that gave the appearance of a particle required a collection of waves of different wavelengths that interfered with one another in such a way that they canceled each other out beyond the wave packet.
If giving up particles and reducing everything to waves rid physics of discontinuity and quantum jumps, then for Schrödinger it was a price worth paying. However, his interpretation soon ran into difficulties as it failed to make physical sense.
Firstly, the wave packet representation of the electron began to unravel when it was discovered that the constituent waves would spread out across space to such a degree that they would have to travel faster than the speed of light if they were to be connected with the detection of a particle-like electron in an experiment.
Try as he might there was no way for Schrödinger to prevent this dispersal of the wave packet since it was made up of waves that varied in wavelength and frequency as the wave packet traveled through space it would soon begin to spread out as individual waves moved at different velocities.
An almost instantaneous coming together, a localization at one point in space, would have to take place every time an electron was detected as a particle.
Secondly, when attempts were made to apply the wave equation to helium and other atoms, Schrödinger's vision of the reality that lay beneath his mathematics disappeared into an abstract, multi-dimensional space that was impossible to visualize.
The wave function of an electron encodes everything there is to know about its single three-dimensional wave. Yet, the wave function for the two electrons of the helium atom could not be interpreted as two three-dimensional waves existing in ordinary three-dimensional space.
Instead, the mathematics pointed to a single wave inhabiting a strange six-dimensional space.
In each move across the periodic table from one element to the next, the number of electrons increased by one and an additional three dimensions were required.
If lithium, third in the table required a nine-dimensional space then uranium had to be accommodated in a space with 276 dimensions.
The waves that occupied these abstract multi-dimensional spaces could not be the real, physical waves that Schrödinger hoped would restore continuity and eliminate the quantum jump.
Nor could Schrödinger's interpretation account for the photoelectric and Compton effects.
There were unanswered questions. How could a wave packet possess electric charge? Could wave mechanics incorporate quantum spin?
If Schrödinger's wave function did not represent real waves in everyday three-dimensional space then what were they? It was Max Born, who provided the answer.
Born was nearing the end of his five-month stay in America when Schrödinger's first paper on wave mechanics appeared in March 1926.
Reading it on his return to Göttingen in April he was taken completely by surprise as others had been.
The terrain of quantum physics had dramatically changed during his absence.
Almost out of nowhere, Born immediately recognized, Schrödinger had constructed a theory of fascinating power and elegance.
He was quick to acknowledge the superiority of wave mechanics as a mathematical tool, as demonstrated by the relative ease with which it solved the fundamental atomic problem, the hydrogen atom.
After all it had taken someone of Pauli's prodigious talent to apply matrix mechanics to the hydrogen atom.
Born might have been taken by surprise, but he was already familiar with the idea of matter waves long before Schrödinger's paper was published.
A letter from Einstein directed my attention to Du Bois thesis shortly after its publication, but I was too much involved in our speculations to study it carefully.
Born admitted more than half a century later.
By July 1925 he had made time to study Du Bois work and wrote to Einstein that the wave theory of matter could be of very great importance.
Enthusied, he had already begun speculating a little bit about Du Bois waves, Born told Einstein.
But just then he shoved Du Bois ideas aside to make sense of the strange multiplication rule in a paper given to him by Heisenberg.
Now, almost a year later, Born solved some of the problems encountered by wave mechanics, but at a price far higher than Schrödinger demanded with his sacrifice of particles.
The rejection of particles and quantum jumps that Schrödinger advocated was too much for Born.
He witnessed regularly in Goettingen what he called the fertility of the particle concept in experiments on atomic collisions.
Born accepted the richness of Schrödinger's formalism but rejected the Austrian's interpretation.
It is necessary, Born wrote late in 1926, to drop completely the physical pictures of Schrödinger which aim at a revitalization of the classical continuum theory to retain only the formalism and to fill that with a new physical content.
Already convinced that particles could not simply be abolished, Born found a way to weave them together with waves using probability as he came up with a new interpretation of the wave function.
Born had been working on applying matrix mechanics to atomic collisions while in America.
Back in Germany with Schrödinger's wave mechanics suddenly at his disposal, he returned to the subject and produced two seminal papers bearing the same title, Quantum Mechanics of Collision Phenomena.
The first, only four pages long, was published on 10th of July in Zeitrift für Physik.
Ten days later the second paper more polished and refined than the first was finished and in the post.
While Schrödinger renounced the existence of particles, Born in his attempt to save them, put forward an interpretation of the wave function that challenged a fundamental tenet of physics, Determinism.
The Newtonian universe is purely deterministic with no room for chance.
In it, a particle has a definite momentum and position at any given time.
The forces that act on the particle determine the way its momentum and position vary in time.
The only way that physicists such as James Clerk Maxwell and Ludwig Boltzmann could account for the properties of a gas that consists of many such particles was to use probability and settle for a statistical description.
The forced retreat into a statistical analysis was due to the difficulties in tracking the motion of such an enormous number of particles.
Probability was a consequence of human ignorance in a deterministic universe where everything unfolded according to the laws of nature.
If the present state of any system and the forces acting upon it are known, then what happens to it in the future is already determined.
In classical physics, determinism is bound by an umbilical cord to causality, the notion that every effect has a cause.
Like two billiard balls colliding when an electron slams into an atom, it can be scattered in almost any direction.
However, that is where the similarity ends, argued Born as he made a startling claim.
When it comes to atomic collisions, physics could not answer the question, what is the state after collision, but only how probable is a given effect of the collision.
Here, the whole problem of determinism arises, admitted Born.
It was impossible to determine exactly where the electron was after the collision.
The best that physics could do, he said, was to calculate the probability that the electron would be scattered through a certain angle.
This was Born's new physical content and it all hinged on his interpretation of the wave function.
The wave function itself has no physical reality, it exists in the mysterious ghost-like realm of the possible.
It deals with abstract possibilities, like all the angles by which an electron could be scattered following a collision with an atom.
There is a real world of difference between the possible and the probable.
Born argued that the square of the wave function, a real rather than a complex number, inhabits the world of the probable.
Squaring the wave function, for example, does not give the actual position of an electron only the probability, the odds that it will be found here rather than there.
For example, if the value of the wave function of an electron at x is double its value at y, then the probability of it being found at x is four times greater than the probability of finding it at y.
The electron could be found at x, y, or somewhere else.
Niels Bohr would soon argue that until an observation or measurement is made a micro-physical object like an electron does not exist anywhere,
between one measurement and the next it has no existence outside the abstract possibilities of the wave function.
It is only when an observation or measurement is made that the wave function collapses as one of the possible states of the electron becomes the actual state and the probability of all the other possibilities becomes zero.
For Born, Schrödinger's equation described a probability wave.
There were no real electron waves, only abstract waves of probability.
From the point of view of our quantum mechanics there exists no quantity which in an individual case causally determines the effect of a collision, wrote Born.
And he confessed, I myself tend to give up determinism in the atomic world.
Yet while the motion of particles follows probability rules he pointed out, probability itself propagates according to the law of causality.
It took Born the time between his two papers to fully grasp that he had introduced a new kind of probability into physics.
Quantum probability, for one of a better term, was not the classical probability of ignorance that could in theory be eliminated.
It was an inherent feature of atomic reality.
For example, the fact that it was impossible to predict when an individual atom would decay in a radioactive sample, amid the certainty that one would do so, was not due to a lack of knowledge but was the result of the probabilistic nature of the quantum rules that dictate radioactive decay.
Schrödinger dismissed Born's probability interpretation.
He did not accept that a collision of an electron or an alpha particle with an atom is absolutely accidental, i.e., completely undetermined.
Otherwise if Born was right then there was no way to avoid quantum jumps and causality was once again threatened.
In November 1926 he wrote to Born,
I have however the impression that you and others who essentially share your opinion are too deeply under the spell of those concepts like stationary states, quantum jumps, etc.
which have obtained civic rights in our thinking in the last dozen years, hence you cannot do full justice to an attempt to break away from this scheme of thought.
Schrödinger never relinquished his interpretation of wave mechanics and the attempt at a visualizability of atomic phenomena.
I can't imagine that an electron hops about like a flea, he once memorably said.
Zurich lay well outside the golden quantum triangle of Copenhagen, Göttingen and Munich.
As the new physics of wave mechanics spread like wildfire through Europe's physics community in the spring and summer of 1926,
many were eager to hear Schrödinger discuss his theory in person.
When the invitation arrived from Arnold Sommerfeld and Wilhelm Wien to give two lectures in Munich, Schrödinger readily accepted.
The first, on 21 of July to Sommerfeld's Wednesday colloquium was routine and well received.
The second on 23 of July to the Bavarian section of the German physical society was not.
Heisenberg, who at the time was based in Copenhagen as Bohr's assistant, had returned to Munich in time to hear both of Schrödinger's lectures before going on a hiking tour.
As he sat in the packed lecture theatre for a second time, Heisenberg listened quietly until the end of Schrödinger's talk entitled, New Results of Wave Mechanics.
During the question and answer session that followed, he became increasingly agitated until he could no longer remain silent.
As he rose to speak, all eyes were on him.
Schrödinger's theory, he pointed out could not explain Planck's radiation law, the Frank Hertz experiment, the Compton effect or the photoelectric effect.
None could be explained without discontinuity and quantum jumps, the very concepts that Schrödinger wanted to eliminate.
Before Schrödinger could reply with some in the audience already expressing their disapproval at the remarks of the 24-year-old, an annoyed Veen stood up and intervened.
The old physicist, Heisenberg told Pauly later, almost threw me out of the room.
The pair had a history going back to Heisenberg's days as a student in Munich and his poor showing during the oral examination for his doctorate on anything connected to experimental physics.
Young man, Professor Schrödinger will certainly take care of all these questions in due time, Veen told Heisenberg as he motioned for him to sit down.
You must understand that we are now finished with all that nonsense about quantum jumps.
Schrödinger, unfazed, replied that he was confident that all remaining problems would be overcome.
Heisenberg could not stop himself from lamenting later that Sommerfeld who had witnessed the whole incident had succumbed to the persuasive force of Schrödinger's mathematics.
Shaken and dejected at being forced to retire from the arena vanquished before battle had been properly joined, Heisenberg needed to regroup.
A few days ago I heard two lectures here by Schrödinger, he wrote to Jordan, and I am rock solid convinced of the incorrectness of the physical interpretation of QM presented by Schrödinger.
He already knew that conviction alone was not enough, given that Schrödinger's mathematics signifies a great progress.
After his disastrous intervention Heisenberg had sent a dispatch to Bohr from the front line of quantum physics.
After reading Heisenberg's version of events in Munich Bohr invited Schrödinger to Copenhagen to give a lecture and participate in some discussions for the narrower circle of those who work here at the institute in which we can deal more deeply with the open questions of atomic theory.
When Schrödinger stepped off the train on 1st of October 1926 Bohr was waiting for him at the station. Remarkably, it was the first time they had ever met.
After the exchange of pleasantries, battle began almost at once, and according to Heisenberg continued daily from early morning until late at night.
There was to be little respite for Schrödinger from Bohr's continual probing in the days ahead. He installed Schrödinger in the guest room at his home to maximize their time together.
Although usually the most kind and considerate of hosts, in his desire to convince Schrödinger that he was in error, Bohr appeared even to Heisenberg to act as a remorseless fanatic, one who was not prepared to make the least concession or grant that he could ever be mistaken.
Each man passionately defended his deeply rooted convictions concerning the physical interpretation of the new physics. Neither was prepared to concede a single point without putting up a fight. Each pounced on any weakness or lack of precision in the argument of the other.
During one discussion Schrödinger called the whole idea of quantum jumps a sheer fantasy, but it does not prove that there are no quantum jumps, Bohr countered. All it proved he continued was that we cannot imagine them.
Emotions soon ran high.
You can't seriously be trying to cast doubt on the whole basis of quantum theory, asked Bohr. Schrödinger conceded there was much that still needed to be fully explained, but that Bohr had also failed to discover a satisfactory physical interpretation of quantum mechanics.
As Bohr continued to press Schrödinger finally snapped, if all this damned quantum jumping were really here to stay I should be sorry I ever got involved with quantum theory.
But the rest of us are extremely grateful that you did, Bohr replied. Your wave mechanics has contributed so much to mathematical clarity and simplicity that it represents a gigantic advance over all previous forms of quantum mechanics.
After a few days of these relentless discussions, Schrödinger fell ill and took to his bed. Even as his wife did all she could to nurse their house guest, Bohr sat on the edge of the bed and continued the argument, but surely Schrödinger you must see.
He did see, but only through the glasses that he had long worn, and he was not about to change them for ones prescribed by Bohr. There had been little if any chance of the two men ever reaching a concord. Each remained unconvinced by the other.
No real understanding could be expected since at the time, neither side was able to offer a complete and coherent interpretation of quantum mechanics, Heisenberg later wrote.
Schrödinger did not accept that quantum theory represented a complete break with classical reality. As far as Bohr was concerned, there was no going back to the familiar ideas of orbits and continuous paths in the atomic realm.
The quantum jump was here to stay, whether Schrödinger liked it or not.
As soon as he arrived back in Zurich, Schrödinger recounted Bohr's really remarkable approach to atomic problems in a letter to Wilhelm Wien.
He is completely convinced that any understanding in the usual sense of the word is impossible, he told Wien.
Therefore the conversation is almost immediately driven into philosophical questions, and soon, you no longer know whether you really take the position he is attacking, or whether you really must attack the position that he is defending.
Yet, despite their theoretical differences, Bohr and especially Heisenberg had behaved in a touchingly kind, nice, caring and attentive manner, and all was totally cloudlessly amiable and cordial.
Distance and a few weeks had made it seem less of an ordeal.
A week before Christmas 1926, Schrödinger and his wife traveled to America, where he had accepted an invitation from the University of Wisconsin to give a series of lectures for which he would receive the princely sum of $2,500.
Afterwards he crisscrossed the country giving nearly 50 lectures.
By the time he arrived back in Zurich in April 1927, Schrödinger had turned down several job offers.
He had his eye on a far greater prize, Planck's chair in Berlin.
Having been appointed in 1892, Planck was due to retire on 1st of October 1927, to an emeritus professorship.
Heisenberg, 24, was too young for such an elevated position.
Arnold Sommerfeld had been first choice, but at 59 he decided to stay in Munich.
It was now either Schrödinger or Born.
Schrödinger was appointed as Planck's successor, and it was the discovery of wave mechanics that had clinched it.
In August 1927, Schrödinger moved to Berlin and found someone there who was just as unhappy with Born's probabilistic interpretation of the wave function as he was.
Einstein
Einstein had been the first to introduce probability into quantum physics in 1916 when he provided the explanation for the spontaneous emission of light quanta as an electron jumped from one atomic energy level to another.
Ten years later Born had put forward an interpretation of the wave function and wave mechanics that could account for the probabilistic character of quantum jumps.
It came with a price tag that Einstein did not want to pay, the renunciation of causality.
In December 1926, Einstein had expressed his growing disquiet at the rejection of causality and determinism in a letter to Born.
Quantum mechanics is certainly imposing, but an inner voice tells me that it is not yet the real thing.
The theory says a lot, but does not really bring us any closer to the secret of the old one.
I, at any rate, am convinced that he is not playing at dice.
As the battle lines were being drawn, Einstein was unwittingly the inspiration for a stunning breakthrough, one of the greatest and profoundest achievements in the history of the quantum.
The Uncertainty Principle
Chapter 10 Uncertainty in Copenhagen
As Werner Heisenberg stood in front of the blackboard with his notes spread out on the table before him, he was nervous.
The brilliant 25-year-old physicist had every reason to be.
It was Wednesday 28th of April 1926 and he was about to deliver a lecture on matrix mechanics to the famed physics colloquium at Berlin University.
Whatever the merits of Munich or Göttingen, it was Berlin that Heisenberg rightly called the stronghold of physics in Germany.
His eyes scanned the faces in the audience and settled on four men sitting in the front row, each with a Nobel Prize to his name.
Max von Lauch, Walter Nernst, Max Planck and Albert Einstein.
Any nerves at this first chance to meet so many famous men quickly subsided as Heisenberg by his own reckoning presented a clear account of the concepts and mathematical foundations of what was then a most unconventional theory.
As the audience drifted away after the lecture, Einstein invited Heisenberg back to his apartment.
During the half-hour stroll to Haberlundstrasse, Einstein asked Heisenberg about his family, education and early research.
It was only when they were comfortably seated in his apartment that the real conversation began, recalled Heisenberg, as Einstein probed the philosophical background of my recent work.
You assume the existence of electrons inside the atom and you are probably right to do so, said Einstein, but you refuse to consider their orbits even though we can observe electron tracks in a cloud chamber.
I should very much like to hear more about your reasons for making such strange assumptions.
This was just what he had hoped for, a chance to win over the 47-year-old quantum master.
We cannot observe electron orbits inside the atom, replied Heisenberg, but the radiation which an atom emits during discharges enables us to deduce the frequencies and corresponding amplitudes of its electrons.
Warming to his theme he explained that since a good theory must be based on directly observable magnitudes I thought it more fitting to restrict myself to these, treating them as it were as representatives of the electron orbits.
But you don't seriously believe, Einstein protested, that none but observable magnitudes must go into a physical theory.
It was a question that struck at the very foundations on which Heisenberg had constructed his new mechanics.
Isn't that precisely what you have done with relativity, he countered.
A good trick should not be tried twice, smiled Einstein.
Possibly I did use this kind of reasoning he conceded, but it is nonsense all the same.
Although it might be heuristically useful to bear in mind what one has actually observed in principle, he argued, it is quite wrong to try founding a theory on observable magnitudes alone.
In reality the very opposite happens, it is the theory which decides what we can observe.
What did Einstein mean?
Almost a century before, in 1830 the French philosopher Auguste Comte had argued that, while every theory has to be based on observation, the mind also needs a theory in order to make observations.
Einstein tried to explain that observation was a complex process, involving assumptions about phenomena that are used in theories.
The phenomenon under observation produces certain events in our measuring apparatus, said Einstein.
As a result further processes take place in the apparatus, which eventually and by complicated paths, produce sense impressions and help fix the effects in our consciousness.
These effects Einstein maintained depend on our theories.
And in your theory, he told Heisenberg, you quite obviously assume that the whole mechanism of light transmission, from the vibrating atom to the spectroscope or to the eye, works just as one has always supposed it does, that is, essentially according to Maxwell's law.
If that were no longer the case, you could not possibly observe any of the magnitudes you call observable.
Einstein continued to press.
Your claim that you are introducing none but observable magnitudes is therefore an assumption about a property of the theory that you are trying to formulate.
I was completely taken aback by Einstein's attitude though I found his arguments convincing, Heisenberg later admitted.
While Einstein was still a patent clerk, he had studied the work of the Austrian physicist Ernst Mach, for whom the goal of science was not to discern the nature of reality but to describe experimental data, the facts, as economically as possible.
Every scientific concept was to be understood in terms of its operational definition, a specification of how it could be measured.
It was while under the influence of this philosophy that Einstein had challenged the established concepts of absolute space and time.
But he had long since abandoned Mach's approach because as he told Heisenberg, it rather neglects the fact that the world really exists, that our sense impressions are based on something objective.
As he left the apartment, disappointed at his failure to persuade Einstein, Heisenberg needed to make a decision.
In three days' time, on 1st of May, he was due in Copenhagen to begin his dual appointment as Bohr's assistant and as a lecturer at the university.
However he had just been offered an ordinary professorship at Leipzig University.
Heisenberg knew it was a tremendous honor for one so young but should he accept?
Heisenberg told Einstein of the difficult choice he had to make.
Go and work with Bohr, was his advice.
The next day Heisenberg wrote to his parents that he was turning down the Leipzig offer.
If I continue to produce good papers, he reassured himself and them, I will always receive another call, otherwise I don't deserve it.
Heisenberg is now here and we are all very much occupied with discussions about the new development of the quantum theory and the great prospects it holds out, Bohr wrote to Rutherford in the middle of May 1926.
Heisenberg lived at the institute in a cozy little attic flat with slanting walls and a view of Filet Park.
Bohr and his family had moved into the plush and spacious director's villa next door.
Heisenberg was such a regular visitor that he soon felt half at home with the Bohr's.
The enlargement and renovation of the institute had taken far longer than expected and Bohr was exhausted.
Saptive energy, he suffered a severe case of flu.
As Bohr spent the next two months recovering, Heisenberg successfully used wave mechanics to account for the line spectrum of helium.
Once Bohr was back to his old self, living next door to him was something of a mixed blessing.
After eight or nine o'clock in the evening Bohr all of a sudden would come up to my room and say, Heisenberg what do you think about this problem?
And then we would start talking and talking and quite frequently we went on till twelve or one o'clock at night.
Or he would invite Heisenberg over to the villa for a chat that lasted long into the evening, fueled by glasses of wine.
As well as working with Bohr, Heisenberg gave two lectures a week on theoretical physics at the university in Danish.
He was not much older than his students and one of them could barely believe he was so clever since he looked like a bright carpenter's apprentice
just returned from technical school.
Heisenberg quickly adapted to the rhythm of life at the institute and with his new colleagues enjoyed sailing, horse riding and walking tours at the weekends.
But there was less and less time for such activities after Schrödinger's visit at the beginning of October 1926.
Schrödinger and Bohr had failed to reach any sort of accord over the physical interpretation of either matrix or wave mechanics.
Heisenberg saw how terribly anxious Bohr was to get to the bottom of things.
In the months that followed the interpretation of quantum mechanics was all that Bohr and his young apprentice talked about as they tried to reconcile theory and experiment.
Bohr often came up to my room late at night to talk to me of the difficulties in quantum theory which tortured both of us, Heisenberg said later.
Nothing caused them more pain than wave particle duality.
As Einstein told Aaron Thest, on the one hand waves, on the other, quanta.
The reality of both is firm as a rock but the devil makes a verse out of this which really rhymes.
In classical physics something can either be a particle or a wave, it cannot be both.
Heisenberg had used particles and Schrödinger waves as they discovered their respective versions of quantum mechanics.
Even the demonstration that both matrix and wave mechanics were mathematically equivalent had not yielded any deeper understanding of wave particle duality.
The crux of the whole problem, Heisenberg said, was that no one could answer the questions, is an electron now a wave or is it a particle and how does it behave if I do this and that and so on.
The harder Bohr and Heisenberg thought about wave particle duality the worse things seemed to become.
Like a chemist who tries to concentrate his poison more and more from some kind of solution, remembered Heisenberg, we tried to concentrate the poison of the paradox.
As they did so there was an increasing tension between the two men as each adopted a different approach in an attempt to resolve the difficulties.
In the search for a physical interpretation of quantum mechanics, what the theory revealed about the nature of reality at the atomic level, Heisenberg was totally committed to particles, quantum jumps and discontinuity.
For him the particle aspect was dominant in wave particle duality, he was not prepared to make room to accommodate anything remotely linked to Schrödinger's interpretation.
To Heisenberg's horror Bohr wanted to play with both schemes.
Unlike the young German he was not wedded to matrix mechanics and had never been enthralled by any mathematical formalism.
While Heisenberg's first port of call was always the mathematics, Bohr weighed anchor and sought to understand the physics behind the mathematics.
In probing quantum concepts such as wave particle duality, he was more interested in grasping the physical content of an idea rather than the mathematics it came wrapped in.
Bohr believed that a way had to be found to allow for the simultaneous existence of both particles and waves in any complete description of atomic processes.
Reconciling these two contradictory concepts was for him the key that would open the door leading to a coherent physical interpretation of quantum mechanics.
Ever since Schrödinger's discovery of wave mechanics it was understood that there was one quantum theory too many.
What was needed was a single formulation especially given that the two were mathematically the same.
It was Paul Dirac and Pasquale Jordan independently of each other who came up with just such a formalism that autumn.
Dirac who had arrived in Copenhagen in September 1926 for a six month stay showed that matrix and wave mechanics were just special cases of an even more abstract formulation of quantum mechanics called transformation theory.
All that was missing was a physical interpretation of the theory and the search for it was beginning to take its toll.
Since our talks often continued till long after midnight and did not produce a satisfactory conclusion, despite protracted efforts over several months, recalled Heisenberg, both of us became utterly exhausted and rather tense.
Bohr decided that enough was enough and went on a four week skiing holiday in Goldbrunstalen, Norway in February 1927.
Heisenberg was glad to see him go so that he could think about these hopelessly complicated problems undisturbed.
None was more pressing than the trajectory of an electron in a cloud chamber.
When Bohr met Rutherford at the Research Students Christmas Party in Cambridge in 1911, he was struck by the New Zealanders generous praise for the recent invention of the cloud chamber by CTR Wilson.
The Scotsman had managed to create clouds in a small glass chamber that contained air saturated with water vapor.
Cooling the air by allowing it to expand caused the vapor to condense into miniscule water droplets on particles of dust, producing a cloud.
Before long Wilson was able to create a cloud even after removing all traces of dust from the chamber.
The only explanation he could offer was that the cloud was formed by condensation on ions present in the air within the chamber.
However, there was another possibility.
Radiation passing through the chamber could rip electrons from atoms in the air forming ions, thereby leaving a trail of tiny water droplets in its wake.
It was soon discovered that radiation did exactly that.
Wilson appeared to have given physicists a tool for observing the trajectories of alpha and beta particles emitted from radioactive substances.
Particles followed well-defined paths while waves, because they spread out, did not.
However, quantum mechanics did not allow for the existence of the particle trajectories that were clearly visible for all to see in a cloud chamber.
The problem seemed insurmountable.
But it ought to be possible, Heisenberg was convinced, to establish a connection between what was observed in the cloud chamber and quantum theory, hard though it appeared to be.
Working late one evening in his small attic flat at the institute, Heisenberg's mind began to wander as he pondered the riddle of electron tracks in a cloud chamber where matrix mechanics said there should be none.
All of a sudden he heard the echo of Einstein's rebuke that, it is the theory that decides what we can observe.
Convinced that he was on to something Heisenberg needed to clear his head.
Although it was well past midnight, he went for a walk in the neighboring park.
Barely feeling the chill he began to focus on the precise nature of the electron track left behind in a cloud chamber.
We had always said so glibly that the path of the electron in the cloud chamber could be observed, he wrote later.
But, perhaps what we really observed was something much less.
Perhaps we merely saw a series of discrete and ill-defined spots through which the electron had passed.
In fact, all we do see in the cloud chamber are individual water droplets which must certainly be much larger than the electron.
There was no continuous unbroken path, Heisenberg believed.
He and Bohr had been asking the wrong questions.
The one to answer was, can quantum mechanics represent the fact that an electron finds itself approximately in a given place and that it moves approximately with a given velocity?
Hurrying back to his desk, Heisenberg began manipulating the equations he knew so well.
Quantum mechanics apparently placed restrictions on what could be known and observed, but how did the theory decide what can and cannot be observed?
The answer was the uncertainty principle.
Heisenberg had discovered that quantum mechanics forbids at any given moment the precise determination of both the position and the momentum of a particle.
It is possible to measure exactly either where an electron is or how fast it is moving, but not both simultaneously.
It was nature's price for knowing one of the two exactly.
In a quantum dance of give and take the more accurately one is measured the less accurately the other can be known or predicted.
If he was right, then Heisenberg knew that it meant no experiment probing the atomic realm would ever succeed in overcoming the limits imposed by the uncertainty principle.
It was, of course, impossible to prove such a claim, but Heisenberg was certain it must be so, given that all processes involved in any such experiment had necessarily to satisfy the laws of quantum mechanics.
In the days that followed he tested the uncertainty principle, or as he preferred to call it, the indeterminacy principle.
In the laboratory of the mind he conducted one imaginary thought experiment after another in which it might be possible to measure position and momentum simultaneously with an accuracy that the uncertainty principle said was impossible.
As calculation after calculation revealed that the uncertainty principle had not been violated, one particular thought experiment convinced Heisenberg that he had successfully demonstrated that it is the theory which decides what we can and cannot observe.
Heisenberg had once discussed with a friend the difficulties surrounding the concept of electron orbits.
His friend had argued that it should in principle be possible to construct a microscope that allowed electron paths inside the atom to be observed.
However, such an experiment was now ruled out because according to Heisenberg, not even the best microscope could cross the limits set by the uncertainty principle.
All he had to do was prove it theoretically by trying to determine the exact position of a moving electron.
To see an electron required a special kind of microscope.
Ordinary microscopes use visible light to illuminate an object and then focus the reflected light into an image.
The wavelengths of visible light are much larger than an electron and therefore could not be used to determine its exact position as they washed over it like waves over a pedal.
What was required was a microscope that used gamma rays, light of extremely short wavelength and high frequency to pinpoint its position.
Arthur Compton in 1923 had investigated x-rays striking electrons and found conclusive evidence for the existence of Einstein's light quanta.
Heisenberg imagined that like two billiard balls colliding, when a gamma ray photon hits the electron it is scattered into the microscope as the electron recoils.
There is however a discontinuous shove rather than a smooth transition in the electrons momentum due to the impact of the gamma ray photon.
Since the momentum that an object possesses is its mass multiplied by its velocity, any change in its velocity causes a corresponding change in its momentum.
When the photon hits the electron it jolts its velocity, the only way to minimize the discontinuous change in the electrons momentum is by reducing the energy of the photon, thereby lessening the impact of the collision.
To do so entails using light of a longer wavelength and lower frequency, however such a switch in wavelength means that it is no longer possible to pin down the exact position of the electron.
The more precisely the electrons position is measured, the more uncertain or imprecise any measurement of its momentum and vice versa.
Heisenberg showed that if delta P and delta Q are the imprecision or uncertainty with which the momentum and the position are known, then delta P multiplied by delta Q is always greater than or equal to h over 2 pi.
Delta P delta Q is greater than or equal to h over 2 pi, where h is Planck's constant.
This was the mathematical form of the uncertainty principle or the imprecision in knowledge of simultaneous measurements of position and momentum.
Heisenberg also discovered another uncertainty relation involving a different pair of so-called conjugate variables, energy and time.
If delta E and delta T are the uncertainties with which the energy E of a system can be determined and the time T at which E is observed, then delta E delta T is greater or equal to h over 2 pi.
At first there were some who thought that the uncertainty principle was the result of the technological shortcomings of the equipment used in an experiment.
If the equipment could be improved, they believed then the uncertainty would disappear.
This misunderstanding arose because of Heisenberg's use of thought experiments to draw out the significance of the uncertainty principle.
However, thought experiments are imaginary experiments employing perfect equipment under ideal conditions.
The uncertainty discovered by Heisenberg is an intrinsic feature of reality.
There could be no improvement, he argued, on the limits set by the size of Planck's constant and enforced by the uncertainty relations on the precision of what is observable in the atomic world.
Rather than uncertain or indeterminate, unknowable may have been a more apt description of his remarkable discovery.
Heisenberg believed it was the act of measuring the position of the electron that made the precise determination of its momentum at the same time impossible.
The reason appeared, as far as he was concerned, to be straightforward.
The electron is disturbed unpredictably when struck by the photon used to see it in order to locate its position.
It was this unavoidable disturbance during the act of measurement that Heisenberg identified as the origin of uncertainty.
It was an explanation that he believed was supported by the fundamental equation of quantum mechanics.
pq-qp equals negative i h over 2 pi, where p and q are the momentum and position of a particle.
It was the inherent uncertainty of nature that lay behind non-commutativity, the fact that p times q does not equal q times p.
If an experiment to locate an electron were followed by one measuring its velocity and therefore its momentum, they would give two precise values.
Multiplying the two values together yields an answer, a.
However, repeating the experiments in reverse order, measuring the velocity first and then the position, would lead to a completely different result, b.
In each case, the first measurement caused a disturbance that affected the outcome of the second.
If there had been no disturbance which was different in each experiment, then p times q would be the same as q times p.
As pq-qp would then equal zero, there would be no uncertainty and no quantum world.
Heisenberg was delighted as he saw the pieces fit neatly together.
His version of quantum mechanics was built out of matrices representing observables, such as position and momentum, that do not commute.
Ever since he discovered the strange rule that made the order in which two arrays of numbers were multiplied an essential component of the mathematical scheme of his new mechanics, the physical reason why this was so had been shrouded in mystery.
Now, he had lifted the veil.
It was, according to Heisenberg, only the uncertainty specified by delta p delta q is greater than or equal to h over 2 pi that creates room for the validity of the relations in pq-qp equals negative i h over 2 pi.
It was uncertainty, he claimed, that makes possible this equation without requiring that the physical meaning of the quantities p and q be changed.
The uncertainty principle had exposed a deep fundamental difference between quantum and classical mechanics.
In classical physics, both the position and momentum of an object can, in principle, be simultaneously determined to any degree of accuracy.
If the position and velocity were known precisely at any given moment, then the path of an object past, present and future could also be exactly mapped out.
These long-established concepts of everyday physics can also be defined exactly for the atomic processes, said Heisenberg.
However, the limitations of these concepts are laid bare when attempts are made to measure simultaneously a pair of conjugate variables, position and momentum or energy and time.
For Heisenberg, the uncertainty principle was the bridge between the observation of what appeared to be electron tracks in a cloud chamber and quantum mechanics.
As he built that bridge between theory and experiment, he assumed that only such experimental situations can arise in nature as can be expressed in the mathematical formalism of quantum mechanics.
He was convinced that if quantum mechanics said it could not happen, then it did not.
The physical interpretation of quantum mechanics is still full of internal discrepancies, Heisenberg wrote in his uncertainty paper, which show themselves in arguments about continuity versus discontinuity and particle versus wave.
It was a sorry state of affairs that arose because concepts that had been the foundation of classical physics ever since Newton fit nature only inaccurately at the atomic level.
He believed that with a more precise analysis of concepts such as position, momentum, velocity and the path of an electron or atom, it might be possible to eliminate the contradictions evident up to now in the physical interpretations of quantum mechanics.
What is meant by position in the quantum realm?
Nothing more or less, Heisenberg answered, then the result of a specific experiment designed to measure, say, the position of the electron in space at a given moment.
Otherwise this word has no meaning.
For him, there simply is no electron with a well-defined position or a well-defined momentum in the absence of an experiment to measure its position or momentum.
A measurement of an electron's position creates an electron with a position, while a measurement of its momentum creates an electron with a momentum.
The very idea of an electron with a definite position or momentum is meaningless prior to an experiment that measures it.
Heisenberg had adopted an approach to defining concepts through their measurement that harked back to Ernst Mach and what philosophers called operationalism.
But it was more than just a redefinition of old concepts.
With the track left behind by an electron passing through a cloud chamber firmly on his mind, Heisenberg examined the concept of the path of the electron.
A path is an unbroken continuous series of positions taken up by the moving electron in space and time.
Under his new criteria, to observe the path involves measuring the electron's position at each successive point.
However, hitting the electron with a gamma ray photon in the act of measuring its position disturbs it.
Therefore its future trajectory cannot be predicted with certainty.
In the case of an atomic electron orbiting a nucleus, a gamma ray photon is energetic enough to knock it out of the atom and only one point in its orbit is measured and therefore known.
Since the uncertainty principle forbids an exact measurement of both the position and velocity that define the path of an electron or its orbit in an atom, there simply is no path or orbit.
The only thing that is known for certain, says Heisenberg, is one point along the path and therefore hear the word path has no definable meaning.
It is measurement that defines what is being measured.
There is no way of knowing, argued Heisenberg what happens between two consecutive measurements.
It is of course tempting to say that the electron must have been somewhere between the two observations and that therefore the electron must have described some kind of path or orbit even if it may be impossible to know which path.
Tempting or not, he maintained that the classical notion of an electrons trajectory being a continuous unbroken path through space is unjustified.
An electron track observed in a cloud chamber only looks like a path but is really nothing more than a series of water droplets left in its wake.
Heisenberg was desperately trying to understand the sort of questions that it was possible to answer experimentally after his discovery of the uncertainty principle.
It was an unspoken basic tenet of classical physics that a moving object possessed both a precise location in space at a given time and a precise momentum irrespective of whether it was measured or not.
From the fact that the position and momentum of an electron cannot be measured with absolute accuracy at the same time, Heisenberg asserted that the electron does not possess precise values of position and momentum simultaneously.
To talk as if it did or that it has a trajectory is meaningless. To speculate about the nature of reality that lies beyond the realm of observation and measurement is pointless.
In later years, Heisenberg repeatedly chose to highlight the moment he remembered his talk with Einstein in Berlin as the crucial juncture on his journey to the uncertainty principle.
Yet, as he traveled the road to discovery that ended in the depths of a winter's night in Copenhagen, others had walked parts of the route with him. His most influential and valued companion was not Bohr, but Wolfgang Pauli.
As Schrödinger, Bohr and Heisenberg were locked in debate in Copenhagen in October 1926, Pauli was in Hamburg quietly analyzing the collision of two electrons.
He discovered, aided by Bohr's probabilistic interpretation, what he described in a letter to Heisenberg as a dark point.
Pauli had found that when electrons collide, their respective momenta must be taken as controlled and their positions uncontrolled.
A probable change in momentum was accompanied by a simultaneous but indeterminable change in position.
He had found that one could not ask simultaneously about momentum, Q, and position, P.
One can see the world with the P, I, and one can view it with the Q, I, Pauli stressed, but if one opens both eyes together then one goes astray.
Pauli took it no further but his dark point lurked in the back of Heisenberg's mind as he and Bohr grappled with the problem of interpretation and wave-particle duality in the months before the discovery of the uncertainty principle.
On 23rd February 1927, Heisenberg wrote a 14-page letter to Pauli summarizing his work on the uncertainty principle.
He relied on the critical judgment of the Viennese wrath of God more than most.
De is dawning in quantum theory, replied Pauli, and he lingering doubts vanished and by 9th March, Heisenberg had turned the contents of his letter into a paper for publication.
It was only then that he wrote to Bohr in Norway.
I believe that I have succeeded in treating the case where both the momentum P and the position Q are given to a certain accuracy.
I have written a draft of a paper about these problems which yesterday I sent Pauli.
Heisenberg chose not to send Bohr either a copy of the paper or the details of what he had done.
It was a sign of how strained their relationship had become.
I wanted to get Pauli's reactions before Bohr was back because I felt again that when Bohr comes back he will be angry about my interpretation, he explained later.
So I first wanted to have some support and see whether somebody else liked it.
Five days after Heisenberg posted his letter, Bohr was back in Copenhagen.
Refreshed after his month-long vacation, Bohr dealt with pressing institute business before carefully reading the uncertainty paper.
When they met to discuss it, he told a stunned Heisenberg that it was not quite right.
Bohr not only disagreed with Heisenberg's interpretation, but he had also spotted an error in the analysis of the gamma ray microscope thought experiment.
The workings of the microscope had nearly proved to be Heisenberg's undoing as a student in Munich.
Only the intervention of Sommerfeld had secured his doctorate.
Afterwards, a contrite Heisenberg had read up on microscopes, but he was about to discover that he still had some more to learn.
Bohr told Heisenberg it was wrong to place the origin of the uncertainty in the momentum of the electron in the discontinuous recoil it suffers due to the collision with the gamma ray microscope.
What prohibits the precise measurement of the momentum of the electron is not the discontinuous and uncontrollable nature of the momentum change, Bohr argued, but the impossibility of measuring that change exactly.
The Compton effect, he explained, allows the change in momentum to be calculated with pinpoint accuracy as long as the angle by which the photon is scattered after the collision through the aperture of the microscope is known.
However, it is impossible to fix the point where the photon enters the microscope.
Bohr identified this as the source of the uncertainty in the momentum of the electron.
The electrons position when it collides with the photon is uncertain since the finite aperture of any microscope limits its resolving power and therefore its ability to locate any micro physical object exactly.
Heisenberg had failed to take all this into account and there was worse to come.
Bohr maintained that a wave interpretation of the scattered light quantum was indispensable for the correct analysis of the thought experiment.
It was the wave particle duality of radiation and matter that was at the heart of quantum uncertainty for Bohr as he linked Schrodinger's wave packets with Heisenberg's new principle.
If the electron is viewed as a wave packet, then for it to have a precise well-defined position requires it to be localized and not spread out.
Such a wave packet is formed from the superposition of a group of waves.
The more tightly localized or confined the wave packet is, the greater the variety of waves needed, the greater the range of frequencies and wavelengths involved.
A single wave has a precise momentum, but it was an established fact that a group of superimposed waves of differing wavelengths cannot have a well-defined momentum.
Equally, the more precisely defined the momentum of a wave packet, the fewer component waves it has and the more spread out it is, thereby increasing the uncertainty in its position.
The simultaneously precise measurement of position and momentum is impossible as Bohr showed that the uncertainty relations could be derived from the wave model of the electron.
What troubled Bohr was that Heisenberg had adopted an approach based exclusively on particles and discontinuity.
The wave interpretation Bohr believed could not be ignored.
He regarded Heisenberg's failure to accommodate wave particle duality as a deep conceptual flaw.
I did not know exactly what to say to Bohr's argument, Heisenberg said later.
So the discussion ended with a general impression that now Bohr has again shown that my interpretation is not correct.
He was furious and Bohr upset at the reaction of his young protege.
Living next door to each other and with their offices on the ground floor of the institute, separated only by a staircase, Bohr and Heisenberg did well to avoid one another for a few days before meeting again to discuss the uncertainty paper.
Bohr hoped that, having had time to cool down, Heisenberg would see reason and rewrite it.
He refused.
Bohr tried to explain that it was not right and I shouldn't publish the paper, Heisenberg said later.
I remember that it ended by my breaking out in tears because I just couldn't stand this pressure from Bohr.
There was too much at stake for him to simply make the changes being demanded.
Heisenberg's reputation as the wunderkind of physics rested on his discovery of matrix mechanics, aged just 24.
The growing popularity of Schrödinger's wave mechanics threatened to overshadow even undermine that astonishing achievement.
Before long he was complaining about the number of papers being written that simply reworked into the language of wave mechanics results first obtained using matrix methods.
Although he too had employed the alternative to matrix mechanics as a handy set of mathematical tools with which to calculate the spectrum of helium,
Heisenberg harbored hopes of slamming the door on Schrödinger's wave mechanics and the Austrians' claims at having restored continuity.
With the discovery of the uncertainty principle and his interpretation of it based on particles and discontinuity, Heisenberg thought he had closed the door and locked it.
He wept tears of frustration as he tried to prevent Bohr from opening it again.
Heisenberg believed that his future was intimately bound to whether it was particles or waves, discontinuity or continuity that ruled in the atomic domain.
He wanted to publish as quickly as possible and challenge Schrödinger's claim that matrix mechanics was unanchaulich, unvisualizable and therefore untenable.
Schrödinger disliked discontinuity and a particle-based physics as much as Heisenberg loathed a physics of continuity and waves.
Armed with the uncertainty principle and what he deemed to be the correct interpretation of quantum mechanics, Heisenberg went on the attack as he consigned his rival to a footnote in his paper.
Schrödinger describes quantum mechanics as a formal theory of frightening indeed repulsive abstractness and a lack of visualizability.
Certainly one cannot overestimate the value of the mathematical and to that extent physical mastery of the quantum mechanical laws that Schrödinger's theory has made possible.
However, as regards questions of physical interpretation and principle, the popular view of wave mechanics as I see it has actually deflected us from exactly those roads which were pointed out by the papers of Einstein and Dibroy on the one hand and by the papers of Bohr and by quantum mechanics, i.e. matrix mechanics on the other hand.
On 22nd of March 1927, Heisenberg posted his paper on the perceptual content of quantum theoretical kinematics and mechanics to the Zeitschrift für Physik, the quantum theorist's journal of choice.
A quarrel with Bohr, he wrote to Pauli two weeks later.
By exaggerating one side or the other, protested Heisenberg, one can discuss a lot without saying anything new.
Believing that he had dealt with Schrödinger and his wave mechanics once and for all, Heisenberg now faced a far more tenacious opponent.
While Heisenberg was busy exploring the consequences of the uncertainty principle in Copenhagen, on the ski slopes in Norway, Bohr came up with complementarity.
It was for him no mere theory or a principle but the necessary conceptual framework hitherto missing for describing the strange nature of the quantum world.
Complimentarity Bohr believed could accommodate the paradoxical nature of wave-particle duality.
The wave and particle properties of electrons and photons, matter and radiation were mutually exclusive, yet complementary aspects of the same phenomenon.
Waves and particles were two sides of the same coin.
Complimentarity neatly sidestepped the difficulties that arose from having to use two disparate classical descriptions, waves and particles to describe a non-classical world.
Both particles and waves were, according to Bohr, indispensable for a complete description of quantum reality.
Either description by itself is only partially true.
Photons paint one picture of light, waves another, both hang side by side.
But, to avoid contradictions, there were limitations.
The observer can look at only one of them at any given time.
No experiment would ever reveal a particle and a wave at the same time.
Bohr argued that evidence obtained under different conditions cannot be comprehended within a single picture, but must be regarded as complementary,
in the sense that only the totality of the phenomena exhausts the possible information about the objects.
Bohr found support for his emerging ideas when he saw something in the uncertainty relations.
Delta P delta Q is greater than or equal to H over 2 pi and delta E delta T is greater than or equal to H over 2 pi.
That Heisenberg, blinded by his intense dislike of waves and continuity, did not.
The Planck-Einstein equation E equals Hv, and De Broglie's formula P equals H over lambda, embodied wave particle duality.
Energy and momentum are properties commonly associated with particles whereas frequency and wavelength are both characteristics of waves.
Each equation contained one particle-like and one wave-like variable.
The meaning of this combination of particle and wave characteristics in the same equation was something that niggled Bohr.
After all, a particle and a wave are two wholly distinct physical entities.
As he corrected Heisenberg's analysis of the microscope thought experiment, Bohr spotted that the same was true for the uncertainty relations.
It was a finding that led him to interpret the uncertainty principle as revealing the extent to which two complementary but mutually exclusive classical concepts,
either particles and waves or momentum and position, could be applied simultaneously without contradiction in the quantum world.
The uncertainty relations also implied that a choice has to be made between what Bohr called a causal description
based on the conservation laws of energy and momentum, E and P in the uncertainty relations, and a spacetime description in which events are followed in space and time, Q and T.
The two descriptions were mutually exclusive but complementary so as to account for the results of all possible experiments.
To Heisenberg's dismay, Bohr had reduced the uncertainty principle to a special rule exposing the limits inherent in nature
on any simultaneous measurements of complementary pairs of observables such as position and momentum or on the simultaneous use of two complementary descriptions.
There was another difference of opinion.
Whereas the uncertainty principle led Heisenberg to question the extent to which classical concepts such as particle, wave, position, momentum and trajectory were applicable in the atomic realm,
Bohr argued that the interpretation of the experimental material rests essentially upon the classical concepts.
While Heisenberg insisted upon an operational definition of these concepts, a sort of meaning through measurement, Bohr argued that their meanings were already fixed by how they were used in classical physics.
Every description of natural processes he had written in 1923 must be based on ideas which have been introduced and defined by the classical theory.
Regardless of any limitations imposed by the uncertainty principle, they could not be replaced for the simple reason that all experimental data, its discussion and interpretation,
by which theories are put to the test in the laboratory, is of necessity expressed in the language and concepts of classical physics.
Heisenberg suggested that since classical physics was found wanting at the atomic level, why should these concepts be retained?
Why should we not simply say that we cannot use these concepts with a very high precision, therefore the uncertainty relations and therefore we have to abandon these concepts to a certain extent, he argued in the spring of 1927.
When it comes to the quantum we must realize that our words don't fit.
If words fail then the only sensible option for Heisenberg was to retreat into the formalism of quantum mechanics.
After all he maintained, a new mathematical scheme is just as good as anything because the new mathematical scheme then tells what may be there and what may not be there.
Bohr was unconvinced.
The gathering of every piece of information about the quantum world, he pointed out, involves performing and experiment the results of which are recorded as fleeting flashes of light on a screen,
or as clicks of a Geiger counter, or registered by the movement of needles on voltmeters and the like.
Such instruments belong to the everyday world of the physics laboratory, but they are the only means by which an event at the quantum level can be magnified, measured and recorded.
It is the interaction between a piece of laboratory equipment and a micro-physical object, an alpha particle or an electron, which triggers the click of a Geiger counter, or causes the needle of a voltmeter to move.
Any such interaction involves the exchange of at least one quantum of energy.
The consequence of this, Bohr said, is the impossibility of any sharp distinction between the behavior of atomic objects and the interactions with the measuring instruments which serve to define the conditions under which the phenomena appear.
In other words, it was no longer possible to make the separation that existed in classical physics between the observer and the observed, between the equipment used to make a measurement and what was being measured.
Bohr was adamant that it was the specific experiment being performed that revealed either the particle or wave aspects of an electron or a beam of light, of matter or radiation.
Since particle and wave were complementary but mutually exclusive facets of one underlying phenomenon, in no actual or imaginary experiment could both be revealed.
When equipment was set up to investigate the interference of light as in Young's famous, Two Slits experiment, it was the wave nature of light that was manifest.
If it was an experiment to study the photoelectric effect by shining a beam of light onto a metal surface, then it was light as a particle that would be observed.
To ask whether light is either a wave or a particle is meaningless, in Quantum Mechanics said Bohr there is no way of knowing what light really is.
The only question worth asking is, does the light behave like a particle or a wave?
The answer is that sometimes it behaves like a particle and at others like a wave, depending upon the choice of experiment.
Bohr assigned a pivotal role to the act of choosing which experiment to perform.
Heisenberg identified the act of measurement to determine, for example, the exact position of an electron as the origin of a disturbance that ruled out a simultaneously precise measurement of its momentum.
Bohr agreed that there was a physical disturbance.
Indeed our usual, classical description of physical phenomena is based entirely on the idea that the phenomena concerned may be observed without disturbing them appreciably, he said during a lecture delivered in September 1927.
It was a statement implying that such a disturbance is caused by the act of observing phenomena in the quantum world.
A month later he was more explicit when in a draft of a paper he wrote that no observation of atomic phenomena is possible without their essential disturbance.
However he believed that the origin of this irreducible and uncontrollable disturbance lay not in the act of measurement but in the experimenter having to choose one side of the wave particle duality in order to perform that measurement.
Uncertainty Bohr argued was nature's price for making that choice.
In the middle of April 1927, as he worked on formulating a consistent interpretation of quantum mechanics within the conceptual framework provided by complementarity, Bohr sent a copy of the uncertainty paper to Einstein at Heisenberg's request.
In the accompanying letter he wrote that it was a very important contribution to the discussion of the general problems of quantum theory.
In spite of their ongoing and often heated arguments Bohr informed Einstein that Heisenberg shows in an exceedingly brilliant manner how his uncertainty relations may be utilized not only in the actual development of quantum theory but also for the judgment of its visualizable content.
He went on to outline some of his own emerging ideas that would throw light on the difficulties of the quantum theory that are connected with the concepts or rather with the words that are used in the customary description of nature and which always have their origin in the classical theories.
Einstein, for some unknown reason, chose not to reply.
If he was hoping to elicit a response from Einstein, then Heisenberg must have been disappointed when he returned to Copenhagen after spending Easter in Munich.
It was a much needed break from the constant pressure to yield to Bohr's interpretation.
So I have come to be in a fight for the matrices and against the waves, Heisenberg wrote to Pauli on 31st of May, the very day his 27 page paper appeared in print.
In the ardor of this struggle I have often criticized Bohr's objections to my work too sharply and without realizing or intending it have in this way personally wounded him.
When I now reflect on these discussions I can very well understand that Bohr was angry about them.
The reason for such contrition was that two weeks earlier he had finally admitted to Pauli that Bohr was right.
The scattering of gamma rays into the aperture of the hypothetical microscope was the basis of the uncertainty relation for momentum and position.
Thus the relation delta p delta q tilde h indeed comes out naturally but not entirely as I had thought.
Heisenberg went on to concede that certain points were easier to handle using Schrödinger's wave description but he remained utterly convinced that in quantum physics only discontinuities are interesting and they could never be emphasized enough.
It was still not too late to withdraw the paper but it was a step too far.
All results of the paper are correct after all, he told Pauli and I am also in agreement with Bohr concerning these.
As a compromise Heisenberg added a post script.
After the conclusion of the foregoing paper it began, more recent investigations of Bohr have led to a point of view which permits an essential deepening and sharpening of the analysis of quantum mechanical correlations attempted in this work.
Heisenberg acknowledged that Bohr had brought to his attention crucial points that he had overlooked.
Uncertainty was a consequence of wave particle duality.
He closed by thanking Bohr and with the publication of the paper months of wrangling and gross personal misunderstandings though not entirely forgotten were firmly pushed aside.
Whatever their differences as Heisenberg said later all that mattered now was to present the facts in such a way that despite their novelty they could be grasped and accepted by all physicists.
I am very ashamed to have given the impression of being quite ungrateful, Heisenberg wrote to Bohr in the middle of June not long after Pauli had visited Copenhagen.
Two months later still full of remorse, he explained to Bohr how he reflected almost every day on how that came about and I am ashamed that it could not have gone otherwise.
Future job prospects had been a major determining factor in the rush to publish.
When he turned down the Leipzig professorship in favor of Copenhagen Heisenberg was certain that if he continued producing good papers then universities would come calling.
After the publication of the uncertainty paper the job offers came.
Anxious that Bohr might think otherwise he was quick to explain that he had not encouraged potential suitors because of their recent dispute over uncertainty.
Not yet 26 Heisenberg became Germany's youngest ordinary professor when he accepted a new offer from Leipzig University.
He left Copenhagen at the end of June.
By then life at the institute was back to normal as Bohr continued the painfully slow business of dictating the paper on complementarity and its implications for the interpretation of quantum mechanics.
He had been hard at work on it since April and Oscar Klein a 32 year old swede based at the institute was the person Bohr turned to for help.
As the argument over uncertainty and complementarity raged Hendrik Kramer's Bohr's former assistant warned Klein do not enter this conflict we are both too kind and gentle to participate in that kind of struggle.
When Heisenberg first learned that Bohr was writing a paper aided by Klein on the basis that there exists waves and particles he wrote rather disparagingly to Pauli that when one starts like that then one can of course make everything consistent.
As one draft followed another in the title changed from the philosophical foundations of the quantum theory to the quantum postulate and the recent development of atomic theory.
Bohr tried hard to finish the paper so he could present it at a forthcoming conference but it turned out to be yet another draft for the time being it would have to do.
The International Physics Congress from 11th to 20th of September 1927 in Como, Italy was held to commemorate the 100th anniversary of the death of the Italian Alessandro Volta the inventor of the battery.
With the conference in full swing Bohr was still finalizing his notes until the day of the lecture on 16th of September.
Among the audience at the Instituto Carducci eager to hear what he had to say were Bohr, Deboi, Compton, Heisenberg, Lawrence, Pauli, Planck and Sommerfeld.
It was impossible for some in the audience to catch every softly spoken word that followed as Bohr outlined for the first time his new framework of complementarity followed by an exposition of Heisenberg's uncertainty principle and the role of measurement in quantum theory.
Bohr stitched each of these elements together including Bohr's probabilistic interpretation of Schrodinger's wave function so that they constituted the foundations of a new physical understanding of quantum mechanics.
Physicists would later call this fusion of ideas the Copenhagen interpretation.
Bohr's lecture was the culmination of what Heisenberg later described as an intensive study of all questions concerning the interpretation of quantum theory in Copenhagen.
At first even the young quantum magician was uneasy with the Dane's answers.
I remember discussions with Bohr which went through many hours till very late at night and ended almost in despair, Heisenberg wrote later.
And when at the end of the discussion I went alone for a walk in the neighboring park I repeated to myself again and again the question,
can nature possibly be as absurd as it seemed to us in these atomic experiments?
Bohr's answer was an unequivocal yes.
The central role given to measurement and observation vitiated all attempts to unearth regular patterns in nature or any causal connections.
It was Heisenberg in his uncertainty paper who first advocated in print the rejection of one of the central tenets of science.
But what is wrong in the sharp formulation of the law of causality?
When we know the present precisely we can predict the future is not the conclusion but the assumption.
Even in principle we cannot know the present in all detail.
Not knowing simultaneously the exact initial position and velocity of an electron for example allows only probabilities of a plenitude of possibilities of future positions and velocities to be calculated.
Therefore it is impossible to predict the exact result of any single observation or measurement of an atomic process.
Only the probability of a given outcome among a range of possibilities can be precisely predicted.
The classical universe built on the foundations laid down by Newton was a deterministic clockwork cosmos.
Even after Einstein's relativistic remodeling if the exact position and velocity of an object particle or planet are known at any given moment then in principle its position and velocity can be completely determined for all time.
In the quantum universe there was no room for the determinism of the classical where all phenomena can be described as a causal unfolding of events in space and time.
Because all experiments are subject to the laws of quantum mechanics and therefore to equation delta p delta q tilde h Heisenberg boldly asserted in the last paragraph of his uncertainty paper it follows that quantum mechanics establishes the final failure of causality.
Any hope of restoring it was as fruitless and senseless as any lingering belief in a real world hidden behind what Heisenberg called the perceived statistical world.
It was a view shared by Bohr, Pauly and Born.
At Como two physicists were noticeable by their absence.
Schrodinger had only weeks earlier moved to Berlin as Planck's successor and was busy settling in.
Einstein refused to set foot in Fascist Italy.
Bohr would have to wait just a month before they met in Brussels.
Part three.
Titans clash over reality.
There is no quantum world.
There is only an abstract quantum mechanical description.
Niels Bohr.
I still believe in the possibility of a model of reality that is to say of a theory that represents things themselves and not merely the probability of their occurrence.
Albert Einstein.
Chapter 11.
Solvay 1927.
Now I am able to write to Einstein, Hendrik Lawrence wrote on 2nd of April 1926.
Earlier that day this elder statesman of physics had been granted a private audience with the king of the Belgians.
Lawrence had sought and received royal approval for Einstein's election to the scientific committee of the International Institute of Physics set up by industrialist Ernest Solvay.
Once described by Einstein as a marvel of intelligence and exquisite tact, Lawrence had also obtained the king's permission to invite German physicists to the 5th Solvay conference scheduled for October 1927.
His Majesty expressed the opinion that seven years after the war, the feelings which they aroused should be gradually damped down.
That a better understanding between peoples was absolutely necessary for the future and that science could help to bring this about, reported Lawrence.
Aware the Germany's brutal violation of Belgian neutrality in 1914 was still fresh in the memory, the king felt it necessary to stress that in view of all that the Germans had done for physics, it would be very difficult to pass them over.
But, passed over and isolated from the international scientific community they had been, ever since the end of the war.
The only German invited is Einstein who is considered for this purpose to be international, Rutherford told a colleague before the 3rd Solvay conference in April 1921.
Einstein decided not to attend because Germans were excluded and instead went on a lecture tour of America to raise funds for the founding of the Hebrew University in Jerusalem.
Two years later he said he would decline any invitation to the 4th Solvay conference because of the continuing prohibition on German participation.
In my opinion, it is not right to bring politics into scientific matters, he wrote to Lawrence, nor should individuals be held responsible for the government of the country to which they happen to belong.
Unable to attend the 1921 conference because of ill health, Bohr too declined an invitation to Solvay in 1924.
He feared that to go might be interpreted by some as tacit approval of the policy to exclude the Germans.
When Lawrence became president of the League of Nations Committee on Intellectual Cooperation in 1925, he saw little prospect of the ban on German scientists from international conferences being lifted in the near future.
Then, unexpectedly in October that same year, the door barring them was unlocked, if not yet opened.
In an elegant palazzo in the small Swiss resort of Locarno on the northern tip of Lake Maggiore, treaties were ratified that many hoped would ensure the future peace of Europe.
Locarno was the sunniest place in Switzerland and an apt setting for such optimism.
It had taken months of intense diplomatic negotiations to arrange the meeting so that emissaries of Germany, France and Belgium could settle their post-war borders with one another.
The Locarno treaties paved the way for Germany's acceptance in September 1926 into the League of Nations and membership brought with it an end to the exclusion of her scientists from the international stage.
When the king of Belgium gave his consent prior to the final moves on the diplomatic chessboard, Lawrence wrote to Einstein asking him to attend the fifth Solvay conference and to accept his election to the committee responsible for planning it.
Einstein agreed and in the coming months the participants were selected, the agenda finalized and the coveted invitations sent out.
All those invited fell into one of three groups.
The first were members of the Scientific Committee, Hendrik Lawrence, President, Martin Knudsen, Secretary, Marie Curie, Charles Eugène Guy, Paul Langevin, Owen Richardson and Albert Einstein.
The second group consisted of a scientific secretary, a Solvay family representative and three professors from the Free University of Brussels invited as a matter of courtesy.
The American physicist Irving Langmuir due to visit Europe at the time would be present as a guest of the committee.
The invitation made clear that the conference will be devoted to the new quantum mechanics and to questions connected with it.
This was reflected in the composition of the third group.
Niels Bohr, Max Born, William L. Bragg, Leon Bueh Wien, Arthur H. Compton, Louis DeProy, Peter Debye, Paul Dirac, Paul Ehrenfest, Ralph Fowler, Werner Heisenberg, Hendrik Kramer's, Wolfgang Pauli, Max Planck, Erwin Schrödinger and C.T.R. Wilson.
The old masters of quantum theory and the young Turks of quantum mechanics would all travel to Brussels.
Sommerfeld and Jordan were the most prominent of those not invited to what looked like the physicists equivalent of a theological council convened to settle some disputed point of doctrine.
During the conference five reports would be presented.
William L. Bragg on the intensity of X-ray reflection.
Arthur Compton on disagreements between experiment and the electromagnetic theory of radiation.
Louis DeProy on the new dynamics of quanta, Max Born and Werner Heisenberg on quantum mechanics and Erwin Schrödinger on wave mechanics.
The last two sessions of the conference would be devoted to a wide-ranging general discussion concerning quantum mechanics.
Two names were missing from the agenda.
Einstein had been asked but decided he was not competent enough to present a report.
The reason, he told Lawrence, is that I have not been able to participate as intensively in the modern development of quantum theory as would be necessary for that purpose.
This is in part because I have on the whole too little receptive talent for fully following the stormy developments.
In part also because I do not approve of the purely statistical way of thinking on which the new theory is founded.
It was not an easy decision since Einstein had wanted to contribute something of value in Brussels but he confessed, I have now given up that hope.
In fact, Einstein had closely monitored the stormy developments of the new physics and indirectly stimulated and encouraged the work of DeProy and Schrödinger.
However from the very beginning he doubted that quantum mechanics was a consistent and complete description of reality.
Bohr's name was also missing. He too had played no direct part in the theoretical development of quantum mechanics but had exerted his influence through discussions with the likes of Heisenberg, Pauli and Dirac who did.
All those invited to the fifth Solvay conference on electrons and photons knew it was designed to address the most pressing problem of the day, more philosophy than physics, the meaning of quantum mechanics.
What did the new physics reveal about the nature of reality? Bohr believed he had found the answer.
For many he arrived in Brussels as king of the quantum but Einstein was the pope of physics. Bohr was anxious to learn his reaction to the latest stage of the development which, to our view, went far in clarifying the problems which he had himself from the outset elicited so ingeniously.
What Einstein thought mattered deeply to Bohr.
So it was in a mood of great expectancy that most of the world's leading quantum physicists assembled at 10am on a grey overcast Monday on 24th of October 1927 at the Institute of Physiology in Leopold Park for the start of the first session.
The conference had taken 18 months to arrange and required the consent of a king and the ending of Germany's pariah status.
After a few brief words of welcome from Lawrence as president of the scientific committee and chair of the conference, the task of opening the proceedings fell to William L. Bragg, professor of physics at Manchester University.
Now 37, Bragg was only 25 when he was awarded the Nobel Prize for physics in 1915, together with his father William H. Bragg, for pioneering the use of x-rays to investigate the structure of crystals.
He was the obvious choice to report on the latest data concerning the reflection of x-rays by crystals and how these results led to a better understanding of atomic structure.
After Bragg's presentation, Lawrence invited questions and contributions from the floor.
The agenda had been organised to allow ample time after each report for a thorough discussion, with Lawrence using his command of English, German and French to help those less fluent.
Bragg, Heisenberg de Rack, Bourne de Poy and the old Dutch master himself were among those who took part in the discussion before the first session came to an end and everyone adjourned for lunch.
In the afternoon session, the American Arthur Compton reported on the failure of the electromagnetic theory of radiation to explain either the photoelectric effect or the increase in the wavelength of x-rays when they are scattered by electrons.
Though awarded a share of the 1927 Nobel Prize only a few weeks earlier, genuine modesty prevented him from referring to this last phenomenon as the Compton effect, as it was universally known.
Where James Clerk Maxwell's great 19th century theory failed, Einstein's light quantum, newly rebranded as the photon, succeeded in uniting theory and experiment.
The reports presented by Bragg and Compton were intended to facilitate the discussion of theoretical concepts.
At the end of the first day all the leading players had spoken, Bar 1, Einstein.
After a leisurely reception on Tuesday morning at the Free University of Brussels, everyone reconvened in the afternoon to hear Louis de Bois' paper on the new dynamics of quanta.
Speaking in French, de Bois began by outlining his own contribution, the extension of wave particle duality to matter, and how Schrödinger ingeniously developed it into wave mechanics.
Then, treading carefully by conceding that Born's idea contained a great deal of truth, he offered an alternative to the probabilistic interpretation of Schrödinger's wave function.
In the pilot wave theory, as de Bois later called it, an electron really exists both as a particle and a wave, in contrast to the Copenhagen interpretation where an electron behaves like either a particle or a wave depending on the type of experiment performed.
Both particles and waves exist simultaneously, de Bois argued, with the particle, akin to a surfer, riding a wave.
The waves leading or piloting the particles from one place to another were physically real rather than Born's abstract waves of probability.
With Bois and his associates determined to assert the primacy of the Copenhagen interpretation, and Schrödinger still doggedly wanting to promote his views on wave mechanics, de Bois' pilot wave proposal came under attack.
Looking for support from the one man who might sway the neutrals, de Bois was disappointed when Einstein remained silent.
On Wednesday 26th of October, the proponents of the two rival versions of quantum mechanics addressed the conference.
During the morning session, Heisenberg and Born gave a joint report. It was divided into four broad sections, the mathematical formalism, the physical interpretation, the uncertainty principle, and the applications of quantum mechanics.
The presentation, like the writing of the report, was a double act. Born, the senior man, delivered the introduction and sections one and two before handing over to Heisenberg.
Quantum mechanics, they began, is based on the intuition that the essential difference between atomic physics and classical physics is the occurrence of discontinuities.
Then came the metaphorical tipping of their hats to colleagues sitting only feet away, as they pointed out the quantum mechanics was essentially a direct continuation of the quantum theory founded by Planck, Einstein, and Bohr.
After an exposition of matrix mechanics that direct Jordan transformation theory and the probability interpretation, they turned to the uncertainty principle and the actual meaning of Planck's constant H.
It was nothing less they maintained than the universal measure of the indeterminacy that enters the laws of nature through the dualism of waves and corpuscles.
In effect, if there were no wave particle duality of matter and radiation, there would be no Planck's constant and no quantum mechanics.
In conclusion, they made the provocative statement that we consider quantum mechanics to be a closed theory whose fundamental physical and mathematical assumptions are no longer susceptible of any modification.
Closure implied that no future developments would ever alter any of the fundamental features of the theory.
Any such claim to the completeness and finality of quantum mechanics was something that Einstein could not accept.
For him, quantum mechanics was indeed an impressive achievement, but not yet the real thing.
Refusing to take the bait, Einstein took no part in the discussion that followed the report, nor did anyone else raise objections as only Bohr, Dirac, Lawrence, and Bohr spoke.
Paul Ehrenfest, sensing Einstein's disbelief at the boldness of the Bohr-Heisenberg assertion that quantum mechanics was a closed theory, scribbled a note and passed it to him.
Don't laugh. There is a special section in Purgatory for professors of quantum theory, where they will be obliged to listen to lectures on classical physics ten hours every day.
I laugh only at their naivety, Einstein replied. Who knows who would have the last laugh in a few years.
After lunch it was Schrödinger who took center stage as he delivered his report in English on wave mechanics.
Under this name at present two theories are being carried on which are indeed closely related but not identical, he said.
There was really only one theory but it was effectively split in two.
One part concerned waves in ordinary everyday three-dimensional space while the other required a highly abstract multi-dimensional space.
The problem, Schrödinger explained, was that for anything other than a moving electron this was a wave that existed in a space with more than three dimensions.
Whereas the single electron of the hydrogen atom could be accommodated in a three-dimensional space, helium with two electrons needed six dimensions.
Nevertheless, Schrödinger argued that this multi-dimensional space known as configuration space was only a mathematical tool and ultimately whatever was being described, be it many electrons colliding or orbiting the nucleus of an atom,
the process took place in space and time.
In truth however a complete unification of the two conceptions has not yet been achieved, he admitted, before going on to outline both.
Although physicists found it easier to use wave mechanics, no leading theorists agreed with Schrödinger's interpretation of the wave function of a particle as representing the cloud-like distribution of its charge and mass.
Undeterred by the widespread acceptance of Bohr's alternative probability interpretation, Schrödinger highlighted his own and questioned the accepted notion of the quantum jump.
From the moment he received the invitation to speak in Brussels Schrödinger was acutely aware of the possibility of a clash with the matricians.
The discussion began with Bohr asking if a remark about difficulties later in Schrödinger's report implied that a result he had stated earlier was incorrect.
Schrödinger dealt with Bohr's inquiry comfortably only to find Bohr challenging the correctness of another calculation.
Somewhat annoyed he said it was perfectly correct and rigorous and that this objection by Mr Bohr is unfounded.
After a couple of others had spoken it was Heisenberg's turn.
Mr Schrödinger says at the end of his report that the discussion he has given reinforces the hope that when our knowledge will be deeper it will be possible to explain and to understand in three dimensions the results provided by the multidimensional theory.
I see nothing in Mr Schrödinger's calculations that would justify this hope.
Schrödinger argued that his hope of achieving a three-dimensional conception is not quite utopian.
A few minutes later the discussion ended and brought to a close the first part of the proceedings, the presentation of the commissioned reports.
When it was already too late to change the dates it was discovered that the Académie des Ciesces in Paris had chosen Thursday 27th of October to mark the centenary of the death of the French physicist Augustin Fresnel.
It was decided that the Solvay meeting would be suspended for a day and a half to allow those wishing to attend the ceremonial event to do so and return for the climax of the conference.
A wide-ranging general discussion spread over the last two sessions.
Lawrence, Einstein, Bohr, Bourne, Pauly, Heisenberg and Dippoy were among the twenty who travelled to Paris to honour a kindred spirit.
Amid the distraction of German, French and English voices all seeking permission from Lawrence to speak next, Paul Ehrenfest suddenly got up and walked over to the blackboard and wrote,
The Lord there did confound the languages of all the earth.
As he returned to his chair, there was laughter as his colleagues realised that Ehrenfest was not just referring to the Biblical Tower of Babel.
The first session of the general discussion began on Friday afternoon, 28th October, with Lawrence making some introductory remarks as he tried to focus minds on the issues of causality, determinism and probability.
Were quantum events caused, or not, or as he put it, could one not maintain determinism by making it an article of faith? Must one necessarily elevate indeterminism to a principle?
Offering no further thoughts of his own, Lawrence invited Bohr to address the meeting.
As he spoke about the epistemological problems confronting us in quantum physics, it was clear to all present that Bohr was attempting to convince Einstein about the correctness of the Copenhagen solutions.
When the conference proceedings were published in French in December 1928, many mistook Bohr's contribution then and later as one of the official reports.
When asked for an edited version of his comments for inclusion, Bohr requested that a much expanded version of his Como lecture, which had been published the previous April be reprinted in lieu of his remarks.
Bohr being Bohr, his request was granted.
Einstein listened as Bohr outlined his belief that wave particle duality was an intrinsic feature of nature that was explicable only within the framework of complementarity.
That complementarity underpinned the uncertainty principle which exposed the limits of applicability of classical concepts.
However, the ability to communicate unambiguously the results of experiments probing the quantum world, Bohr explained, required the experimental setup, as well as the observations themselves, to be expressed in a language suitably refined by the vocabulary of classical physics.
In February 1927, as Bohr was edging towards complementarity, Einstein had given a lecture in Berlin on the nature of light.
He argued that instead of either a quantum or a wave theory of light, what was needed was a synthesis of both conceptions.
It was a view he had first expressed almost twenty years earlier.
Where he had long hoped to see some sort of synthesis, Einstein now heard Bohr imposing segregation through complementarity.
It was either waves or particles depending on the choice of experiment.
Scientists had always conducted their experiments on the unspoken assumption that they were passive observers of nature able to look without disturbing what they were looking at.
There was a razor-sharp distinction between object and subject between the observer and observed.
According to the Copenhagen interpretation, this was not true in the atomic realm, as Bohr identified what he called the essence of the new physics, the quantum postulate.
It was a term he introduced to capture the existence of discontinuity in nature due to indivisibility of the quantum.
The quantum postulate, said Bohr, led to no clear separation of the observer and the observed.
When investigating atomic phenomena, the interaction between what is measured and the measuring equipment meant, according to Bohr,
that an independent reality in the ordinary physical sense can neither be ascribed to the phenomenon nor to the agencies of observation.
The reality Bohr envisaged did not exist in the absence of observation.
According to the Copenhagen interpretation, a micro-physical object has no intrinsic properties.
An electron simply does not exist at any place until an observation or measurement is performed to locate it.
It does not have a velocity or any other physical attribute until it is measured.
In between measurements, it is meaningless to ask what is the position or velocity of an electron,
since quantum mechanics says nothing about a physical reality that exists independently of the measuring equipment,
only in the act of measurement does the electron become real.
An unobserved electron does not exist.
It is wrong to think that the task of physics is to find out how nature is, Bohr would argue later.
Physics concerns what we can say about nature.
Nothing more.
He believed that science had but two goals, to extend the range of our experience and to reduce it to order.
What we call science, Einstein once said, has the sole purpose of determining what is.
Physics for him was an attempt to grasp reality as it is independent of observation.
It is in this sense he said that one speaks of physical reality.
Bohr, armed with the Copenhagen interpretation was not interested in what is, but in what we can say to each other about the world.
As Heisenberg later stated, unlike objects in the everyday world, atoms or the elementary particles themselves are not as real.
They form a world of potentialities or possibilities rather than one of things or facts.
For Bohr and Heisenberg, the transition from the possible to the actual took place during the act of observation.
There was no underlying quantum reality that exists independently of the observer.
For Einstein, a belief in the existence of an observer independent reality was fundamental to the pursuit of science.
At stake in the debate that was about to begin between Einstein and Bohr, was the soul of physics and the nature of reality.
After Bohr's contribution, three others had already spoken when Einstein indicated to Lawrence that he wanted to break his self-imposed silence.
Despite being conscious of the fact that I have not entered deeply enough into the essence of quantum mechanics, he said,
nevertheless I want to present here some general remarks.
Quantum mechanics Bohr had argued exhausted the possibilities of accounting for observable phenomena.
Einstein disagreed.
A line had been drawn in the micro-physical sands of the quantum realm.
Einstein knew that the onus was on him to show that the Copenhagen interpretation was inconsistent and thereby wrecked the claims of Bohr and his supporters that quantum mechanics was a closed and complete theory.
He resorted to his favorite tactic, the hypothetical thought experiment conducted in the laboratory of the mind.
Einstein went over to the blackboard and drew a line representing an opaque screen with a small slit in it.
Just behind the screen, he drew a semi-circular curve representing a photographic plate.
Using the sketch, Einstein outlined his experiment.
When a beam of electrons or photons strikes the screen, some will pass through the slit and hit the photographic plate.
Because of the narrowness of the slit, the electrons passing through it will diffract like waves in every possible direction.
In keeping with the demands of quantum theory, Einstein explained,
the electrons traveling outwards from the slit towards the photographic plate do so as spherical waves.
Nonetheless the electrons actually strike the plate as individual particles.
There were, said Einstein, two distinct points of view concerning this thought experiment.
According to the Copenhagen interpretation, before any observation is made and striking the photographic plate counts as such,
there is a non-zero probability of detecting an individual electron at every point on the plate.
Even though the wave-like electron is spread over a large region of space, the very moment a particular electron is detected at point A,
the probability of finding it at point B or anywhere else on the plate instantly becomes zero.
Since the Copenhagen interpretation maintains that quantum mechanics gives a complete description of individual electron events in the experiment,
the behavior of each electron is described by a wave function.
Here's the rub, said Einstein.
If, prior to the observation, the probability of finding the electron was smeared over the entire photographic plate,
then the probability at B and everywhere else had to be instantaneously affected at the very moment the electron hit the plate at point A.
Such an instantaneous collapse of the wave function implied the propagation of some sort of faster than light cause and effect outlawed by his special theory of relativity.
If an event at A is the cause of another at B then there must be a time lapse between them to allow a signal to travel at light speed from A to B.
Einstein believed the violation of this requirement later called locality indicated that the Copenhagen interpretation was inconsistent and quantum mechanics was not a complete theory of individual processes.
Einstein proposed an alternative explanation.
Each electron that passes through the slit follows one of many possible trajectories until it hits the photographic plate.
However, the spherical waves do not correspond to individual electrons, argued Einstein, but to a cloud of electrons.
Quantum mechanics does not give any information about individual processes but only about what he called an ensemble of processes.
Though each individual electron of the ensemble follows its own distinct trajectory from slit to plate,
the wave function does not represent an individual electron but the electron cloud.
Therefore the square of the wave function, psi A, represents not the probability of finding a particular electron at A, but that of finding any member of the ensemble at that point.
It was, Einstein said, a purely statistical interpretation by which he meant that the statistical distribution of the large number of electrons striking the plate produced the characteristic diffraction pattern.
Bohr, Heisenberg, Pauley and Bourne were not entirely sure what Einstein was driving at.
He had not clearly stated his aim, to show that quantum mechanics was inconsistent and therefore an incomplete theory.
Sure, the wave function collapses instantaneously, they thought, but it was an abstract wave of probability, not a real wave traveling in ordinary three-dimensional space,
nor was it possible to choose between the two viewpoints Einstein outlined on the basis of observing what happens to an individual electron.
In both cases, an electron passes through the slit and hits the plate at some point.
I feel myself in a very difficult position because I don't understand what precisely is the point which Einstein wants to make, said Bohr.
No doubt, it is my fault.
Remarkably, he then said,
I do not know what quantum mechanics is.
I think we are dealing with some mathematical methods which are adequate for a description of our experiments.
Instead of responding to Einstein's analysis, Bohr simply went on to restate his own views.
But in this game of quantum chess, the Danish grandmaster later recounted in a paper written in 1949 to celebrate his opponent's 70th birthday,
the reply he gave that evening and on the last day of the conference in 1927.
According to Bohr, Einstein's analysis of his thought experiment tacitly assumed that the screen and photographic plate both had a well-defined position in space and time.
However, maintained Bohr, this implied that both had an infinite mass.
For only then would there be no uncertainty in either position or time as the electron emerged from the slit.
As a result, the exact momentum and energy of the electron is unknown.
This was the only possible scenario, argued Bohr, given that the uncertainty principle implies that the more precisely the electron's position is known,
the more inexact any concurrent measurement of its momentum must be.
The infinitely heavy screen in Einstein's imaginary experiment left no room for uncertainty in the space and time location of the electron at the slit.
However, such precision came at a price, its momentum and energy were completely indeterminate.
It was more realistic, Bohr suggested, to assume that the screen did not have an infinite mass,
although still much heavier the screen would now move when the electron passed through the slit.
While any such movement would be so small as to be impossible to detect in the laboratory,
its measurement presented no problem in the abstract world of the idealized thought experiment furnished as it was with measuring devices capable of perfect accuracy.
Because the screen moves, the position of the electron in space and time is uncertain during the process of diffraction,
resulting in a corresponding uncertainty in both its momentum and energy.
However, compared to the case of an infinitely massive screen, it would lead to an improved prediction of where the diffracted electron will hit the photographic plate.
Within the limits imposed by the uncertainty principle, argued Bohr, quantum mechanics was as complete a description of individual events as was possible.
Unimpressed by Bohr's reply, Einstein asked him to consider the possibility of controlling and measuring the transfer of momentum and energy between the screen and the particle,
be it an electron or a photon, as it passed through the slit.
Then, he argued, the state of the particle immediately afterwards could be determined with an accuracy greater than that allowed by the uncertainty principle.
As the particle passes through the slit, said Einstein, it would be deflected and its trajectory towards the photographic plate would be determined by the law of conservation of momentum,
which requires the sum total of the momenta of two bodies, particle and screen, that interact, to remain constant.
If the particle is deflected upwards, then the screen must be pushed downwards and vice versa.
Having used the movable screen introduced by Bohr for his own ends, Einstein modified the imaginary experiment further by inserting a two-slit screen between the movable screen and the photographic plate.
Einstein reduced the intensity of a beam until only one particle at a time passed through the slit in the first screen, S1, and one of the two slits of the second screen, S2, before hitting the photographic plate.
As each particle left an indelible mark where it hit the plate, something remarkable would happen.
What initially appeared to be a random sprinkling of specks was slowly transformed as more and more particles left their imprint by the laws of statistics into the characteristic interference pattern of light and dark bands.
While each particle was responsible for only a single mark, it nevertheless contributed decisively through some statistical imperative to the overall interference pattern.
By controlling and measuring the transfer of momentum between the particle and the first screen it was possible said Einstein to determine if the particle was deflected towards the upper or lower slit in the second screen.
From where it hit the photographic plate and the movement of the first screen it was possible to trace through which of the two slits the particle had passed.
It appeared that Einstein had devised an experiment in which it was possible to simultaneously determine the position and momentum of a particle with a greater precision than the uncertainty principle allowed.
In the process he also seemed to have contradicted another fundamental tenet of the Copenhagen interpretation.
Bohr's framework of complementarity posited that either particle-like or wave-like properties of an electron or a photon could be manifest in any given experiment.
There had to be a flaw in Einstein's argument and Bohr set out to find it by sketching the sort of equipment needed to conduct the experiment.
The apparatus he focused on was the first screen.
Bohr realized that the control and measurement of the transfer of momentum between the particle and screen hinged on the screen's ability to move vertically.
It is the observation of the screen moving either up or down as the particle passes through the slit that allows the determination of whether it passes through either the upper or lower slit in the second screen after it strikes the photographic plate.
Einstein, despite his years at the Swiss Patent Office had not considered the details of the experiment.
Bohr knew that the quantum devil lay in the details.
He replaced the first screen with one hanging by a pair of springs fixed to a supporting frame so that its vertical motion due to the transfer of momentum from a particle passing through the slit could be measured.
The measuring device was simple, a pointer attached to the supporting frame and a scale engraved on the screen itself.
It was crude, but sensitive enough to allow the observation of any individual interaction between screen and particle in an imaginary experiment.
Bohr argued that if the screen was already moving with an unknown velocity greater than any due to an interaction with a particle as it passed through the slit, then it would be impossible to ascertain the degree of momentum transfer and with it the trajectory of the particle.
On the other hand, if it was possible to control and measure the transfer of momentum from particle to screen, the uncertainty principle implied a simultaneous uncertainty in the position of the screen and slit.
However precise the measurement of the screen's vertical momentum, it was strictly matched in accordance with the uncertainty principle by a corresponding imprecision in the measurement of its vertical position.
Bohr went on to argue that the uncertainty in the position of the first screen destroys the interference pattern.
For example, D on the photographic plate is a point of destructive interference, a dark spot in the interference pattern.
A vertical displacement of the first screen would result in a change in the length of the two paths A, B, D and A, C, D.
If the new lengths differed by half a wavelength, then instead of destructive interference there would be constructive interference and a bright spot at D.
To accommodate uncertainty in the vertical displacement of the first screen, S1 requires an averaging over all of its possible positions.
This leads to interference somewhere between the extremes of total constructive and total destructive interference, resulting in a washed out pattern on the photographic plate.
Controlling the transfer of momentum from the particle to the first screen allows the trajectory of the particle through a slit in the second screen to be tracked.
However, it destroys the interference pattern, argued Bohr.
He concluded that Einstein's suggested control of momentum transfer would involve a latitude in the knowledge of the position of the diaphragm, S1, which would exclude the appearance of the interference phenomena in question.
Bohr had not only defended the uncertainty principle, but also the belief that the wave and particle aspects of a micro-physical object cannot both appear in a single experiment, imaginary or not.
Bohr's rebuttal rested only assumption that controlling and measuring the momentum transferred to S1 accurately enough to determine the particle's direction afterwards results in an uncertainty in the position of S1.
The reason for this, Bohr explained, lay in reading the scale on S1.
To do so it has to be illuminated, and that requires the scattering of photons from the screen and results in an uncontrollable transfer of momentum.
This impedes the precise measurement of the momentum transferred from the particle to the screen as it passes through the slit.
The only way to eliminate the impact of the photon is by not illuminating the scale at all, making it impossible to read.
Bohr had resorted to employing the same concept of disturbance that he had earlier criticized Heisenberg for using as an explanation of the origin of uncertainty in the microscope thought experiment.
There was another curious phenomenon associated with the two-slit experiment.
If one of the two slits has a shutter that is closed, then the interference pattern disappears.
Interference occurs only when both slits are open at the same time, but how was that possible?
A particle can go through only one slit. How did the particle know that the other slit was open or closed?
Bohr had a ready answer.
There was no such thing as a particle with a well-defined path.
It was this lack of a definite trajectory that was behind the appearance of an interference pattern, even though it was particles, one at a time, which had passed through the two-slit setup and not waves.
This quantum fuzziness enables a particle to sample a variety of possible paths, and so it knows if one of the slits is open or closed, whether it is open or not affects the particle's future path.
If detectors are placed in front of the two slits to sneak a look at which slit a particle is going to pass through, then it seems possible to close the other slit without affecting the particle's trajectory.
When such a delayed choice experiment was later actually conducted, instead of an interference pattern there was an enlarged image of the slit.
In trying to measure the position of the particle to establish through which slit it would pass, it is disturbed from its original course and the interference pattern fails to materialize.
The physicist has to choose, says Bohr, between either tracing the path of a particle or observing interference effects.
If one of the two slits of S2 is closed, then the physicist knows through which slit the particle passed before hitting the photographic plate, but there will be no interference pattern.
Bohr argues that this choice allows an escape from the paradoxical necessity of concluding that the behavior of an electron or a photon should depend on the presence of a slit in the diaphragm, S2, through which it could be proved not to pass.
The two slit experiment was for Bohr a typical example of the appearance of complementary phenomena under mutually exclusive experimental conditions.
Given the quantum mechanical nature of reality, he argued, light was neither a particle nor a wave. It was both, and sometimes it behaved like a particle and sometimes like a wave.
On any given occasion, nature's answer to whether it was a particle or a wave simply depended on the questions asked.
On the type of experiment performed, an experiment to determine through which slit in S2 a photon passed was a question that solicited a particle answer and therefore no interference pattern.
It was the loss of an independent objective reality and not probability.
God playing dice that Einstein found unacceptable.
Quantum mechanics therefore could not be the fundamental theory of nature that Bohr claimed it to be.
Einstein's concern and criticism provided a most valuable incentive for us all to re-examine the various aspects of the situation as regards the description of atomic phenomena, recalled Bohr.
A major point of contention, he stressed, was the distinction between the objects under investigation and the measuring instruments which serve to define, in classical terms, the conditions under which the phenomena appear.
In the Copenhagen interpretation, the measuring instruments were inextricably linked with the object under investigation. No separation is possible.
While a micro-physical object such as an electron was subject to the laws of quantum mechanics, the apparatus obeyed the laws of classical physics.
Yet Bohr had to retreat in the face of Einstein's challenge as he applied the uncertainty principle to a macroscopic object.
The first screen, S1.
By doing so, Bohr had imperiously consigned an element of the large-scale world of the everyday to the realm of the quantum as he failed to establish where is the cut between the classical and the quantum worlds, the border between the macro and micro.
It would not be the last time that Bohr played a questionable move in his game of quantum chess with Einstein. The spoils for the victor were just too high.
Einstein spoke only once more during the general discussion when he asked a question.
Dipgoi recalled later that Einstein said hardly anything beyond presenting a very simple objection to the probability interpretation and then he fell back into silence.
However, with all the participants staying at the hotel metropole, it was in its elegant art deco dining room that the keenest arguments took place, not in the conference room at the Institute of Physiology.
Bohr and Einstein said Heisenberg were in the thick of it all.
Surprisingly for an aristocrat, Dipgoi spoke only French.
He must have seen Einstein and Bohr deep in conversation in the dining room with the likes of Heisenberg and Pauli listening closely.
As they spoke in German, Dipgoi did not realize that they were engaged in what Heisenberg called a dual.
The acknowledged master of the thought experiment, Einstein would arrive at breakfast armed with a new proposal that challenged the uncertainty principle and with it the much lauded consistency of the Copenhagen interpretation.
The analysis would begin over coffee and croissants. It continued as Einstein and Bohr headed to the Institute of Physiology, usually with Heisenberg, Pauli and Ehrenfest trailing alongside.
As they walked and talked, assumptions were probed and clarified before the start of the morning session.
During the meeting and particularly in the pauses, we younger people, mostly Pauli and I, tried to analyze Einstein's experiment, Heisenberg said later, and at lunchtime the discussions continued between Bohr and the others from Copenhagen.
Late in the afternoon, following further consultations among themselves, the collaborative effort would yield a rebuttal.
During dinner back at the Metropole, Bohr would explain to Einstein why his latest thought experiment had failed to break the limits imposed by the uncertainty principle.
Each time Einstein could find no fault with the Copenhagen response, but they knew, said Heisenberg, in his heart he was not convinced.
After several days Heisenberg later recalled, Bohr, Pauli and I knew that we could now be sure of our ground, and Einstein understood that the new interpretation of quantum mechanics cannot be refuted so simply.
But Einstein refused to yield. Even if it failed to capture the essence of his rejection of the Copenhagen interpretation he would say, God does not play dice.
But still it cannot be for us to tell God how he is to run the world, replied Bohr on one occasion.
Einstein I am ashamed of you, said Paul Ehrenfest, only half joking. You are arguing against the new quantum theory just as your opponents argue about relativity theory.
The only impartial witness to the private encounters between Einstein and Bohr at Solvay 1927 was Ehrenfest.
Einstein's attitude gave rise to ardent discussions within a small circle, in which Ehrenfest, who, through the years had been a close friend to us both, recalled Bohr, took part in a most active and helpful way.
A few days after the conference ended, Ehrenfest wrote a letter to his students at Leiden University vividly describing the goings on in Brussels.
Bohr towering completely over everybody, at first not understood at all, Bohrn was also there. Then, step by step, defeating everybody.
Naturally once again the awful Bohr incantation terminology. Poor Lawrence as an interpreter between the British and the French who were absolutely unable to understand each other.
Summarizing Bohr. And Bohr responding with polite despair.
Every night at 1am Bohr came into my room just to say one single word to me. Until 3am.
It was delightful for me to be present during the conversations between Bohr and Einstein.
Like a game of chess Einstein all the time with new examples to break the uncertainty relation.
Bohr from out of the philosophical smoke clouds constantly searching for the tools to crush one example after the other.
Einstein like a jack in the box jumping out fresh every morning. Oh that was priceless.
But I am almost without reservation pro Bohr and contra Einstein.
However Ehrenfest admitted that he would not be able to find relief in his own mind before Concord with Einstein was reached.
At Solvay 1927 the discussions with Einstein were conducted Bohr said later in a most humorous spirit.
Yet he noted wistfully a certain difference in attitude and outlook remained.
Since with his mastery for coordinating apparently contrasting experiences without abandoning continuity and causality.
Einstein was perhaps more reluctant to renounce such ideals than someone for whom renunciation in this respect
appeared to be the only way to proceed with the immediate task of coordinating the multifarious evidence regarding atomic phenomena.
Which accumulated from day to day in the exploration of this new field of knowledge.
It was Einstein's very successes implied Bohr that kept him anchored in the past.
The fifth Solvay conference ended with Bohr in the minds of those gathered in Brussels having successfully argued for the logical consistency of the Copenhagen interpretation.
But failing to convince Einstein that it was the only possible interpretation of what was a complete closed theory.
On his journey home Einstein traveled to Paris with a small group that included de Bois.
Carry on he told the French Prince as they parted company you are on the right road.
But de Bois disheartened at the lack of support in Brussels would soon recant and accept the Copenhagen interpretation.
When Einstein reached Berlin he was exhausted and subdued.
Within a fortnight he wrote to Arnold Sommerfeld that quantum mechanics may be a correct theory of the statistical laws but it is an inadequate conception of individual elementary processes.
While Paul Langevan later said that the confusion of ideas reached its zenith at Solvay 1927.
For Heisenberg this meeting of minds was the decisive turning point in establishing the correctness of the Copenhagen interpretation.
I am satisfied in every respect with the scientific results he wrote as the conference ended.
Bois and my views have been generally accepted at least serious objections are no longer being made not even by Einstein and Schrödinger.
As far as Heisenberg was concerned they had won.
We could get anything clear by using the old words and limiting them by the uncertainty relations and still get a completely consistent picture he recalled almost 40 years later.
When asked whom he meant by we Heisenberg replied I could say that at that time it was practically Bohr, Pauli and myself.
Bohr never used the term the Copenhagen interpretation nor did anyone else until Heisenberg in 1955.
Yet from a handful of adherents it quickly spreads so that for most physicists the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics became synonymous with quantum mechanics.
Three factors lay behind this rapid dissemination and acceptance of the Copenhagen spirit.
The first was the pivotal role of Bohr and his institute.
Inspired by his stay in Rutherford's laboratory in Manchester as a young postdoctoral student Bohr had managed to create an institute of his own with the same zing in the air the sense that anything was possible.
Bohr's institute quickly became the world's centre of quantum physics and to paraphrase the old Romans all roads lead to Blegs d'Amvet 17 recalled the Russian George Gamov who arrived there in the summer of 1928.
The Kaiser Wilhelm Institute of Theoretical Physics of which Einstein was the director existed only on paper and he preferred it that way.
While he usually worked alone or later with an assistant who carried out the calculations Bohr fathered many scientific children.
The first to rise to prominence and positions of authority were Heisenberg, Pauli and Dirac.
Though only young men as Ralph Kronig later recalled other young physicists did not dare to go against them.
Kronig for one had not published the idea of electron spin after Pauli ridiculed it.
Secondly around the time of Solvay 1927 a number of professorships became vacant.
Those who had helped create the new physics filled nearly all of these.
The institutes they headed quickly began to attract many of the best and brightest students from Germany and across Europe.
Schrödinger had secured the most prestigious position as Planck's successor in Berlin.
Immediately after the Solvay conference Heisenberg arrived in Leipzig to take up his post as professor and director of the Institute for Theoretical Physics.
Within six months in April 1928 Pauli moved from Hamburg to a professorship at the EHT in Zurich.
Pasquale Jordan whose mathematical skills had been vital to the development of matrix mechanics succeeded Pauli in Hamburg.
Before long through regular visits and the exchange of assistants and students between each other and Bohr's Institute Heisenberg and Pauli established Leipzig in Zurich as centers of quantum physics.
With Kramers already installed at the University of Utrecht and born at Göttingen the Copenhagen interpretation soon became quantum dogma.
Lastly, despite their differences Bohr and his younger associates always presented a united front against all challenges to the Copenhagen interpretation.
The one exception was Paul Dirac, appointed Leukasian professor of mathematics at Cambridge University in September 1932, a chair once occupied by Isaac Newton.
Dirac was never interested in the question of interpretation.
It seemed to him to be a pointless preoccupation that led to no new equations.
Tellingly, he called himself a mathematical physicist whereas neither his contemporaries Heisenberg and Pauli nor Einstein and Bohr ever described themselves as such.
They were theoretical physicists to a man as was Lawrence, the acknowledged elder statesman of the Klan who died in February 1928.
To me personally, Einstein wrote later. He meant more than all the others encountered in my lifetime.
Soon, Einstein's own health became a matter of concern. In April 1928 during a short visit to Switzerland he collapsed as he carried his suitcase up a steep hill.
At first it was thought that he had suffered a heart attack but then an enlargement of the heart was diagnosed.
Later Einstein told his friend Michel Besso that he had felt close to croaking before adding which of course one shouldn't put off unduly.
Once back in Berlin under Elsa's watchful eye visits by friends and colleagues were strictly rationed.
She was once more Einstein's gatekeeper and nurse as she had been after he had fallen ill following his Herculian effort in formulating the general theory of relativity.
This time, Elsa needed help and hired a friend's unmarried sister. Helen Dukas was 32 and became Einstein's trusted secretary and friend.
As he recuperated, a paper by Bohr was published in three languages, English, German and French.
The English version entitled The Quantum Postulate and the Recent Development of Atomic Theory appeared on 14 April 1928.
A footnote stated, the content of this paper is essentially the same as that of a lecture on the present state of quantum theory delivered on September 16, 1927 at the Volta celebrations in Como.
In truth, Bohr had produced a more refined and advanced exposition of his ideas surrounding complementarity in quantum mechanics than he had presented in either Como or Brussels.
Bohr sent a copy to Schrödinger who replied, if you want to describe a system, e.g. a mass point by specifying its momentum P and position Q, then you find that this description is only possible with a limited degree of accuracy.
What was therefore needed, Schrödinger argued, was the introduction of new concepts with respects to which this limitation no longer applies.
However he concluded it will no doubt be very difficult to invent this conceptual scheme since, as you emphasize so impressively, the new fashioning required touches upon the deepest levels of our experience, space, time and causality.
Bohr wrote back thanking Schrödinger for his not altogether unsympathetic attitude, but he did not see the need for new concepts in quantum theory since the old empirical concepts appeared inseparably linked to the foundations of the human means of visualization.
Bohr restated his position that it was not a question of a more or less arbitrary limitation in the applicability of the classical concepts, but an inescapable feature of complementarity that emerges in an analysis of the concept of observation.
He ended by encouraging Schrödinger to discuss the contents of his letter with Planck and Einstein.
When Schrödinger informed him of the exchange with Bohr, Einstein replied that the Heisenberg Bohr tranquilizing philosophy, or religion, is so delicately contrived that for the time being it provides a gentle pillow for the true believer from which he cannot very easily be aroused.
So let him lie there.
Four months after collapsing, Einstein was still weak but no longer confined to his bed.
To continue his convalescence he rented a house in the sleepy town of Schauboitz on the Baltic coast.
There he read Spinoza and enjoyed being away from the idiotic existence one leads in the city.
It was almost a year before he was well enough to return to his office.
He would work there all morning before going home for lunch and a rest until three o'clock.
Otherwise he was always working, recalled Helen Dukas, sometimes all through the night.
During the Easter vacation of 1929 Pauli went to see Einstein in Berlin.
He found Einstein's attitude regarding modern quantum physics reactionary because he continued to believe in a reality where natural phenomena unfolded according to the laws of nature independently of an observer.
Shortly after Pauli's visit Einstein made his views perfectly clear as he received the Planck Medal from Planck himself.
I admire to the highest degree the achievements of the younger generation of physicists which goes by the name quantum mechanics and believe in the deep level of truth of that theory, he told the audience.
But I believe that the restriction to statistical laws will be a passing one.
Einstein had already embarked on his solitary journey in search of a unified field theory that he believed would save causality and an observer independent reality.
In the meantime he would continue to challenge what was becoming the quantum orthodoxy, the Copenhagen interpretation.
When they met again in Brussels at the sixth Solvay conference in 1930, Einstein presented Bohr with an imaginary box of light.
Chapter 12
Einstein forgets relativity.
Bohr was stunned.
Einstein smiled.
Over the past three years Bohr had reexamined the imaginary experiments Einstein had proposed at the Solvay conference in October 1927.
Each was designed to show that quantum mechanics was inconsistent, but he had found the flaw in Einstein's analysis in every case.
Not content to rest on his laurels, Bohr devised some thought experiments of his own involving an assortment of slits, shutters, clocks and the like as he probed his interpretation for any weaknesses.
He found none.
But Bohr never conjured up anything as simple and ingenious as the thought experiment that Einstein had just finished describing to him in Brussels at the sixth Solvay conference.
The theme of the sixth day meeting that began on 20th of October 1930 was the magnetic properties of matter.
The format remained the same, a series of commissioned reports on various topics related to magnetism, each followed by a discussion.
Bohr had joined Einstein as a member of the nine strong scientific committee and both were therefore automatically invited to the conference.
After the death of Lawrence, the Frenchman Paul Langevan had agreed to take on the demanding dual responsibilities of presiding over the committee and the conference.
Dirac, Heisenberg, Cromers, Pauley and Sommerfeld were among the 34 participants.
As a meeting of minds, it was a close second to Solvay 1927, with twelve current and future Nobel laureates present.
It was the backdrop to the second round of the ongoing struggle between Einstein and Bohr over the meaning of quantum mechanics and the nature of reality.
Einstein had traveled to Brussels armed with a new thought experiment designed to deliver a fatal blow to the uncertainty principle and the Copenhagen interpretation.
An unsuspecting Bohr was ambushed after one of the formal sessions.
Imagine a box full of light, Einstein asked Bohr.
In one of its walls is a hole with a shutter that can be opened and closed by a mechanism connected to a clock inside the box.
This clock is synchronized with another in the laboratory.
Way the box.
Set the clock to open the shutter at a certain time for the briefest of moments, but long enough for a single photon to escape.
We now know explained Einstein precisely the time at which the photon left the box.
Bohr listened unconcerned everything Einstein had proposed appeared straightforward and beyond contention.
The uncertainty principle applied only to pairs of complementary variables, position and momentum or energy and time.
It did not impose any limit on the degree of accuracy with which any one of the pair could be measured.
Just then, with a hint of smile, Einstein uttered the deadly words.
Way the box again.
In a flash, Bohr realized that he and the Copenhagen interpretation were in deep trouble.
To work out how much light had escaped locked up in a single photon, Einstein used a remarkable discovery he had made while still a clerk at the patent office in Bern.
Energy is mass and mass is energy.
This astonishing spin-off from his work on relativity was captured by Einstein in his simplest and most famous equation, E equals mc squared.
Where E is energy, m is mass and c is the speed of light.
By weighing the box of light before and after the photon escapes, it is easy to work out the difference in mass.
Although such a staggeringly small change was impossible to measure using equipment available in 1930, in the realm of the thought experiment it was child's play.
Using E equals mc squared to convert the quantity of missing mass into an equivalent amount of energy, it was possible to calculate, precisely, the energy of the escaped photon.
The time of the photon's escape was known via the laboratory clock being synchronized with the one inside the light box, controlling the shutter.
It appeared that Einstein had conceived an experiment capable of measuring, simultaneously, the energy of the photon and the time of its escape with a degree of accuracy proscribed by Heisenberg's uncertainty principle.
It was quite a shock for Bohr, recalled the Belgian physicist Leon Rosenfeld, who had recently begun what turned into a long-term collaboration with the Dain.
He did not see the solution at once.
While Bohr was desperately worried by Einstein's latest challenge, Pauli and Heisenberg were dismissive.
Ah well it will be all right, it will be all right, they told him.
During the whole evening he was extremely unhappy, going from one to the other and trying to persuade them that it couldn't be true, that it would be the end of physics if Einstein were right, recalled Rosenfeld.
But he couldn't produce any refutation.
Rosenfeld was not invited to Solvay 1930, but had traveled to Brussels to meet Bohr.
He never forgot the sight of the two quantum adversaries heading back to the hotel metropole that evening.
Einstein, a tall majestic figure walking quietly, with a somewhat ironical smile on his face and Bohr, trotting near him, very excited, ineffectually pleading that if Einstein's device would work, it would mean the end of physics.
For Einstein it was neither an end nor a beginning, it was nothing more than a demonstration that quantum mechanics was inconsistent and therefore not the closed and complete theory that Bohr claimed.
His latest thought experiment was simply an attempt to rescue the kind of physics that aimed to understand an observer-independent reality.
A photograph shows Einstein and Bohr walking together, but slightly out of step.
Einstein is just ahead as if trying to flee. Bohr, mouth open, is hurrying to keep pace. He leans toward Einstein desperate to make himself heard.
Despite having his coat draped over his left arm, Bohr gestures with his left forefinger to emphasize whatever point he is trying to make.
Einstein's hands are by his side, one clutching a briefcase, and the other a possible victory cigar.
As he listens, Einstein's mustache fails to hide the half-knowing smile of a man who thinks he has just gained the upper hand.
That evening said Rosenfeld, Bohr looked like a dog who has received a thrashing.
Bohr spent a sleepless night examining every facet of Einstein's thought experiment.
He took the imaginary box of light apart to find the flaw that he hoped existed.
Einstein did not picture, even in his mind's eye, either the details of the inner workings of the lightbox or how to weigh it.
Bohr, desperate to get to grips with the device and the measurements that would have to be made,
drew what he called a pseudo-realistic diagram of the experimental setup to help him.
Given the need to weigh the lightbox before the shutter is opened at a preset time and after the photon has escaped,
Bohr decided to focus on the weighing process.
With mounting anxiety and little time he chose the simplest possible method,
he suspended the lightbox from a spring fixed to a supporting frame.
To turn it into a weighing scale, Bohr attached a pointer to the lightbox so its position could be read on a scale
attached to the vertical arm of what resembled a hangman's gallows.
To ensure that the pointer was positioned at zero on the scale, Bohr attached a small weight to the bottom of the box.
There was nothing whimsical in the construction as Bohr included even the nuts and bolts used to fix the frame to a base
and drew the clockwork mechanism controlling the opening and closing of the hole through which the photon was to escape.
The initial weighing of the lightbox is simply the configuration with the attached weight chosen to ensure that the pointer is at zero.
After the photon escapes, the lightbox is lighter and is pulled upwards by the spring.
To reposition the pointer at zero the attached weight has to be replaced by a slightly heavier one.
There is no time limit on how long the experimenter can take to change the weights.
The difference in the weights is the mass lost due to the escaped photon and from E equals mc squared the energy of the photon can be calculated precisely.
From the arguments he deployed at Solvay 1927, Bohr held that any measurement of the position of the lightbox would lead to an inherent uncertainty in its momentum
because to read the scale would require it to be illuminated.
The very act of measuring its weight would cause an uncontrollable transfer of momentum to the lightbox because of the exchange of photons between the pointer and the observer causing it to move.
The only way to improve the accuracy of the position measurement was to carry out the balancing of the lightbox, the positioning of the pointer at zero, over a comparatively long time.
However Bohr argued that this would lead to a corresponding uncertainty in the momentum of the box.
The more accurately the position of the box was measured, the greater the uncertainty attached to any measurement of its momentum.
Unlike at Solvay 1927, Einstein was attacking the energy-time uncertainty relation, not the position momentum incarnation.
It was now in the early hours of the morning that a tired Bohr suddenly saw the flaw in Einstein's gedankin experiment.
He reconstructed the analysis bit by bit until he was satisfied that Einstein had indeed made an almost unbelievable mistake.
Relieved Bohr went to sleep for a few hours knowing that when he awoke it would be to savor his triumph over breakfast.
In his desperation to destroy the Copenhagen view of quantum reality, Einstein had forgotten to take into account his own theory of general relativity.
He had ignored the effects of gravity on the measurement of time by the clock inside the lightbox.
General relativity was Einstein's greatest achievement.
The theory appeared to me then and it still does.
The greatest feat of human thinking about nature, the most amazing combination of philosophic penetration, physical intuition, and mathematical skill, said Moxborn.
He called it a great work of art to be enjoyed and admired from a distance.
When the bending of light predicted by general relativity was confirmed in 1919, it made headlines around the world.
J.J. Thompson told one British newspaper that Einstein's theory was a whole new continent of new scientific ideas.
One of these new ideas was gravitational time dilation.
Two identical and synchronized clocks in a room with one fixed to the ceiling and the other on the floor would be out of step by 300 parts in a billion billion, because time flows more slowly at the floor than at the ceiling.
The reason was gravity.
According to general relativity, Einstein's theory of gravity, the rate at which a clock ticks depends upon its position in a gravitational field.
Also, a clock moving in a gravitational field ticks slower than one that is stationary.
Bohr realized that this implied that weighing the lightbox affected the timekeeping of the clock inside.
The position of the lightbox in the Earth's gravitational field is altered by the act of measuring the pointer against the scale.
This change in position would alter the rate of the clock, and it would no longer be synchronized with the clock in the laboratory, making it impossible to measure as accurately as Einstein presumed the precise time the shutter opened and the photon escaped from the box.
The greater the accuracy in measuring the energy of the photon via E equals mc squared, the greater the uncertainty in the position of the lightbox within the gravitational field.
This uncertainty of position prevents due to gravity's ability to affect the flow of time, the determination of the exact time the shutter opens and the photon escapes.
Through this chain of uncertainties Bohr showed that Einstein's lightbox experiment could not simultaneously measure exactly both the energy of the photon and the time of its escape.
Heisenberg's uncertainty principle remained intact, and with it the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics.
When Bohr came down to breakfast he was no longer looking like a dog who has received a thrashing the night before.
Now, it was Einstein who was stunned into silence as he listened to Bohr explain why his latest challenge, like those of three years earlier, had failed.
Later there would be those who questioned Bohr's refutation because he had treated macroscopic elements such as the pointer, the scale and the lightbox as if they were quantum objects and therefore subject to limitations imposed by the uncertainty principle.
To handle macroscopic objects in this way ran counter to his insistence that laboratory equipment be treated classically.
But Bohr had never been particularly clear about where to draw the line between the micro and the macro since in the end every classical object is nothing but a collection of atoms.
Whatever reservations some had later, Einstein accepted Bohr's counter arguments as did the physics community at the time.
As a result, he ceased his attempts to circumvent the uncertainty principle to demonstrate that quantum mechanics was logically inconsistent.
Instead, Einstein would henceforth focus on exposing the theory as incomplete.
In November 1930, Einstein lectured in Leiden on the lightbox.
Afterwards a member of the audience argued that there was no conflict within quantum mechanics.
I know, this business is free of contradictions replied Einstein, yet in my view it contains a certain unreasonableness.
In spite of this, in September 1931, he once again nominated Heisenberg and Schrödinger for a Nobel Prize.
But after going two rounds with Bohr and his seconds at the Solvay conferences, one sentence in Einstein's letter of nomination was telling.
In my opinion this theory contains without doubt a piece of the ultimate truth.
His inner voice continued to whisper that quantum mechanics was incomplete, that it was not the whole truth as Bohr would have everyone believe.
At the end of the 1930 Solvay conference, Einstein travelled to London for a few days.
He was the guest of honour at a fundraising dinner on 28th of October for the benefit of impoverished Eastern European Jews.
Held at the Savoy Hotel and hosted by Baron Rothschild, the fundraiser drew almost a thousand people.
With the great and the good elegantly dressed, Einstein willingly donned white tie and tails to play his part in what he called the monkey comedy, if it helped open wallets.
George Bernard Shaw was the master of ceremonies.
Although he occasionally departed from his prepared script, the 74-year-old Shaw gave a virtuoso performance that began with him complaining that he had to talk about Ptolemy and Aristotle, Kepler and Copernicus, Galileo and Newton, gravitation and relativity and modern astrophysics and heaven knows what.
Then with his usual wit, Shaw summarized everything in three sentences.
Ptolemy made a universe which lasted 1400 years. Newton also made a universe which lasted for 300 years.
Einstein has made a universe, and I can't tell you how long that will last.
The guests laughed, none louder than Einstein.
After comparing the achievements of Newton and Einstein Shaw ended with a toast, a drink to the greatest of our contemporaries, Einstein.
It was a difficult act to follow, but Einstein was every bit as much the showman when the occasion demanded.
He expressed his gratitude to Shaw for the unforgettable words which you have addressed to my mythical namesake, who makes life so difficult for me.
He offered words of praise to Jews and Gentiles alike, of noble spirit and with a strong sense of justice, who had devoted their lives to uplifting human society and liberating the individual from degrading oppression.
To you all I say, knowing that he was addressing a sympathetic audience, that the existence and destiny of our people depends less on external factors than on us remaining faithful to the moral traditions which have enabled us to survive for thousands of years, despite the fierce storms that have broken over our heads.
In the service of life, Einstein added, sacrifice becomes grace.
Words, said in hope would, for millions, soon be put to the test, as the dark clouds of the coming Nazi storm gathered.
Six weeks earlier, on 14th of September, the Nazis had gained 6.4 million votes in the Reichstag elections.
The size of the Nazi votes stunned many. In May 1924, the party had won 32 seats, and in the December elections that same year just 14.
In May 1928 they did even worse winning a mere 12 seats and 812,000 votes. The results seemed to confirm the Nazis as just another far-right fringe group.
Now, little more than two years later, they had increased their share of the vote eightfold and were the second largest party in the Reichstag with 107 deputies.
Einstein was not alone in believing that the Hitler vote is only a symptom, not necessarily of anti-Jewish hatred, but of momentary resentment caused by economic misery and unemployment within the ranks of misguided German youths.
However, only about one-quarter of those who voted Nazi were young first-time voters.
It was among the older generation of white-collar workers, shopkeepers, small businessmen, Protestant farmers in the North, craftsmen, and unskilled workers outside the industrial centers that Nazi support was strongest.
What contributed decisively to the changed German political landscape between the elections of 1928 and 1930 was the Wall Street Crash in October 1929.
Germany was hardest hit by the financial shockwaves emanating from New York.
The lifeblood of its fragile economic revival of the past five years had been short-term loans from the United States.
With mounting losses and in disarray, American financial institutions demanded immediate repayment of existing loans.
The result was a rapid rise in unemployment from 1.3 million in September 1929 to over 3 million in October 1930.
Einstein, for the moment, saw the Nazis as nothing more than a childish disease of the Republic that would soon pass.
The disease, however, would kill off an already ailing Weimar Republic that had in all but name, abandoned parliamentary democracy, in favor of rule by decree.
We are moving towards bad times, wrote a pessimistic Sigmund Freud on 7 December 1930.
I ought to ignore it with the apathy of old age, but I can't help feeling sorry for my seven grandchildren.
Five days earlier, Einstein had left Germany to spend two months at Caltech, the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena.
Boltzmann, Schrödinger and Lawrence had all lectured at what had fast become one of America's leading centers of scientific excellence.
When his ship docked in New York, Einstein was persuaded to give a 15-minute press conference to the horde of waiting reporters.
What do you think of Adolf Hitler, shouted one.
He is living on the empty stomach of Germany, replied Einstein. As soon as the economic conditions improve, he will no longer be important.
A year later, in December 1931 when he set off for a second stint at Caltech, Germany was in an even deeper economic depression and greater political turmoil.
I decided today that I shall essentially give up my Berlin position and shall be a bird of passage for the rest of my life, Einstein wrote in his diary as he crossed the Atlantic.
While in California, Einstein happened to meet Abraham Flexner, who was in the process of establishing a unique research center, the Institute for Advanced Study, in Princeton, New Jersey.
Armed with a $5 million donation, Flexner wanted to create a society of scholars devoted entirely to research freed from the demands of teaching students.
Serendipitously meeting Einstein, Flexner wasted little time in taking the first steps that eventually led to the recruitment of the world's most celebrated scientist.
Einstein agreed to spend five months a year at the Institute and the remainder in Berlin.
I am not abandoning Germany, he told the New York Times. My permanent home will still be in Berlin.
The five-year arrangement would begin in the autumn of 1933, because Einstein had already committed himself to another spell at Caltech.
He was fortunate that he had, for it was during this third visit to Pasadena that Hitler was appointed Chancellor on 30th of January 1933.
For Germany's half million Jews, the Exodus began slowly, with only 25,000 leaving by June.
Einstein, safely in California did not speak out, but acted as if he would return when the time came.
He wrote to the Prussian Academy asking about his salary but had already made his decision.
In view of Hitler, he wrote to a friend on 27th of February, I don't dare step on German soil.
That very day the Reichstag was set alight. It signaled the beginning of the first wave of state-sponsored Nazi terror.
In the midst of the violence unleashed by the Nazis, 17 million voted for them in the Reichstag election on 5th of March.
Five days later, on the eve of his planned departure from Pasadena, Einstein gave an interview and made public what he thought about events in Germany.
As long as I have any choice in the matter, he said, I shall live only in a country where civil liberty, tolerance and equality of all citizens, before the law, prevail.
Civil liberty implies freedom to express one's political convictions in speech and in writing. Tolerance implies respect for the convictions of others whatever they may be.
These conditions do not exist in Germany at the present time.
As his words were reported around the world, he was condemned in the German press as newspapers vied to demonstrate their allegiance to the Nazi regime.
Good news of Einstein he is not coming back, read the headline in the Berliner Lokalenzeige.
The article seethed at how this puffed-up bit of vanity dared to sit in judgment on Germany without knowing what is going on here.
Matters that forever must remain incomprehensible to a man who was never German in our eyes and who declares himself to be a Jew and nothing but a Jew.
Einstein's comments left Planck in a quandary.
On 19th of March he wrote to Einstein of his profound distress over all kinds of rumors which have emerged in this unquiet and difficult time about your public and private statements of a political nature.
Planck complained that these reports make it exceedingly difficult for all those who esteem and revere you to stand up for you.
He blamed Einstein for making the difficult situation of his tribal companions and co-religionists worse.
When his ship docked at Antwerp in Belgium on 28th of March, Einstein asked to be driven to the German embassy in Brussels.
There he surrendered his passport, renounced his German citizenship for a second time and handed over a letter of resignation from the Prussian Academy.
While he pondered what to do and where to go, Einstein and Elsa moved into a villa in the small resort of Le Coq-sur-Mer on the Belgian coast.
As rumors circulated that Einstein's life might be at risk, the Belgian government assigned two guards to protect him.
In Berlin Planck was relieved when he learned of Einstein's resignation.
It was the only honorable way to sever ties with the Academy and, at the same time save your friends from an immeasurable amount of grief and pain, he wrote to Einstein.
There were few prepared to stand up for him in the new Germany.
On 10th of May 1933, Swastika Klad students and academics carrying torches marched down Unter den Linden to the open plots just across from Berlin University's main entrance
and set fire to some 20,000 books plundered from the shelves of the city's libraries and bookstores.
A crowd of 40,000 watched as the flames consumed the un-German and Jewish Bolshevik works by the likes of Marx, Brecht, Freud, Zola, Proust, Kafka and Einstein.
It was a scene repeated in every major university town in the country and men like Planck read the smoke signals and did little if anything to resist.
The book burning was just the beginning of the Nazi assault on degenerate art and culture, but a far more significant event had already occurred for German Jews when anti-Semitism was effectively legalized.
The Law for the Restoration of the Career Civil Service passed on 7th of April applied to some 2 million state employees.
The law was designed to target the Nazis' political opponents, socialists, communists, and the Jews.
Paragraph 3 contained the infamous Aryan Clause. Civil servants not of Aryan origin are to retire.
The law defined a non-Aryan as a person who had one parent or grandparent, who was not Aryan.
62 years after their emancipation in 1871, German Jews were once again the subject of legalized state discrimination.
It was the springboard for the Nazi persecution of the Jews that followed.
Universities were state institutions, and soon more than a thousand academics including 313 professors were dismissed or resigned.
Almost a quarter of the pre-1933 physics community was forced into exile, including half of all theorists.
By 1936 more than 1600 scholars had been ousted, a third of these were scientists, including 20, who had been or would be awarded the Nobel Prize, 11 in physics, 4 in chemistry, 5 in medicine.
Formally, the new law did not apply to those employed before the First World War, or who were veterans of that war or anyone who had lost a father or son during the war.
But as the Nazi purge of the civil service continued unabated, and claimed an increasing number who were exempt,
on 16 May 1933, Planck, as president of the Kaiser Wilhelm Society, went to see Hitler.
He thought he could limit the damage being done to German science.
Incredibly Planck told Hitler that there are different sorts of Jews, some valuable for mankind and others worthless.
And that distinctions must be made.
That's not right, said Hitler.
A Jew is a Jew all Jews stick together like leeches, wherever there is one Jew other Jews of all sorts immediately gather.
His opening gambit having failed, Planck changed tack.
The wholesale expulsion of Jewish scientists would be harmful to Germany's interests, argued Planck.
Hitler flew into a rage at the very suggestion.
Our national policies will not be revoked or modified even for scientists.
If the dismissal of Jewish scientists means the annihilation of contemporary German science, then we shall do without science for a few years.
In November 1918, in the immediate aftermath of defeat, Planck had rallied the dispirited members of the Prussian Academy of Sciences.
If the enemy has taken from our fatherland all defense and power, if severe domestic crises have broken in upon us and perhaps still more severe crises stand before us,
there is one thing which no foreign or domestic enemy has yet taken from us.
That is the position which German science occupies in the world.
For Planck, who had lost his eldest son on the battlefield, all the sacrifices had to be worth something.
As his disastrous meeting with Hitler came to an abrupt end, Planck knew that the Nazis were on the verge of achieving what no one else had.
The destruction of German science.
Two weeks earlier, the Nazi physicist and Nobel laureate Johannes Stark had been appointed director of the Physikalische Technische of Eichsenstalt,
the Imperial Institute of Physics and Technology.
Soon, Stark wielded even greater power in the service of Aryan physics as he was placed in charge of dispersing government research funds.
From these positions of power he was determined to exact revenge.
In 1922 he had stepped down from his professorship at the University of Würzburg to try his handed business.
Anti-Semitic, dogmatic and quarrelsome, Stark had alienated virtually everyone bar the like-minded fellow Nobel laureate and Nazi, Philipp Lenard,
the leading and long-time proponent of so-called Deutsche Physik.
When Stark wanted to return to academia after the failure of his business venture, no one who was in a position to do so was prepared to offer him a job.
Already bitterly opposed to the Jewish physics of Einstein and dismissive of modern theoretical physics, Stark was determined to have a say in all appointments to professorial chairs of physics
and lobbied to have them occupied by supporters of German physics.
Heisenberg had long wanted to be Sommerfeld's successor at Munich.
In 1935 Stark called Heisenberg the spirit of Einstein's spirit and launched a concerted campaign against him and theoretical physics.
It culminated on 15 July 1937 with the publication of an article in the SS Journal, Das Schwarze Court, in which Heisenberg was branded a white Jew.
He spent the next year trying to remove the slur that if it stuck would place him in real danger of being isolated and dismissed.
He turned to Heinrich Himmler, head of the SS, who happened to be a family acquaintance.
Himmler exonerated Heisenberg but blocked his appointment as Sommerfeld's successor.
There was also a proviso that in future he should clearly separate for your audiences in the acknowledgement of scientific research results, the personal and political characteristics of the researcher.
Heisenberg duly obliged in separating the scientist from the science.
There would be no more mention by him of Einstein's name in public.
The Göttingen physicists James Frank and Max Born were exempt as war veterans from the Aryan Clause, but neither man chose to exercise his right believing that to do so was tantamount to collusion with the Nazis.
Frank was condemned by no fewer than 42 of his colleagues when he submitted his letter of resignation for fueling anti-German propaganda by stating that we Germans of Jewish descent are being treated as aliens and enemies of the Fatherland.
Born who had no intention of resigning discovered his name on a list of suspended civil servants published in the local newspaper.
All I had built up in Göttingen during 12 years hard work was shattered.
He wrote later, It seemed to me like the end of the world.
He shuddered at the thought of standing in front of students who for whatever reason have thrown me out or living among colleagues who were able to live with this so easily.
Suspended but not yet sacked. Born had never felt particularly Jewish, he confessed to Einstein, but now he was extremely conscious of it.
Not only because we are considered to be so but because oppression and injustice provoke me to anger and resistance.
Born hoped to settle in England, for the English seemed to be accepting the refugees most nobly and generously.
His wish was granted when he was offered a three-year lectureship at Cambridge University.
Believing that he might be depriving a deserving English physicist, Born accepted only after being reassured that the post had been created, especially for him.
He was one of the lucky few whose contributions to physics were internationally recognized.
Unlike the young ones for whom Einstein said his heart aches.
But even scientists of Born's caliber had to endure periods of deep uncertainty about their future.
After his time in Cambridge was up, Born spent six months in Bangalore, India and was seriously considering a post in Moscow when in 1936 he was offered the chair of natural philosophy at the University of Edinburgh.
Heisenberg had tried to convince Born that he was safe since only the very least are affected by the law, you and Frank certainly not.
He hoped, like others, that things would eventually settle down and the political revolution could take place without any damage to Göttingen physics.
But the damage was already done.
It had taken the Nazis a matter of weeks to transform Göttingen, the cradle of quantum mechanics from a great university, to a second-rate institution.
The Nazi minister of education asked David Hilbert, the most fetid mathematician in Göttingen, whether it was true that your institute suffered so much from the departure of the Jews and their friends.
Suffered?
No, it didn't suffer, Herr Minister, replied Hilbert. It just doesn't exist anymore.
As news spread of what was happening in Germany, scientists and their professional bodies quickly swung into action to help colleagues fleeing Nazi oppression with money and jobs.
Aid organizations supported by gifts and donations from individuals and private foundations were set up.
In England the Academic Assistance Council with Rutherford as its president was established in May 1933 as a clearinghouse that found temporary posts and offered help for refugee scientists, artists and writers.
Many initially escaped to Switzerland, Holland or France and stayed only a short while before traveling on to Britain and the United States.
In Copenhagen Bohr's institute became a staging post for many physicists.
In December 1931 the Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters had chosen Bohr as the next occupant of the Erisbolig, the House of Honor, a mansion built by the founder of the Karlsberg breweries.
His new status as Denmark's leading citizen meant he enjoyed even more influence at home and abroad, which he exercised to help others.
In 1933 he and his brother Harold helped set up the Danish Committee for Support of Intellectual Workers in exile.
Through colleagues and former students Bohr was able to get new posts established or have vacancies filled by refugees.
It was Bohr who got James Frank to Copenhagen on a three-year visiting professorship in April 1934.
After a year or so Frank moved on to a tenured position in the United States which, along with Sweden, was the final destination of many who arrived in Denmark.
One man who did not have to worry about a job was Einstein.
In early September, as fears for his safety in Belgium grew, Einstein left for England.
For the next month he kept a low profile, staying in a cottage on the Norfolk coast.
Soon the tranquility by the seaside was shattered when he learned that Paul Ehrenfest, in a fit of despair while estranged from his wife, had committed suicide.
It happened during a visit to an Amsterdam hospital to see his 16-year-old son Vasily, who suffered from Down's syndrome.
Einstein was shocked at the news that Ehrenfest had also shot Vasily.
Remarkably the boy survived but was blinded in one eye.
Although deeply upset at Ehrenfest's suicide, Einstein's thoughts soon turned to the speech he had agreed to give at a fundraising rally highlighting the plight of refugees.
The meeting chaired by Rutherford took place on 3 October at the Royal Albert Hall.
A public eager to get a glimpse of the great man meant that there was not even standing room on the night.
Einstein succeeded in addressing the audience of 10,000 in his heavily accented English without once mentioning Germany by name, at the request of the organizers.
For the refugee assistance council believed that the issue raised at the moment is not a Jewish one alone, many who have suffered or are threatened had no Jewish connection.
Four days later, on the evening of 7 October, Einstein left for America.
Due to spend the next five months at the Institute for Advanced Study, he never returned to Europe.
As he was being driven from New York to Princeton, Einstein was handed a letter from Abraham Flexner.
The Institute's director was asking him not to attend any public events and to exercise discretion for his own safety.
The reason Flexner gave was the danger posed to Einstein by the bans of irresponsible Nazis to be found in America.
Yet his real concern was the damage that Einstein's public statements might inflict on the reputation of his fledgling institute and therefore on the donations it relied on.
Within a matter of weeks Einstein found Flexner's restrictions and increasing interference suffocating.
Once he even gave his new address as concentration camp, Princeton.
Einstein wrote to the trustees of the Institute to complain of Flexner's behavior and asked them to guarantee him security for undisturbed and dignified work in such a way that there is no interference at every step of a kind that no self-respecting person can tolerate.
If they could not then he would have to discuss with you ways and means of severing my relations with your institute in a dignified manner.
Einstein gained the right to do as he pleased, but at a price.
He would never have any real influence in the running of the Institute.
When he backed Schrödinger for a post at the Institute, it effectively ruled the Austrian out of the running.
Schrödinger did not have to leave Berlin but did so as a matter of principle.
He had been in exile at Maudland College Oxford University less than a week when on 9th of November 1933 he received some unexpected news.
The president of the college, George Gordon, informed Schrödinger that the Times had called to say that he would be among the winners of the Nobel Prize that year.
I think you may believe it, the Times do not say a thing unless they really know, said Gordon proudly.
As for me I was truly astonished, for I thought you had the prize.
Schrödinger and Dirac were each awarded a half share of the 1933 Nobel Prize, with the deferred prize of 1932 going to Heisenberg alone.
Dirac's first reaction was to refuse it because he did not want the publicity.
He accepted after Rutherford convinced him that refusing it would generate even greater publicity.
While Dirac toyed with the idea of rejecting the prize, Borne was deeply hurt at being ignored by the Swedish Academy.
I have a bad conscience regarding Schrödinger, Dirac and Borne, Heisenberg wrote to Borne.
Schrödinger and Dirac both deserved an entire prize at least as much as I do, and I would have gladly shared with Borne since we have worked together.
Earlier he replied to a letter of congratulations from Borne.
The fact that I am to receive the Nobel Prize alone for work done in Göttingen in collaboration, you, Jordan and I, this fact depresses me, and I hardly know what to write to you.
That Heisenberg's matrices bear his name is not altogether justified, as in those days he actually had no idea what a matrix was, Borne complained to Einstein two decades later.
It was he who reaped all the rewards of our work together, such as the Nobel Prize and that sort of thing.
He admitted that, for the last twenty years I have not been able to rid myself of a certain sense of injustice.
Borne was finally awarded the Nobel in 1954 for his fundamental work in quantum mechanics and especially for his statistical interpretation of the wave function.
After the difficult start by the end of November 1933, Princeton was beginning to appeal to Einstein.
Princeton is a wonderful little spot, a quaint and ceremonious village of puny demigods on stilts, he wrote to Queen Elizabeth of Belgium.
Yet by ignoring certain special conventions I have been able to create for myself an atmosphere conducive to study and free from distractions.
In April 1934 Einstein made public that he would be staying in Princeton indefinitely. The bird of passage had found a place to nest for the rest of his life.
Einstein had always been an outsider even in physics, beginning with his days in the patent office.
Yet he had led the way for so long, and so often. He hoped to do so again as he came up with a new challenge for Borne and the Copenhagen interpretation.
Chapter 13. Quantum Reality
Princeton is a madhouse and Einstein is completely cuckoo, wrote Robert Oppenheimer. It was January 1935 and America's leading homegrown theoretical physicist was 31.
Twelve years later, after directing the building of the atomic bomb he would return to the Institute for Advanced Study to take charge of the madhouse and its solipsistic luminaries, shining in separate and helpless desolation.
Einstein accepted that his critical attitude towards quantum mechanics ensured that, here in Princeton, I am considered an old fool.
It was a sentiment widely shared by the younger generation of physicists who, having been weaned on the theory, agreed with Paul Dirac's assessment that quantum mechanics explained most of physics and all of chemistry.
That a few old men were fighting about the meaning of the theory was for them neither here nor there, given its enormous practical success.
By the end of the 1920s as one problem after another in atomic physics was solved, attention shifted from the atom to the nucleus.
During the early 1930s the discovery of the neutron by James Chadwick in Cambridge and the work of Enrico Fermi and his team in Rome on the reactions induced by the impact of neutrons on nuclei opened up the new frontier of nuclear physics.
In 1932 John Cockcroft and Ernest Walton, Chadwick's colleagues in Rutherford's Cavendish Laboratory, constructed the first particle accelerator and used it to split an atom by breaking apart its nucleus.
Einstein might have moved from Berlin to Princeton but physics was moving on without him.
He knew as much but felt he had earned the right to pursue the physics that interested him.
He arrived at the institute in October 1933 Einstein was shown to his new office and asked what equipment he needed.
A desk or table, a chair, paper and pencils he replied.
Oh yes and a large wastebasket so I can throw away all my mistakes.
And there were plenty but Einstein was never disheartened as he sought his holy grail, a unified field theory.
Just as Maxwell had unified electricity, magnetism and light into a single all-encompassing theoretical structure in the 19th century, Einstein hoped to unify electromagnetism and general relativity.
For him such a unification was the next step as logical as it was inevitable.
It was in 1925 that he undertook the first of his many attempts at constructing such a theory that ended up in the wastebasket.
After the discovery of quantum mechanics, Einstein believed that a unified field theory would yield this new physics as a byproduct.
In the years following Solvay 1930 there was little direct contact between Bohr and Einstein.
A valuable channel of communication ceased with Paul Ehrenfest's suicide in September 1933.
In a moving tribute Einstein wrote of his friend's inner struggle to understand quantum mechanics and the increasing difficulty of adaptation to new thoughts which always confronts the man past 50.
I do not know how many readers of these lines will be capable of fully grasping that tragedy.
There were many who read Einstein's words and mistook them as a lament at his own plight.
Now in his mid 50s he knew he was regarded as a relic from a bygone age, refusing or unable to live with quantum mechanics.
But he also knew what separated him and Schrödinger from most of their colleagues.
Almost all the other fellows do not look from the facts to the theory, but from the theory to the facts they cannot extricate themselves from a once accepted conceptual net, but only flop about in it in a grotesque way.
In spite of these mutual misgivings there were always young physicists eager to work with Einstein.
One was Nathan Rosen, a 25 year old New Yorker who arrived from MIT in 1934 to serve as his assistant.
A few months before Rosen, the 39 year old Russian born Boris Podolski had joined the institute.
He had first met Einstein at Caltech in 1931 and they had collaborated on a paper.
Einstein had an idea for another paper. It would mark a new phase in his debate with Bohr, as it unleashed a fresh assault on the Copenhagen interpretation.
At Solvay 1927 and 1930, Einstein attempted to circumvent the uncertainty principle to show that quantum mechanics was inconsistent and therefore incomplete.
Bohr, aided by Heisenberg and Pauley, had successfully dismantled each thought experiment and defended the Copenhagen interpretation.
Afterwards Einstein accepted that, although quantum mechanics was logically consistent, it was not the definitive theory that Bohr claimed.
Einstein knew he needed a new strategy to demonstrate that quantum mechanics is incomplete, that it does not fully capture physical reality.
To this end he developed his most enduring thought experiment.
For several weeks, early in 1935, Einstein met Podolski and Rosen in his office to thrash out his idea.
Podolski was assigned the task of writing the resulting paper while Rosen did most of the necessary mathematical calculations.
Einstein, as Rosen recalled later, contributed the general point of view and its implications.
Only four pages long, the Einstein-Podolski-Rosen paper, or the EPR paper as it became known, was completed and mailed by the end of March.
Can quantum mechanical description of physical reality be considered complete?
With its missing the was published on 15th of May in the American Journal Physical Review.
The EPR answer to the question posed, was a defiant, no.
Even before it appeared in print, Einstein's name ensured that the EPR paper generated the kind of publicity nobody wanted.
On Saturday 4th of May 1935, The New York Times carried an article on page 11 under the attention-grabbing headline,
Einstein Attacks Quantum Theory.
Professor Einstein will attack science's important theory of quantum mechanics, a theory of which he was a sort of grandfather.
He concluded that while it is, correct, it is not complete.
Three days later, The New York Times carried a statement from a clearly disgruntled Einstein.
Although no stranger to talking to the press, he pointed out that,
it is my invariable practice to discuss scientific matters only in the appropriate forum,
and I deprecate advanced publication of any announcement in regard to such matters in the secular press.
In the published paper, Einstein, Podolski and Rosen started by differentiating between reality as it is, and the physicist's understanding of it.
Any serious consideration of a physical theory must take into account the distinction between the objective reality,
which is independent of any theory, and the physical concepts with which the theory operates.
These concepts are intended to correspond with the objective reality and by means of these concepts, we picture this reality to ourselves.
Engaging the success of any particular physical theory, EPR argued that two questions had to be answered with an unequivocal yes.
Is the theory correct? Is the description given by the theory complete?
The correctness of the theory is judged by the degree of agreement between the conclusions of the theory and human experience, said EPR.
It was a statement that every physicist would accept when experience in physics takes the form of experiment and measurement.
To date, there had been no conflict between the experiments performed in the laboratory and the theoretical predictions of quantum mechanics.
It appeared to be a correct theory.
Yet for Einstein, it was not enough for a theory to be correct, in agreement with experiments, it also had to be complete.
Whatever the meaning of the term complete, EPR imposed a necessary condition for the completeness of a physical theory.
Every element of the physical reality must have a counterpart in the physical theory.
This completeness criterion required EPR to define a so-called element of reality if they were to carry through their argument.
Einstein did not want to get stuck in the philosophical quicksand which had swallowed so many of trying to define reality.
In the past, none had emerged unscathed from an attempt to pinpoint what constituted reality,
astutely avoiding a comprehensive definition of reality as unnecessary for their purpose, EPR adopted what they deemed to be a sufficient and reasonable criterion for designating an element of reality.
If, without in any way disturbing a system, we can predict with certainty, i.e. with probability equal to unity, the value of a physical quantity then there exists an element of physical reality corresponding to this physical quantity.
Einstein wanted to disprove Bohr's claim that quantum mechanics was a complete fundamental theory of nature by demonstrating that there existed objective elements of reality which the theory did not capture.
Einstein had shifted the focus of the debate with Bohr and his supporters away from the internal consistency of quantum mechanics to the nature of reality and the role of theory.
EPR asserted that for a theory to be complete there had to be one-to-one correspondence between an element of the theory and an element of reality.
A sufficient condition for the reality of a physical quantity such as momentum is the possibility of predicting it with certainty without disturbing the system.
If there existed an element of physical reality that was unaccounted for by the theory, then the theory was incomplete.
The situation would be akin to a person finding a book in a library and when trying to check it out being told by the librarian that according to the catalogue there was no record of the library having the book.
With the book bearing all the necessary markings indicating that it was indeed a part of the collection the only possible explanation would be that the library's catalogue was incomplete.
According to the uncertainty principle, a measurement that yields an exact value for the momentum of a micro-physical object or system excludes even the possibility of simultaneously measuring its position.
The question that Einstein wanted to answer was, does the inability to measure its exact position directly mean that the electron does not have a definite position?
The Copenhagen interpretation answered that in the absence of a measurement to determine its position, the electron has no position.
EPR set out to demonstrate that there are elements of physical reality such as an electron having a definite position that quantum mechanics cannot accommodate and therefore it is incomplete.
EPR attempted to clinch their argument with a thought experiment.
Two particles, A and B, interact briefly and then move off in opposite directions.
The uncertainty principle forbids the exact measurement at any given instant of both the position and the momentum of either particle.
However it does allow an exact and simultaneous measurement of the total momentum of the two particles A and B and the relative distance between them.
The key to the EPR thought experiment is to leave particle B undisturbed by avoiding any direct observation of it.
Even if A and B are light years apart, nothing within the mathematical structure of quantum mechanics prohibits a measurement of the momentum of A yielding information about the exact momentum of B without B being disturbed in the process.
When the momentum of particle A is measured exactly, it indirectly but simultaneously allows, via the law of conservation of momentum, an exact determination of the momentum of B.
Therefore, according to the EPR criterion of reality, the momentum of B must be an element of physical reality.
Similarly, by measuring the exact position of A, it is possible, because the physical distance separating A and B is known, to deduce the position of B without directly measuring it.
Hence, EPR argue, it too must be an element of physical reality.
EPR appeared to have contrived a means to establish with certainty the exact values of either the momentum or the position of B due to measurements performed on particle A without the slightest possibility of particle B being physically disturbed.
Given their reality criterion, EPR argued that they had thus proved that both the momentum and position of particle B are elements of reality that B can have simultaneously exact values of position and momentum.
Since quantum mechanics, via the uncertainty principle rules out any possibility of a particle simultaneously possessing both these properties, these elements of reality have no counterparts in the theory.
Therefore, the quantum mechanical description of physical reality, EPR conclude, is incomplete.
Einstein's thought experiment was not designed to simultaneously measure the position and momentum of particle B.
He accepted that it was impossible to measure either of these properties of a particle directly, without causing an irreducible physical disturbance.
Instead, the two particle thought experiment was constructed to show that such properties could have a definite simultaneous existence, that both the position and the momentum of a particle are elements of reality.
If these properties of particle B can be determined without B being observed, measured, then these properties of B must exist as elements of physical reality independently of being observed, measured.
Particle B has a position that is real, and a momentum that is real.
EPR were aware of the possible counter argument that two or more physical quantities can be regarded as simultaneous elements of reality only when they can be simultaneously measured or predicted.
This, however, made the reality of the momentum and position of particle B dependent upon the process of measurement carried out on particle A, which could be light years away, and which does not disturb particle B in any way.
No reasonable definition of reality could be expected to permit this, said EPR.
Central to the EPR argument was Einstein's assumption of locality, that some mysterious instantaneous action at a distance does not exist.
Locality ruled out the possibility of an event in a certain region of space instantaneously, faster than light, influencing another event elsewhere.
For Einstein, the speed of light was nature's unbreakable limit on how fast anything could travel from one place to another.
For the discoverer of relativity it was inconceivable for a measurement on particle A to affect instantaneously at a distance the independent elements of physical reality possessed by particle B.
As soon as the EPR paper appeared the alarm was raised among the leading quantum pioneers throughout Europe.
Einstein has once again made a public statement about quantum mechanics, and even in the issue of physical review of May 15, together with Podolski and Rosen, not good company by the way, wrote a furious Pauli in Zurich to Heisenberg in Leipzig.
As is well known, he continued, that is a disaster whenever it happens.
Pauli nevertheless conceded as only he could, that if a student in one of his earlier semesters had raised such objections, I would have considered him quite intelligent and promising.
With the zeal of a quantum missionary, Pauli urged Heisenberg to publish an immediate rebuttal to prevent any confusion or wavering among fellow physicists in the wake of Einstein's latest challenge.
Pauli admitted that he had considered for educational reasons squandering paper and ink in order to formulate those facts demanded by quantum theory which caused Einstein particular intellectual difficulties.
In the end it was Heisenberg who drafted a reply to the EPR paper and sent Pauli a copy.
But Heisenberg withheld the publication of his paper, as Bohr had already taken up arms in defense of the Copenhagen interpretation.
The EPR onslaught came down upon us as a bolt from the blue, recalled Leon Rosenfeld, who was in Copenhagen at the time.
Its effect on Bohr was remarkable.
Immediately abandoning everything else, Bohr was convinced that a thorough examination of the EPR thought experiment would reveal where Einstein had gone wrong.
He would show them the right way to speak about it.
Excitedly Bohr started dictating to Rosenfeld the draft of a reply, but soon he began to hesitate.
No this won't do we must try all over again, Bohr mumbled to himself.
So it went on for a while with growing wonder at the unexpected subtlety of the EPR argument, recalled Rosenfeld.
Now and then he would turn to me and ask, what can they mean do you understand it?
After a while an increasingly agitated Bohr realized that the argument Einstein had deployed was both ingenious and subtle.
A refutation of the EPR paper would be harder than he first thought and he announced that he must sleep on it.
The next day he was calmer.
They do it smartly, he told Rosenfeld, but what counts is to do it right.
For the next six weeks, day and night, Bohr worked on nothing else.
Even before he had finished his reply to EPR, Bohr wrote a letter on 29 June for publication in the journal, Nature.
Entitled Quantum Mechanics and Physical Reality, it briefly spelled out his counterattack.
Once again the New York Times smelt a story.
Bohr and Einstein add odds.
They begin a controversy concerning the fundamental nature of reality, where the headlines of the article that appeared on 28th of July.
The Einstein-Bohr controversy has just begun this week in the current issue of Nature, the British scientific publication, the paper told its readers,
with a preliminary challenge by Professor Bohr to Professor Einstein, and with a promise by Professor Bohr that,
a fuller development of this argument will be given in an article to be published shortly, in the physical review.
Bohr had deliberately chosen the same forum as Einstein, and his six-page response, received on 13th of July, was also entitled
Can Quantum Mechanical Description of Physical Reality Be Considered Complete?
Published on 15th of October Bohr's answer was an emphatic, yes.
However, unable to identify any error in the EPR argument, Bohr was reduced to arguing that Einstein's evidence for quantum mechanics being incomplete
was not strong enough to bear the weight of such a claim.
Using a debating tactic with a long and illustrious history, Bohr began his defense of the Copenhagen interpretation
by simply rejecting the major component of Einstein's case for incompleteness, the criterion, of physical reality.
Bohr believed that he had identified a weakness in the EPR definition, the need to conduct a measurement without in any way disturbing a system.
Bohr hoped to exploit what he described as an essential ambiguity when it is applied to quantum phenomena of the reality criterion,
as he publicly retreated from the position that an act of measurement resulted in an unavoidable physical disturbance.
He had relied on disturbance to undermine Einstein's previous thought experiments by demonstrating that it was impossible to know simultaneously the exact momentum and position of a particle
because the act of measuring one caused an uncontrollable disturbance that ruled out an exact measurement of the other.
Bohr knew perfectly well that EPR did not seek to challenge Heisenberg's uncertainty principle since their thought experiment was not designed to simultaneously measure the position and momentum of a particle.
Bohr acknowledged as much when he wrote that in the EPR thought experiment, there is no question of a mechanical disturbance of the system under investigation.
It was a significant public concession, one he had made in private a few years earlier as he, Heisenberg, Hendrik Kramers and Oscar Klein sat around the fire at his country cottage in Tisvilde.
Isn't it odd, said Klein, that Einstein should have such great difficulties in accepting the role of chance in atomic physics?
It is because we cannot make observations without disturbing the phenomena, said Heisenberg.
The quantum effects we introduce with our observation automatically introduce a degree of uncertainty into the phenomenon to be observed.
This Einstein refuses to accept although he knows the facts perfectly well.
I don't entirely agree with you, Bohr told Heisenberg.
In any case, he continued, I find all such assertions as observation introduces uncertainty into the phenomenon inaccurate and misleading.
Nature has taught us that the word phenomenon cannot be applied to atomic processes unless we also specify what experimental arrangement or what observational instruments are involved.
If a particular experimental setup has been defined and a particular observation follows, then we can admittedly speak of a phenomenon, but not of its disturbance by observation.
Yet, before, during and after the Solvay conferences, an active measurement disturbing the observed object peppered Bohr's writings and was central to his dismantling of Einstein's thought experiments.
Feeling the pressure for Einstein's continued probing of the Copenhagen interpretation, Bohr abandoned his previous reliance on disturbance,
because he knew that it implied that an electron, for example, existed in a state that could be disturbed.
Instead, Bohr now emphasized that any micro-physical object being measured and the apparatus doing the measuring formed an indivisible whole, the phenomenon.
There simply was no room for a physical disturbance due to an active measurement.
This was why Bohr believed the EPR reality criterion was ambiguous.
Alas, Bohr's response to EPR was less than clear.
Years later in 1949 he admitted to a certain inefficiency of expression when he re-read his paper.
Bohr tried to clarify that the essential ambiguity he had alluded to in his EPR rejoinder lay in referring to physical attributes of objects when dealing with phenomena where no sharp distinction can be made between the behavior of the objects themselves and their interaction with the measuring instruments.
Bohr did not object to EPR predicting the results of possible measurements of particle B based on knowledge acquired by measuring particle A.
Once the momentum of particle A is measured, it is possible to predict accurately the result of a similar measurement of the momentum of particle B as outlined by EPR.
However, Bohr argued that that does not mean that momentum is an independent element of B's reality.
Only when an actual momentum measurement is carried out on B can it be said to possess momentum.
A particle's momentum becomes real only when it interacts with a device designed to measure its momentum.
A particle does not exist in some unknown but real state prior to an active measurement.
In the absence of such a measurement to determine either the position or the momentum of a particle, Bohr argued that it was meaningless to assert that it actually possessed either.
For Bohr, the role of the measuring apparatus was pivotal in defining EPR's elements of reality.
Thus, once a physicist sets up the equipment to measure the exact position of particle A from which the position of particle B can be calculated with certainty,
it excludes the possibility of measuring the momentum of A and hence deducing the momentum of B.
If, as Bohr conceded to EPR, there is no direct physical disturbance of particle B then its elements of physical reality, he argued,
must be defined by the nature of the measuring device and the measurement made on A.
For EPR, if the momentum of B is an element of reality, then a momentum measurement on particle A cannot affect B.
It merely allows the calculation of the momentum that particle B has independently of any measurement.
EPR's reality criterion assumes that if particles A and B exert no physical force on each other, then whatever happens to one cannot disturb the other.
However, according to Bohr, since A and B had once interacted before traveling apart, they were forever entwined as parts of a single system and could not be treated individually as two separate particles.
Hence, subjecting A to a momentum measurement was practically the same as performing a direct measurement on B, leading instantly to it having a well-defined momentum.
Bohr agreed that there was no mechanical disturbance of particle B due to an observation of particle A.
Like EPR, he too excluded the possibility of any physical force, a push or pull, acting at a distance.
However, if the reality of the position or momentum of particle B is determined by measurements performed on particle A, then there appears to be some instantaneous influence at a distance.
This violates locality that what happens to A cannot instantaneously affect B and separability that A and B exist independently of each other.
Both concepts lay at the heart of the EPR argument and Einstein's view of an observer independent reality.
However, Bohr maintained that a measurement of particle A somehow instantaneously influences particle B.
He did not expand on the nature of this mysterious influence on the very conditions which define the possible types of predictions regarding the further behavior of the system.
Bohr concluded that since these conditions constitute an inherent element of the description of any phenomenon to which the term physical reality can be properly attached,
we see that the argumentation of the mentioned authors does not justify their conclusion that quantum mechanical description is essentially incomplete.
Einstein mocked Bohr's voodoo forces and spooky interactions.
It seems hard to look into the cards of the Almighty, he wrote later.
But I won't for one minute believe that he throws dice or uses telepathic devices, as he is being credited with by the present quantum theory.
He told Born that physics should represent reality in time and space free from spooky action at a distance.
The EPR paper expressed Einstein's view that the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum theory and the existence of an objective reality were incompatible.
He was right and Born knew it.
There is no quantum world, there is only an abstract quantum mechanical description, argued Bohr.
According to the Copenhagen interpretation, particles do not have an independent reality, they do not possess properties when they are not being observed.
It was a view that was later concisely summarized by the American physicist John Archibald Wheeler.
No elementary phenomenon is a real phenomenon until it is an observed phenomenon.
A year before EPR, Pascal Jordan took the Copenhagen rejection of an observer independent reality to its logical conclusion.
We ourselves produce the results of measurement.
Now we have to start all over again, said Paul Dirac, because Einstein proved that it does not work.
He initially believed that Einstein had delivered a fatal blow against quantum mechanics, but soon, like most physicists, Dirac accepted that Bohr had once more emerged victorious from a battle with Einstein.
Quantum mechanics had long proved its worth and few were interested in examining Bohr's reply to the EPR argument too closely, for it was obscure, even by his own standards.
Shortly after the EPR paper appeared in print, Einstein received a letter from Schrödinger.
I was very happy that in the paper just published in PR you have evidently caught dogmatic QM by the coattails.
After offering an analysis of some of the finer points of the EPR paper, Schrödinger explained his own reservation concerning the theory he had done so much to create.
My interpretation is that we do not have a QM that is consistent with relativity theory, i.e., with a finite transmission speed of all influences.
We have only the analogy of the old absolute mechanics. The separation process is not at all encompassed by the orthodox scheme.
As Bohr struggled to formulate his response, Schrödinger believed that the central role of separability and locality in the EPR argument meant that quantum mechanics was not a complete description of reality.
In his letter Schrödinger used the term, the Schroenken, later translated into English as entanglement, to describe the correlations between two particles that interact and then separate, as in the EPR experiment.
He accepted like Bohr that having interacted, instead of two one-particle systems there was just a single two-particle system and therefore any changes to one particle would affect the other, despite the distance that separated them.
Any entanglement of predictions that takes place can obviously only go back to the fact that the two bodies at some earlier time formed in a true sense one system.
That is, were interacting and have left behind traces on each other, he wrote in a famous paper published later in the year.
If two separated bodies, each by itself known maximally, enter a situation in which they influence each other and separate again, then there occurs regularly that which I have just called entanglement of our knowledge of the two bodies.
Although he did not share Einstein's intellectual and emotional commitment to locality, Schrödinger was not prepared to reject it. He put forward an argument for undoing the entanglement.
Any measurement on either separated part A or B of an entangled two-particle state breaks the entanglement and both are once more independent of each other.
Measurements on separated systems, he concluded, cannot directly influence each other. That would be magic.
Schrödinger must have been surprised when he read the letter dated 17th of June that arrived from Einstein.
From the point of view of principles, he wrote, I absolutely do not believe in a statistical basis for physics in the sense of quantum mechanics, despite the singular success of the formalism of which I am well aware.
This, Schrödinger already knew, but Einstein declared, this epistemology-soaked orgy ought to come to an end.
Even as he wrote the words, Einstein knew how he sounded.
No doubt however you smile at me and think that after all, many a young heretic turns into an old fanatic, and many a young revolutionary becomes an old reactionary.
Their letters had crossed in the post. Two days after having written his, Einstein received Schrödinger's on the EPR paper and replied immediately.
What I really intended has not come across very well, Einstein explained.
On the contrary the main point was so to speak, buried by erudition.
The EPR paper written by Podolski lacked the clarity and style that characterized Einstein's published work in German.
He was unhappy that the fundamental role of separability, that the state of one object cannot depend upon the kind of measurement made on another spatially separated object, had been obscured in the paper.
Einstein wanted the separation principle to be an explicit feature of the EPR argument, and not as it appeared on the last page as some sort of afterthought.
He wanted to draw out the incompatibility of separability and the completeness of quantum mechanics. Both could not be true.
The actual difficulty lies in the fact that physics is a kind of metaphysics, he told Schrödinger.
Physics describes reality. We know it only through its physical description.
Physics was nothing less than a description of reality, but that description, Einstein wrote, can be complete or incomplete.
He attempted to illustrate what he meant by asking Schrödinger to imagine two closed boxes, one of which contains a ball.
Opening the lid of a box and looking inside is making an observation.
Prior to looking inside the first box, the probability that it contains the ball is one half. In other words, there is a 50% chance that the ball is inside the box.
After the box is opened, there is either a probability of one, the ball is in the box, or zero. The ball is not in the box.
But, says Einstein, in reality the ball was always in one of the two boxes, so he asks, is the statement, the probability is half that the ball is in the first box, a complete description of reality?
If no, then a complete description would be, the ball is or is not in the first box.
If, before the box is open is deemed to be a complete description, then such a description would be, the ball is not in one of the two boxes.
The ball's existence in a definite box occurs only when one of the boxes is opened.
In this way arises the statistical character of the world of experience, or its empirical systems of laws, concluded Einstein.
So he poses the question, is the state, before the box is opened completely described by the probability, one half?
To decide, Einstein brought in the separation principle. The second box and its contents is independent of anything that happens to the first box.
Therefore, according to him, the answer is no. Assigning the probability of half, that the first box contains the ball, is an incomplete description of reality.
It was Bohr's violation of Einstein's separation principle, that resulted in the spooky action at a distance, in the EPR thought experiment.
On 8th of August, 1935, Einstein followed up his ball in the box with a more explosive scenario, to demonstrate to Schrödinger the incompleteness of quantum mechanics, because the theory could only offer, probabilities, where there was certainty.
He asked Schrödinger to consider a keg of unstable gunpowder that spontaneously combusts at some time, during the next year.
At the beginning, the wave function describes a well-defined state, a keg of unexploded gunpowder, but after a year the wave function describes a sort of blend of not yet, and of already exploded systems.
Through no art of interpretation can this wave function be turned into an adequate description of a real state of affairs, Einstein told Schrödinger, for in reality, there's just no intermediary between exploded and not exploded.
Either the keg had exploded or it had not. It was, said Einstein, a crude macroscopic example, that exhibited the same difficulties as encountered in the EPR thought experiment.
The flurry of letters he exchanged with Einstein between June and August 1935, had inspired Schrödinger to scrutinize the Copenhagen interpretation.
The fruit of this dialogue was a three-part essay published between 29th of November and 13th of December.
Schrödinger said he did not know whether to call the present situation in quantum mechanics a report or a general confession. Either way, it contained a single paragraph about the fate of a cat that was to have a lasting impact.
A cat is penned up in a steel chamber along with the following diabolical device, which must be secured against a direct interference by the cat.
In a Geiger counter, there is a tiny bit of radioactive substance, so small, that, perhaps in the course of one hour, one of the atoms decays, but also, with equal probability, perhaps none.
If it happens, the counter tube discharges and, through a relay, releases a hammer, which shatters a small flask of hydrocyanic acid.
If one has left this entire system to itself for an hour, one would say that the cat still lives, if, meanwhile, no atom has decayed.
The first atomic decay would have poisoned it.
The wave function of the entire system would express this by having in it the living and the dead cat, pardon the expression, mixed or smeared out, in equal parts.
According to Schrödinger and common sense the cat is either dead or alive, depending on whether or not there has been a radioactive decay.
But according to Bohr and his followers the realm of the subatomic is an Alice in Wonderland sort of place, because only an act of observation can decide if there has been a decay or not.
It is only this observation that determines whether the cat is dead or alive.
Until then the cat is consigned to quantum purgatory, a superposition of states in which it is neither dead nor alive.
Although he chided Schrödinger for choosing to publish in a German journal while there remained German scientists prepared to tolerate the Nazi regime, Einstein was delighted.
The cat shows, he told Schrödinger, that we agree completely with respect to the character of the present theory.
A wave function that contains a living and a dead cat cannot be considered to describe a real state.
Years later in 1950 Einstein inadvertently blew up the cat, as he forgot that it was he who devised the exploding gunpowder keg.
Writing to Schrödinger about contemporary physicists he could not conceal his dismay at their insistence that the quantum theory provides a description of reality and even a complete description.
Such an interpretation Einstein told Schrödinger was refuted most elegantly by your system of radioactive atom, plus Geiger counter, plus amplifier, plus charge of gunpowder, plus cat in a box, in which the wave function of the system contains the cat both alive and blown to bits.
Schrödinger's famous feline thought experiment also highlighted the difficulty of where to draw the line between the measuring apparatus, which is part of the macro world of the everyday and the object being measured, which is part of the micro world of the quantum.
For Bohr there was no sharp cut between the classical and quantum worlds.
To explain his point about the unbreakable bond between observer and observed, Bohr offered the example of a blind man with a cane.
Where he asked was the break between the blind man and the unseen world, in which he lived.
The blind man is inseparable from his cane, argued Bohr. It is an extension of him, as he uses it to get information about the world around him.
Does the world start at the tip of the blind man's cane?
No, said Bohr. Through the tip of his cane the blind man's sense of touch reaches into the world, and the two are inextricably bound together.
Bohr suggested that the same applies when an experimenter attempts to measure some property of a micro physical particle.
The observer and the observed are entwined in an intimate embrace through the act of measurement, such that it is impossible to say where one begins and the other ends.
Nevertheless, the Copenhagen view assigns a privileged position to the observer, be it human or a mechanical device in the construction of reality.
But all matter is made up of atoms and therefore subject to the laws of quantum mechanics, so how can the observer or measuring apparatus have a privileged position?
This is the measurement problem. The Copenhagen interpretation's assumption of the prior existence of the classical world of the macroscopic measuring device appears circular and paradoxical.
Einstein and Schrödinger believed it to be a glaring indication of the incompleteness of quantum mechanics as a total world view, and Schrödinger tried to highlight it with his cat in a box.
Measurement in the Copenhagen interpretation remains an unexplained process, since there is nothing in the mathematics of quantum mechanics that specifies how or when the wave function collapses.
Bohr solved the problem by simply declaring that measurements can indeed be made, but never offered an explanation of how.
Schrödinger met Bohr while in England in March 1936 and reported the encounter to Einstein.
Recently in London spent a few hours with Niels Bohr who in his kind, courteous way, repeatedly said that he found it appalling, even found it high treason, that people like Lau and I, but in particular someone like you, should want to strike a blow against quantum mechanics with the known paradoxical situation, which is so necessarily contained in the way of things, so supported by experiment.
It is as if we are trying to force nature to accept our preconceived conception of reality.
He speaks with the deep inner conviction of an extraordinarily intelligent man, so that it is difficult for one to remain unmoved in one's position. Yet, Einstein and Schrödinger both remained steadfast in their opposition to the Copenhagen interpretation.
In August 1935, two months before the EPR paper was published, Einstein finally bought a house.
There was nothing to distinguish 112 Mercer Street from its neighbors, but because of its owner it became one of the most famous addresses in the world.
It was conveniently located within walking distance of his office at the Institute for Advanced Study, although he preferred to work in his study at home.
Located on the first floor, a large table covered with the usual paraphernalia of the scholar dominated the center of the study. On the walls there were portraits of Faraday and Maxwell, later joined by one of Gandhi.
The small clapboard house with its green shutters was also home to Elsa's younger daughter Margot and Helen Dukas.
All too soon the domestic tranquility was shattered, as Elsa was diagnosed with heart disease.
As her condition worsened Einstein became miserable and depressed, Elsa wrote to a friend.
She was pleasantly surprised. I never thought he was so attached to me. That too helps.
She died, aged 60, on 20 December 1936. With two women to look after him Einstein quickly came to terms with his loss.
I am settling down splendidly here, he wrote to Bourne. I hibernate like a bear in its cave and really feel more at home than ever before, in all my varied existence.
He explained that this bearishness has been accentuated still further by the death of my mate, who was more attached to human beings than I.
Bourne found Einstein's almost casual announcement of Elsa's death rather strange but unsurprising.
For all his kindness, sociability and love of humanity Bourne said later, he was nevertheless totally detached from his environment and the human beings included in it.
Almost. There was one person to whom Einstein was, deeply attached, his sister, Maya.
She came to live with him in 1939 after Mussolini's racial laws forced her to leave Italy and stayed until her death in 1951.
After Elsa's death Einstein established a routine that as the years passed, varied less and less.
Breakfast between 9 and 10 was followed by a walk to the institute. After working until 1pm he would return home for lunch and a nap.
Afterwards he would work in his study until dinner between 6.30 and 7pm. If not entertaining guests he would return to work, until he went to bed between 11 and 12.
He rarely went to the theatre or to a concert, and unlike Bourne, hardly ever watched a movie.
He was, Einstein said in 1936, living in the kind of solitude that is painful in one's youth, but in one's more mature years is delicious.
In early February 1937 Bourne arrived in Princeton, together with his wife and their son Hans, for a week-long stay as part of a six-month world tour.
It was the first opportunity that Einstein and Bourne had had to meet face to face, since the publication of the EPR paper.
Could Bourne finally convince Einstein to accept the Copenhagen interpretation?
The discussion on quantum mechanics was not at all heated, recalled Valentin Bergmann, who later served as one of Einstein's assistants.
But to the outside observer Einstein and Bourne were talking past each other.
Any meaningful discussion he believed required days and days.
Alas, during the encounter he witnessed, so many things were left unsaid.
What was left unsaid between them each man already knew.
Their debate about the interpretation of quantum mechanics came down to a philosophical belief about the status of reality.
Did it exist?
Bourne believed that quantum mechanics was a complete fundamental theory of nature, and he built his philosophical worldview on top of it.
It led him to declare, there is no quantum world, there is only an abstract quantum mechanical description.
It is wrong to think that the task of physics is to find out how nature is.
Physics concerns what we can say about nature.
Einstein, on the other hand, chose the alternative approach.
He based his assessment of quantum mechanics on his unshakable belief in the existence of a causal, observer-independent reality.
Consequently he could never accept the Copenhagen interpretation.
What we call science, Einstein argued, has the sole purpose of determining what is.
For Bourne, the theory came first, then the philosophical position, the interpretation constructed to make sense of what the theory says about reality.
Einstein knew that it was dangerous to build a philosophical worldview on the foundations of any scientific theory.
If the theory is found wanting in the light of new experimental evidence, then the philosophical position it supports, collapses with it.
It is basic for physics that one assumes a real world existing independently from any act of perception, said Einstein.
But this we do not know.
Einstein was a philosophical realist and knew that such a position could not be justified.
It was a belief concerning reality that was not susceptible to proof.
While that may be so for Einstein, it is existence and reality that one wishes to comprehend.
I have no better expression than religious for confidence in the rational nature of reality insofar as it is accessible to human reason, he wrote to Maurice Sullivan.
Wherever this feeling is absent, science degenerates into uninspired empiricism.
Heisenberg understood that Einstein and Schrödinger wanted to return to the reality concept of classical physics or to use a more general philosophic term to the ontology of materialism.
The belief in an objective real world whose smallest parts exist objectively, in the same sense as stones or trees exist independently of whether or not we observe them,
was for Heisenberg a throwback to simplistic materialist views that prevailed in the natural sciences of the 19th century.
Heisenberg was only partly right when he identified that Einstein and Schrödinger wanted to change the philosophy without changing the physics.
Einstein accepted that quantum mechanics was the best theory available, but it was an incomplete representation of real things.
Although it is the only one which can be built out of the fundamental concepts of force and material points, quantum corrections to classical mechanics.
Einstein was desperately seeking to change the physics as well, for he was not the conservative relic many thought, he was convinced that the concepts of classical physics would have to be replaced by new ones.
Since the macroscopic world is described by classical physics and its concepts, Bohr argued that even to seek to go beyond them was a waste of time.
He had developed his framework of complementarity in order to save classical concepts.
For Bohr there was no underlying physical reality that exists independently of measuring equipment and that meant, as Heisenberg pointed out,
we cannot escape the paradox of quantum theory, namely the necessity of using the classical concepts.
It is the Bohr-Heisenberg call to retain classical concepts that Einstein called a tranquilizing philosophy.
Einstein never abandoned the ontology of classical physics, an observer independent reality, but he was prepared to make a decisive break with classical physics.
The view of reality endorsed by the Copenhagen interpretation was all the evidence he needed of the necessity to do so.
He wanted a revolution more radical than the one offered by quantum mechanics, it was hardly surprising that Einstein and Bohr left so much unsaid.
In January 1939 Bohr returned to Princeton and stayed for four months as a visiting professor at the institute.
Although the two men still enjoyed a warm friendly relationship, their ongoing dispute over quantum reality had inevitably led to a cooling.
Einstein was only a shadow of himself, recalled Rosenfeld, who had accompanied Bohr to America.
They did meet, usually at formal receptions, but they no longer talked about the physics that mattered so much to them.
During Bohr's stay Einstein gave only one lecture on his search for a unified field theory.
With Bohr in the audience he expressed the hope that quantum physics would be derivable from such a theory, but Einstein had already made it known that he would rather not discuss the issue further.
Bohr was profoundly unhappy about this said Rosenfeld.
While Einstein unwilling to talk about quantum physics, Bohr found that there were plenty of others in Princeton eager to discuss the latest developments in nuclear physics, given the ominous events in Europe that would lead once again to a world at war.
No matter how deeply one immerses oneself in work, Einstein wrote to Queen Elizabeth of Belgium, a haunting feeling of inescapable tragedy persists.
The letter was dated 9th of January 1939, two days before Bohr sailed for America and brought within the news of a discovery that others had made, the splitting apart of a large nucleus into smaller nuclei with an accompanying release of energy.
Nuclear Fission
It was during the voyage that Bohr realized it was the Uranium-235 isotope that undergoes nuclear fission when it is bombarded by slow-moving neutrons and not Uranium-238.
At the age of 53 it was Bohr's last major contribution to physics.
With Einstein unwilling to debate the nature of quantum reality, Bohr concentrated on working out the details of nuclear fission with the American John Wheeler from Princeton University.
After Bohr returned to Europe Einstein sent a letter, dated 2nd August, to President Roosevelt, urging him to examine the feasibility of developing an atomic bomb, given that Germany had stopped the sale of Uranium or from mines it now controlled in Czechoslovakia.
Roosevelt replied in October, thanking Einstein for his letter and informing him that he had set up a committee to investigate the issues raised.
In the meantime, on 1st of September 1939, Germany attacked Poland.
Still a pacifist, Einstein was prepared to compromise until Hitler and the Nazis were defeated.
In a second letter dated 7th of March 1940, he urged Roosevelt that more needed to be done.
Since the outbreak of the war interest in Uranium has intensified in Germany, I have now learned that research there is carried out in great secrecy.
Unknown to Einstein the man in charge of the German atomic bomb program was Werner Heisenberg.
Once again the letter failed to solicit much of a response.
Bohr's discovery that it was Uranium-235 that underwent fission was far more important to the creation of the atom bomb than anything achieved by Einstein's two letters to Roosevelt.
The American government did not seriously begin thinking about developing an atomic bomb, codenamed the Manhattan Project, until October 1941.
Even though Einstein had become an American citizen in 1940, the authorities considered him a security risk because of his political views.
He was never asked to work on the atomic bomb. Bohr was.
On 22nd of December 1943, he stopped off at Princeton on his way to Los Alamos in New Mexico, where the bomb was being built.
He had dinner with Einstein and Wolfgang Pauli who had joined the Institute for Advanced Study in 1940.
Much had happened since the last time Bohr met Einstein.
In April 1940 German forces had occupied Denmark.
Bohr chose to remain in Copenhagen, hoping that his international reputation would provide some semblance of protection to others at his institute.
And it did. Until August 1943, when the illusion of Danish self-rule was finally shattered, as the Nazis declared martial law after the government rejected a demand that a state of emergency be declared and acts of sabotage be punishable by death.
Then, on 28th of September, Hitler ordered the deportation of Denmark's 8000 Jews.
A sympathetic German official informed two Danish politicians that the roundup was to begin at 9pm on 1st of October.
As word quickly spread of the Nazi plan, almost every Jew disappeared, hidden in the homes of fellow Danes, or finding sanctuary in churches, or disguised as patients in hospitals.
The Nazis managed to round up fewer than 300 Jews.
Bohr, whose mother had been Jewish, managed to escape to Sweden with his family.
From there he flew to Scotland in a British bomber, almost dying from a lack of oxygen because he was travelling in the Bombay and had an ill-fitting oxygen mask.
After meeting British politicians he soon travelled to America, where after his fleeting visit to Princeton, he worked on the atomic bomb under the alias Nicholas Baker.
After the war Bohr returned to his institute in Copenhagen and Einstein said he felt no friendship for any real German.
Yet he had abiding sympathy for Plunk, who outlived all four children from his first marriage.
The death of his youngest son was the bitterest of all the blows Plunk endured in his long life.
Erwin, an Undersecretary of State in the Reich Chancellery before the Nazis came to power, was a suspect in an attempt to assassinate Hitler in July of 1944.
He was arrested and tortured by the Gestapo, and found guilty of complicity in the assassination plot.
At one point there was a glimmer of hope as Plunk set in his words, heaven and hell in motion, to have the death penalty commuted to a prison sentence.
Then, without warning, Erwin was hanged in Berlin in February 1945.
Plunk had been denied the opportunity to see his son one last time.
He was a precious part of my being. He was my sunshine, my pride, my hope.
No words can describe what I have lost with him.
When he heard the news that Plunk had died, aged 89, following a stroke on 4 October 1947, Einstein wrote to his widow of the beautiful and fruitful time he had been privileged to spend with him.
As he offered his condolences, Einstein recalled that the hours which I was permitted to spend at your house and the many conversations which I conducted face to face with that wonderful man
will remain among my most beautiful recollections for the rest of my life.
It was something, he reassured her, which could not be altered by the fact that a tragic fate tore us apart.
After the war Bohr was made a permanent non-resident member of the Institute for Advanced Study and could come and stay whenever he wanted to.
His first trip in September 1946 was brief, as he came to take part in the bicentennial celebrations of the founding of Princeton University.
Then, in 1948, he arrived in February and stayed until June.
This time, Einstein was willing to talk physics.
Abraham Pice, a young Dutch physicist who helped Bohr during his visit, later described the occasion when the dain came bursting into his office in a state of angry despair saying, I am sick of myself.
When Pice asked what was wrong Bohr replied that he had been to see Einstein and they had got into an argument about the meaning of quantum mechanics.
The renewal of their friendship was signaled by the fact that Einstein let Bohr use his office.
One day Bohr was dictating a draft of a paper in honor of Einstein's 70th birthday to Pice.
Stuck on what to say next Bohr stood looking out of the window, every now and then muttering Einstein's name aloud.
At that moment, Einstein tiptoed into the office.
His doctor had banned him from buying any tobacco but had said nothing about stealing it.
Pice later recounted what happened next.
Always on tiptoes he made a beeline for Bohr's tobacco pot which stood on the table at which I was sitting.
Bohr, unaware, was standing at the window muttering, Einstein, Einstein.
I was at a loss what to do especially because I had at that moment not the faintest idea of what Einstein was up to.
Then Bohr with a firm, Einstein, turned around.
There they were, face to face, as if Bohr had summoned him forth.
It is an understatement to say that for a moment Bohr was speechless.
I myself who had seen it coming had distinctly felt uncanny for a moment so I could well understand Bohr's own reaction.
A moment later the spell was broken when Einstein explained his mission. Soon we were all bursting with laughter.
There were other visits to Princeton but Bohr never managed to get Einstein to change his mind on quantum mechanics.
Nor did Heisenberg, who saw him only once after the war during a lecture tour of the United States that overlapped with Bohr's last visit in 1954.
Einstein invited Heisenberg to his home and over coffee and cakes, they chatted for most of the afternoon.
Of politics, we said nothing, recalled Heisenberg.
Einstein's whole interest focused on the interpretation of quantum theory, which continued to disturb him just as it had done in Brussels 25 years before.
Einstein remained resolute.
I don't like your kind of physics, he said.
The necessity of conceiving of nature as an objective reality is said to be superannuated prejudice, while the quantum theoreticians are vaunted.
Einstein had once written to his old friend Maurice Sullivan.
Men are even more susceptible to suggestion than horses and each period is dominated by a mood, with the result that most men fail to see the tyrant who rules over them.
When Chaim Weitzman, the first president of Israel died in November 1952, the Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion felt compelled to offer Einstein the presidency.
I am deeply moved by the offer from our state of Israel and at once saddened and ashamed, because I cannot accept it, said Einstein.
He highlighted the fact that he lacked both a natural aptitude and the experience to deal properly with people and to exercise official functions.
For these reasons alone, he explained, I should be unsuited to fulfill the duties of high office, even if advancing age was not making increasing inroads on my strength.
Ever since the summer of 1950 when doctors discovered that his aortic aneurysm, a bulge in the aorta was getting larger, Einstein knew he was living on borrowed time.
He wrote his will and made it clear that he wanted to be cremated after a private funeral.
He lived to celebrate his 76th birthday and one of his last acts was to sign a declaration written by the philosopher Bertrand Russell calling for nuclear disarmament.
Einstein wrote to Bohr asking him to sign it. Don't frown like that. This has nothing to do with our old controversy on physics, but rather concerns a matter on which we are in complete agreement.
On 13th of April 1955, Einstein experienced severe chest pains and two days later he was taken to hospital.
I want to go when I want, he said, refusing surgery. It is tasteless to prolong life artificially. I have done my share. It is time to go.
As fate would have it, his stepdaughter Margo was staying in the same hospital. She saw Einstein twice and they chatted for a few hours.
Hans Albert who had arrived in America with his family in 1937 rushed from Berkeley in California to his father's bedside.
For a while, Einstein seemed better and asked for his notes, unable to abandon his search for a unified field theory even at the end.
Shortly after 1 a.m., on 18th of April, the aneurysm burst.
After saying a few words in German that the night nurse could not understand, Einstein died.
Later that day he was cremated but not before his brain was removed and his ashes scattered at an undisclosed location.
If everyone lived a life like mine there would be no need for novels, Einstein once wrote to his sister. The year was 1899 and he was 20.
Except for the fact that he was the greatest physicist since Newton, said Banesh Hoffman, one of Einstein's Princeton assistants.
One might almost say that he was not so much a scientist as an artist of science.
Bohr paid his own heartfelt tribute. He recognized Einstein's achievements to be as rich and fruitful as any in the whole history of our culture
and said that mankind will always be indebted to Einstein for the removal of the obstacles to our outlook which were involved in the primitive notions of absolute space and time.
He gave us a world picture with a unity and harmony surpassing the boldest dreams of the past.
The Einstein-Bohr debate did not end with Einstein's death. Bohr would argue as if his old quantum foe were still alive.
I can still see Einstein's smile both knowing, humane and friendly.
Often his first thought when thinking about some fundamental issue in physics was to wonder what Einstein would have said about it.
On Saturday, 17th of November 1962, Bohr gave the last of five interviews concerning his role in the development of quantum physics.
After lunch on Sunday Bohr went to take his usual nap. When he called out his wife Margrethe rushed to the bedroom and found him unconscious.
Bohr, aged 77, had suffered a fatal heart attack.
The last drawing on the blackboard in his study made the night before as he replayed the argument over once more was of Einstein's lightbox.
Part 4 Does God Play Dice?
I want to know how God created this world. I am not interested in this or that phenomenon in the spectrum of this or that element. I want to know his thoughts. The rest are details.
Albert Einstein
Chapter 14 For Whom Bells Theorem Tolls
You believe in the God who plays dice and I in complete law and order in a world which objectively exists and which I in a wildly speculative way am trying to capture. Einstein wrote to Born in 1944.
I firmly believe, but I hope that someone will discover a more realistic way or rather a more tangible basis than it has been my lot to find.
Even the great initial success of quantum theory does not make me believe in the fundamental dice game, although I am well aware that our younger colleagues interpret this as a consequence of senility.
No doubt the day will come when we shall see whose instinctive attitude was the correct one.
20 years passed before a discovery brought that day of judgment closer.
In 1964, the radio astronomers Arno Penzius and Robert Woodrow detected the echo of the Big Bang.
The evolutionary biologist Bill Hamilton published his theory of the genetic evolution of social behavior and the theoretical physicist Murray Gelman predicted the existence of a new family of fundamental particles called quarks.
These were just three of the landmark scientific breakthroughs that year. Yet according to the physicist and historian of science Henry Stapp, none rivaled Bells Theorem, the most profound discovery of science.
It was ignored.
Most physicists were too busy using quantum mechanics as it continued to notch up one success after another to be bothered about the subtleties of the arguments between Einstein and Bohr over its meaning and interpretation.
It was little wonder they failed to recognize that a 34-year-old Irish physicist, John Stuart Bell, had discovered what Einstein and Bohr could not, a mathematical theorem that could decide between their two opposing philosophical world views.
For Bohr there was no quantum world, only an abstract quantum mechanical description. Einstein believed in a reality independent of perception.
The debate between Einstein and Bohr was as much about the kind of physics that was acceptable as a meaningful theoretical description of reality as it was about the nature of reality itself.
Einstein was convinced that Bohr and the supporters of the Copenhagen interpretation were playing a risky game with reality. John Bell was sympathetic to Einstein's position, but part of the inspiration behind his groundbreaking theorem lay in the work done in the early 1950s by an American physicist forced into exile.
David Bohm was a talented PhD student of Robert Oppenheimer's at the University of California at Berkeley.
Born in Wilkes Bar, Pennsylvania in December 1917, Bohm was prevented from joining the top secret research facility in Los Alamos, New Mexico to work on the development of the atomic bomb in 1943, after Oppenheimer was appointed its director.
The authorities cited Bohm's many relatives in Europe, 19 of whom were to die in Nazi concentration camps, as the reason they considered him to be a security risk.
In truth, having been questioned by US Army intelligence and attempting to secure his position as the scientific leader of the Manhattan Project, Oppenheimer had named Bohm as a possible member of the American Communist Party.
Four years later, in 1947, the self-confessed, shatterer of worlds took charge of the Madhouse, as Oppenheimer once called the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton.
Maybe in an attempt to atone for his earlier naming of Bohm, of which his protege was unaware, Oppenheimer helped him obtain an assistant professorship at Princeton University.
Amid the anti-communist paranoia, sweeping the United States after the Second World War, Oppenheimer was soon under suspicion because of his earlier left-wing political views.
Having watched him closely for some years the FBI had compiled a large dossier on the man who knew America's atomic secrets.
In an attempt to smear Oppenheimer, some of his friends and colleagues were investigated by the House Un-American Activities Committee and forced to appear before it.
In 1948, Bohm, who had joined the American Communist Party in 1942 but left after only nine months, invoked the Fifth Amendment that protected him against self-incrimination.
Within a year, he was subpoenaed to appear before a grand jury and once again pleaded the Fifth.
In November 1949 Bohm was arrested, charged with contempt of court, and briefly imprisoned, before being released on bail.
Princeton University, worried about losing wealthy donors, suspended him.
Although he was acquitted, when his case came to trial in June 1950, the university chose to pay off the remaining year of Bohm's contract provided he did not set foot on campus.
Bohm was blacklisted and unable to find another academic post in the United States and Einstein seriously considered appointing him as his research assistant.
Oppenheimer opposed the idea and was among those who advised his former student to leave the country.
In October 1951, Bohm left for Brazil and the University of São Paulo.
He had been in Brazil only a matter of weeks when the American Embassy, fearing that his final destination might be the Soviet Union, confiscated Bohm's passport and reissued it as valid only for travel to the United States.
Worried that his South American exile would cut him off from the international physics community, Bohm acquired Brazilian nationality to circumvent the travel ban imposed by the Americans.
Back in the United States Oppenheimer faced a hearing. Pressure on him intensified the moment it emerged that Klaus Fuchs, a physicist he had selected to work on the atomic bomb, was a Soviet spy.
Einstein advised Oppenheimer to turn up, tell the committee they were fools, and return home. He did no such thing. But another hearing in the spring of 1954 revoked Oppenheimer's security clearance.
Bohm left Brazil in 1955 and spent two years at the Technion Institute in Haifa, Israel before moving to England. After four years at Bristol University, in 1961, Bohm settled once and for all in London after being appointed professor of theoretical physics at Birkbeck College.
During his troubled time in Princeton, Bohm had largely devoted himself to studying the structure and interpretation of quantum mechanics. In February 1951 he published Quantum Theory, one of the first textbooks to examine in some detail the interpretation of the theory and the EPR thought experiment.
Einstein, Podolski and Rosen had conjured up an imaginary experiment that involved a pair of correlated particles A and B so far apart that it should be impossible for them to physically interact with one another.
EPR argued that a measurement carried out on particle A could not physically disturb particle B. Since any measurement has performed on only one of the particles, EPR believed they could cut off Bohr's counterattack. An active measurement causes a physical disturbance.
Since the properties of the two particles are correlated, they argued that by measuring a property of particle A such as its position it is possible to know the corresponding property of B without disturbing it. EPR's aim was to demonstrate that particle B possessed the property independently of being measured, and since this was something that quantum mechanics failed to describe, it was therefore incomplete.
Bohr countered, never so succinctly, that the pair of particles were entangled and formed a single system no matter how far apart they were. Therefore if you measured one, then you also measured the other.
If there, EPR contention could be proved, wrote Bohm. Then one would be led to search for a more complete theory, perhaps containing something like hidden variables in terms of which the present quantum theory would be a limiting case.
But he concluded that quantum theory is inconsistent with the assumption of hidden causal variables. Bohm looked at quantum theory from the prevailing Copenhagen viewpoint.
However in the process of writing his book he became dissatisfied with Bohr's interpretation, even as he agreed with the dismissal by others of the EPR argument as unjustified and based on assumptions concerning the nature of matter which implicitly contradict the quantum theory at the outset.
It was the subtlety of the EPR thought experiment, and what he came to regard is the reasonable assumptions on which it was constructed that led Bohm to question the Copenhagen interpretation.
It was a brave step for a young physicist whose contemporaries were busy using quantum theory to make their reputations rather than risking career suicide by raking over the embers of a dying fire.
But Bohm was already a marked man after his appearance before the House on American Activities Committee and, suspended by Princeton, he had little left to lose.
Bohm presented Einstein with a copy of quantum theory and discussed his reservations with Princeton's most famous resident.
Encouraged to examine the Copenhagen interpretation more closely, Bohm produced two papers that appeared in January 1952.
In the first of these he publicly thanked Einstein for several interesting and stimulating discussions.
By then Bohm was in Brazil but the papers had been written and sent to the physical review in July 1951, just four months after the publication of his book.
Bohm appeared to have had a Paul-like conversion on the road not to Damascus, but Copenhagen.
In his papers Bohm outlined an alternative interpretation of quantum theory and argued that the mere possibility of such an interpretation proves that it is not necessary for us to give up a precise, rational and objective description of individual systems at a quantum level of accuracy.
Reproducing the predictions of quantum mechanics it was a mathematically more sophisticated and coherent version of Louis de Bois's pilot wave model, which the French Prince had abandoned after it was severely criticized at the 1927 Solvay Conference.
Whereas the wave function in quantum mechanics is an abstract wave of probability, in the pilot wave theory it is a real physical wave that guides particles.
Just as an ocean current carries along a swimmer or a ship the pilot wave produces a current that is responsible for the motion of a particle.
The particle has a well-defined trajectory determined by the precise values of position and velocity that it possesses at any given time, but which the uncertainty principle hides by preventing an experimenter from measuring them.
On reading Bohm's two papers, Bell said that he saw the impossible done.
Like almost everyone else he thought that Bohm's alternative to the Copenhagen interpretation had been ruled out as impossible.
He asked why no one had told him about the pilot wave theory.
Why is the pilot wave picture ignored in textbooks?
Should it not be taught, not as the only way but as an antidote to the prevailing complacency?
To show that vagueness, subjectivity and indeterminism are not forced on us by experimental facts but by deliberate theoretical choice.
A part of the answer was the legendary Hungarian-born mathematician John von Neumann.
The eldest of three brothers, the Jewish banker's son was a mathematical prodigy.
When his first paper was published at 18, von Neumann was a student at Budapest University but spent most of his time in Germany at the universities of Berlin and Gürtigen, returning only to take his exams.
In 1923, he enrolled at the ETH in Zurich to study chemical engineering after his father insisted that he have something more practical to fall back on than mathematics.
After graduating from the ETH and gaining a doctorate from Budapest in double-quick time, von Neumann became at 23, the youngest ever Privatdotsent appointed by Berlin University in 1927.
Three years later, he began teaching at Princeton University and in 1933 joined Einstein as a professor at the Institute for Advanced Study, remaining there for the rest of his life.
A year earlier, in 1932, the then-28-year-old von Neumann wrote a book that became the Quantum Physicist's Bible, Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics.
In it, he asked whether quantum mechanics could be reformulated as a deterministic theory by the introduction of hidden variables, which, unlike ordinary variables, are inaccessible to measurement and therefore not subject to the restrictions imposed by the uncertainty principle.
Von Neumann argued that the present system of quantum mechanics would have to be objectively false in order that another description of the elementary process is then the statistical one may be possible.
In other words, the answer was no, and he offered a mathematical proof that outlawed the hidden variables approach that Bohm would adopt twenty years later.
It was an approach with a history. Ever since the seventeenth century, men like Robert Boyle had studied the various properties of gases as their pressure, volume and temperature were varied and had discovered the gas laws.
Boyle found the law describing the relationship between the volume of a gas and its pressure. He established that if a certain quantity of a gas was kept at a fixed temperature and its pressure was doubled, its volume was halved.
If the pressure was increased threefold, then its volume was reduced to a third. At constant temperature, the volume of a gas is inversely proportional to the pressure.
The correct physical explanation of the gas laws had to wait until Ludwig Boltzmann and James Clerk Maxwell developed the kinetic theory of gases in the nineteenth century.
So many of the properties of matter, especially when in gaseous form, can be deduced from the hypothesis that their minute parts are in rapid motion.
The velocity increasing with temperature, wrote Maxwell in 1860, that the precise nature of this motion becomes the subject of rational curiosity.
It led him to conclude that the relations between pressure, temperature and density in a perfect gas can be explained by supposing the particles to move with uniform velocity in straight lines, striking against the sides of the containing vessel and thus producing pressure.
Molecules in a continual state of motion, haphazardly colliding into one another and the walls of the container, holding the gas, produced the relationships between pressure, temperature and volume expressed in the gas laws.
Molecules could be regarded as the unobserved microscopic hidden variable that explained the observed macroscopic properties of gases.
Einstein's explanation of Brownian motion in 1905 is an example where the hidden variable is the molecules of the fluid in which the pollen grains are suspended.
The reason behind the erratic movement of the grains that had so perplexed everyone was suddenly clear after Einstein pointed out that it was due to the bombardment by invisible but very real molecules.
The appeal of hidden variables in quantum mechanics had its roots in Einstein's claim that the theory is incomplete, maybe that incompleteness was due to the failure to capture the existence of an underlying layer of reality.
This untapped seam in the form of hidden variables, possibly hidden particles, forces or something completely new, would restore an independent objective reality.
Phenomena that at one level appear probabilistic would with the help of hidden variables be revealed as deterministic and particles would possess a definite velocity and position at all times.
As von Neumann was acknowledged as one of the great mathematicians of the day, most physicists simply accepted without bothering to check that he had proscribed hidden variables when it came to quantum mechanics.
For them the mere mention of von Neumann and proof was enough.
However von Neumann admitted that there remained the possibility though small that quantum mechanics might be wrong.
In spite of the fact that quantum mechanics agrees well with experiment and that it has opened up for us a qualitatively new side of the world,
one can never say of the theory that it has been proved by experience, but only that it is the best known summarization of experience, he wrote.
Yet, despite these words of caution, von Neumann's proof was held to be sacrosanct.
Virtually everyone misinterpreted it as proving that no theory of hidden variables could reproduce the same experimental results as quantum mechanics.
When he analyzed von Neumann's argument, Bohm believed that it was wrong, but could not clearly pinpoint the weakness.
Nevertheless encouraged by his discussions with Einstein, Bohm attempted to construct the hidden variables theory that was deemed to be impossible.
It would be Bell, who demonstrated that one of the assumptions used by von Neumann was unwarranted and therefore that his impossibility proof was incorrect.
Born in July 1928 in Belfast, John Stuart Bell was descended from a family of carpenters, blacksmiths, farm workers, laborers and horse dealers.
My parents were poor but honest he once said.
Both of them came from large families of eight or nine that were traditional of the working class people of Ireland at that time.
With a father who was in and out of work, Bell's childhood was far removed from the comfortable middle class upbringing of the quantum pioneers.
Nevertheless before he reached his teens the bookish Bell had earned the nickname, the prof, even before he told his family that he wanted to become a scientist.
There was an older sister and two younger brothers and though their mother believed that a good education was the root to future prosperity for her children,
John was the only one who went on to secondary school aged eleven.
It was not a lack of ability that denied his siblings the same opportunity, only a shortage of money for a family always struggling to make ends meet.
Luckily the family came into a small sum of money that enabled Bell to enroll at the Belfast Technical High School.
Not as prestigious as some of the other schools in the city, it offered a curriculum that combined the academic and the practical that suited him.
In 1944, aged sixteen, Bell gained the qualifications necessary to study at Queen's University in his hometown.
With seventeen the minimum age for admission and his parents unable to finance his university studies, Bell looked for work and fortuitously found it as an assistant technician in the laboratory of the physics department at Queen's University.
Before long the two senior physicists recognized Bell's abilities and allowed him to attend the first year lectures whenever his duties permitted.
His enthusiasm and obvious talent were rewarded with a small scholarship and this, together with the money he was able to set aside, meant that he returned after his year as a technician as a fully fledged physics student.
With the sacrifices that he and his parents had made, Bell was focused and driven.
He proved to be an exceptional student and in 1948 obtained a degree in experimental physics. A year later, he gained another in mathematical physics.
Bell admitted that he had a very bad conscience about having lived off my parents for so long and thought I should get a job.
With his two degrees and glowing references he went to England to work for the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Research Establishment.
In 1954, Bell married a fellow physicist, Mary Ross. In 1960, having gained a PhD from Birmingham University, he and his wife moved to CERN, the consul-european pour le réchauché nucléaire, near Geneva, Switzerland.
For a man who would make his name as a quantum theorist, Bell's job was designing particle accelerators. He was proud to call himself a quantum engineer.
Bell first came across von Neumann's proof in 1949, his last year as a student in Belfast when he read Max Born's new book, Natural Philosophy of Cause and Chance.
I was very impressed that somebody, von Neumann, had actually proved that you couldn't interpret quantum mechanics as some sort of statistical mechanics, he later recalled.
But Bell did not read von Neumann's book as it was written in German and he did not know the language. Instead he accepted Born's word for the soundness of von Neumann's proof.
According to Born, von Neumann had put quantum mechanics on an axiomatic basis by deriving it from a few postulates of a very plausible and general character such that the formalism of quantum mechanics is uniquely determined by these axioms.
In particular, Born said it meant that no concealed parameters can be introduced with the help of which the indeterministic description could be transformed into a deterministic one.
Implicitly, Born was arguing in favor of the Copenhagen interpretation because if a future theory should be deterministic it cannot be a modification of the present one but must be essentially different.
Born's message was that quantum mechanics is complete, therefore it cannot be modified.
It was 1955 before von Neumann's book was published in English but by then, Bell had read Bohm's papers on hidden variables.
I saw that von Neumann must have been just wrong, he said later.
Yet Pauly and Heisenberg branded Bohm's hidden variables alternative as metaphysical and ideological.
The ready acceptance of von Neumann's impossibility proof proved only one thing to Bell, a lack of imagination.
Nevertheless, it had allowed Bohr and the advocates of the Copenhagen interpretation to consolidate their position even while some of them suspected that von Neumann might be wrong.
Even though he later dismissed Bohm's work, Pauly in his published lectures on wave mechanics wrote that no proof of the impossibility of extending, i.e. completing quantum theory by hidden variables, has been given.
For 25 years, hidden variable theories had been ruled impossible by the authority of von Neumann.
However, if such a theory could be constructed to yield the same predictions as quantum mechanics, then there would be no reason for physicists to simply accept the Copenhagen interpretation.
When Bohm demonstrated that such an alternative was possible, the Copenhagen interpretation was so well entrenched as the only interpretation of quantum mechanics that he was either ignored or attacked.
Einstein, who had initially encouraged him, dismissed Bohm's hidden variables as too cheap.
I think he was looking for a much more profound rediscovery of quantum phenomena, Bell said as he tried to understand Einstein's reaction.
The idea that you could just add a few variables and the whole thing would remain unchanged apart from the interpretation, which was a kind of trivial addition to ordinary quantum mechanics, must have been a disappointment to him.
Bell was convinced that Einstein wanted to see some grand new principle emerge on a par with the conservation of energy.
Instead, what Bohm offered Einstein was an interpretation that was non-local, requiring the instantaneous transmission of so-called quantum mechanical forces.
There were other horrors lurking in Bohm's alternative. For example, clarified Bell, the trajectories that were assigned to the elementary particles were instantaneously changed when anyone moved a magnet anywhere in the universe.
It was in 1964, during a year-long sabbatical from CERN and his day-job designing particle accelerators, that Bell found the time to enter the Einstein-bore debate.
Bell decided to find out if non-locality was a peculiar feature of Bohm's model, or if it was a characteristic of any hidden variable theory that aimed to reproduce the results of quantum mechanics.
I knew, of course, that the Einstein-Podolski-Rosen setup was the critical one, because it led to distant correlations, he explained.
They ended their paper by stating that if you somehow completed the quantum mechanical description, non-locality would only be apparent. The underlying theory would be local.
Bell started out trying to preserve locality by attempting to construct a local hidden variable theory in which if one event caused another, then there had to be enough time between the two to allow a signal traveling at the speed of light to pass between them.
Everything I tried didn't work, he said later. I began to feel that it very likely couldn't be done.
In his attempt to eliminate what Einstein decried as spooky actions at a distance, non-local influences that were transmitted instantly between one place and another, Bell derived his celebrated theorem.
He began by looking at a version of the EPR thought experiment first devised by Bohm in 1951 that was simpler than the original.
Whereas Einstein-Podolski and Rosen had used two properties of a particle, position and momentum, Bohm used only one, quantum spin.
First proposed in 1925 by the young Dutch physicists George Julenbeck and Samuel Goudsmit, the quantum spin of a particle had no analog in classical physics.
An electron had just two possible spin states, spin up and spin down.
Bohm's adaptation of EPR involved a spin-zero particle that disintegrates and in the process produces two electrons, A and B.
Since their combined spin must remain zero, one electron must have spin up and the other spin down.
Flying off in opposite directions until they are far enough apart to rule out any physical interaction between them, the quantum spin of each electron is measured at exactly the same time by a spin detector.
Bell was interested in the correlations that could exist between the results of these simultaneous measurements carried out on pairs of such electrons.
The quantum spin of an electron can be measured independently in any one of three directions at right angles to each other, labeled X, Y and Z.
These directions are just the normal three dimensions of the everyday world in which everything moves left and right, X direction, up and down, Y direction and back and forth, Z direction.
When the spin of electron A is measured along the X direction by a spin detector placed in its path, it will be either spin up or spin down.
The odds are 50-50, the same as those for flipping a coin to see whether it lands heads or tails.
In both cases, whether it is one or the other is pure chance, but as with flipping a coin repeatedly, if the experiment is done again and again, then electron A will be found to have spin up in half the measurements and spin down in the rest.
Unlike two coins that are flipped at the same time, each of which can be heads or tails, as soon as the spin of electron A is measured as spin up, then a simultaneous measure of the spin of electron B along the same direction will reveal it to be spin down.
There is a perfect correlation between the results of the two spin measurements.
Bell later attempted to demonstrate that there was nothing strange about the nature of these correlations.
The philosopher in the street who has not suffered a course in quantum mechanics is quite unimpressed by Einstein-Pedolsky-Rosen correlations.
He can point to many examples of similar correlations in everyday life.
The case of Bertolman's socks is often cited.
Dr. Bertolman likes to wear two socks of different colors.
Which color will he have on a given foot on a given day is quite unpredictable, but when you see that the first sock is pink, you can be already sure that the second sock will not be pink.
Observation of the first and experience of Bertolman gives immediate information about the second.
There is no accounting for tastes, but apart from that there is no mystery here.
And is not the EPR business the same?
As with the color of Bertolman's socks, given that the spin of the parent particle is zero, it is no surprise that once the spin of electron A along any direction is measured as spin up, the spin of electron B in the same direction is confirmed as spin down.
According to Bohr, until a measurement is made, neither electron A nor electron B has a pre-existing spin in any direction.
It is as if we had come to deny the reality of Bertolman's socks, said Bell, or at least of their colors when not looked at.
Instead, before they are observed, the electrons exist in a ghostly superposition of states so that they are spin up and spin down at the same time.
Since the two electrons are entangled, the information concerning their spin states is given by a wave function similar to psi equals A spin up and B spin down, plus A spin down and B spin up.
Electron A has no x component of spin until a measurement to determine it causes the wave function of the system A and B to collapse, and then it is either spin up or spin down.
At that very moment its entangled partner B acquires the opposite spin in the same direction, even if it is on the other side of the universe.
Bohr's Copenhagen interpretation is non-local.
Einstein would explain the correlations by arguing that both electrons possess definite values of quantum spin in each of the three directions, x, y and z, whether they are measured or not.
For Einstein, said Bell, these correlations simply showed that the quantum theorists had been hasty in dismissing the reality of the microscopic world.
Since the pre-existing spin states of the electron pair cannot be accommodated by quantum mechanics, this led Einstein to conclude that the theory was incomplete.
He did not dispute the correctness of the theory only that it was not a complete picture of physical reality at the quantum level.
Einstein believed in local realism, that a particle cannot be instantly influenced by a distant event, and that its properties exist independently of any measurement.
Unfortunately, Bohm's clever reworking of the original EPR experiment could not distinguish between the positions of Einstein and Bohr.
Both men could account for the results of such an experiment.
Bell's stroke of genius was to discover a way out of the impasse by changing the relative orientation of the two spin detectors.
If the spin detectors measuring electrons A and B are aligned so that they are parallel, then there is a 100% correlation between the two sets of measurements.
Whenever spin up is measured by one detector, spin down is recorded by the other and vice versa.
If one of the detectors is rotated slightly, then they are no longer perfectly aligned.
Now if the spin states of many pairs of entangled electrons are measured when A is found to be spin up, the corresponding measurement of its partner B will sometimes also be spin up.
Increasing the angle of orientation between the detectors results in a reduction in the degree of correlation.
If the detectors are at 90 degrees to each other and the experiment is once again repeated many times, when A is measured along the X direction as spin up, only in half of these instances will B be detected as spin down.
If the detectors are orientated at 180 degrees to one another, then the pair of electrons will be completely anti-correlated.
If A's spin state is measured as spin up, then B's will also be spin up.
Although a thought experiment, it was possible to calculate the exact degree of spin correlation for a given orientation of the detectors predicted by quantum mechanics.
However it was not possible to do a similar calculation using an archetypal hidden variables theory that preserved locality.
The only thing that such a theory would predict was a less than perfect match between spin states of A and B. This was not enough to decide between quantum mechanics and a local hidden variables theory.
Bell knew that any actual experiment that found spin correlations in line with the predictions of quantum mechanics could easily be disputed.
After all, it was possible that in the future someone might develop a hidden variables theory that also exactly predicted the spin correlations for different orientations of the detectors.
Bell then made an astonishing discovery.
It was possible to decide between the predictions of quantum mechanics and any local hidden variables theory by measuring the correlations of pairs of electrons for a given setting of the spin detectors and then repeating the experiment with a different orientation.
This enabled Bell to calculate the total correlation for both sets of orientations in terms of the individual results predicted by any local hidden variables theory.
Since in any such theory the outcome of a measurement at one detector cannot be affected by what is measured at the other, it is possible to distinguish between hidden variables and quantum mechanics.
Bell was able to calculate the limits on the degree of spin correlation between pairs of entangled electrons in a Bohm modified EPR experiment.
He found that in the ethereal realm of the quantum there is a greater level of correlation if quantum mechanics reigns supreme than in any world that depends on hidden variables and locality.
Bell's theorem said that no local hidden variables theory could reproduce the same set of correlations as quantum mechanics.
Any local hidden variables theory would lead to spin correlations that generated numbers called the correlation coefficients between minus 2 and plus 2.
However, for certain orientations of the spin detectors, quantum mechanics predicted correlation coefficients that lay outside of the range known as Bell's inequality that ran from minus 2 to plus 2.
Although Bell with his red hair and pointed beard was difficult to miss, his extraordinary theorem was ignored.
This was hardly surprising since in 1964 the journal to get noticed in was the physical review published by the American Physical Society.
The problem for Bell was that the physical review charged and it was your university that usually paid the bill once your paper was accepted.
As a guest at Stanford University in California at the time, Bell did not want to abuse the hospitality he had been shown by asking the university to pay.
Instead, his six-page paper on the Einstein-Pedolsky-Rosen paradox was published in the third issue of Physics, a little red short-lived journal that actually paid its contributors.
In fact, this was the second paper that Bell wrote during his sabbatical year.
The first reconsidered the verdict of von Neumann and others that quantum mechanics does not permit a hidden variable interpretation.
Unfortunately, mis-filed by the review of modern physics with a letter from the editor going astray causing a further delay, the paper was not published until July 1966.
It was, wrote Bell aimed at those who believe that the question concerning the existence of such hidden variables received an early and rather decisive answer in the form of von Neumann's proof on the mathematical impossibility of such variables in quantum theory.
He went on to show, once and for all, that von Neumann had been wrong.
A scientific theory that does not agree with experimental facts will either be modified or discarded. Quantum mechanics, however, had passed every test it had been subjected to.
There was no conflict between theory and experiment.
For the vast majority of Bell's colleagues, young and old alike, the dispute between Einstein and Bohr over the correct interpretation of quantum mechanics was more philosophy than physics.
The shared Pauli's view expressed in a letter to Born in 1954 that one should know more Rack one's brain about the problem of whether something one cannot know anything about exists all the same than about the ancient question of how many angels are able to sit on the point of a needle.
To Pauli it seemed that Einstein's equations are ultimately always of this kind in his critique of the Copenhagen interpretation.
Bell's theorem changed that.
It allowed the local reality advocated by Einstein that the quantum world exists independently of observation and that physical effects cannot be transmitted faster than the speed of light to be tested against Bohr's Copenhagen interpretation.
Bell had brought the Einstein-Bohr debate into a new arena, experimental philosophy.
If Bell's inequality held, then Einstein's contention that quantum mechanics was incomplete would be right.
However, should the inequality be violated, then Bohr would emerge the victor.
No more thought experiments. It was Einstein versus Bohr in the laboratory.
It was Bell who first challenged the experimentalists to put his inequality to the test when he wrote in 1964 that it requires little imagination to envisage the measurements involved actually being made.
But like Gustav Kirchhoff and his imaginary black body a century earlier, it is easier for a theorist to envisage an experiment than for his colleagues to realize it in practice.
Five years passed before Bell received a letter in 1969 from a young physicist at Berkeley in California.
John Clouser, then 26, explained that he and others had devised an experiment to test the inequality.
Two years earlier Clouser had been a doctoral student at New York's Columbia University when he first came across Bell's inequality.
Convinced that it was worth testing, Clouser went to see his professor and was bluntly told that no decent experimentalist would ever go to the effort of actually trying to measure it.
It was a reaction in keeping with the near universal acceptance of quantum theory and its Copenhagen interpretation as gospel, Clouser wrote later, along with a total unwillingness to even mildly question the theory's foundations.
Nevertheless, by the summer of 1969 Clouser had devised an experiment with the help of Michael Horn, Abner Shimoni and Richard Holt.
It required the quartet to fine tune Bell's inequality so that it could be tested in a real laboratory rather than in the imaginary laboratory of the mind equipped with perfect instruments.
Clouser's search for a post-doctoral position took him to the University of California at Berkeley, where he had to settle for a job doing radio astronomy.
Luckily, when Clouser explained to his new boss the experiment he really wanted to perform, he was allowed to devote half of his time to it.
Clouser found a willing graduate student, Stuart Friedman, to help. Instead of electrons, Clouser and Friedman used pairs of correlated photons in their experiment.
The switch was possible because photons have a property called polarization that for the purposes of the test played the role of quantum spin.
Although a simplification, a photon can be regarded as being polarized either up or down, just like electrons and spin.
If the polarization of one photon along the x-direction is measured as up, then the other will be measured as down, since the combined polarizations of both photons must be zero.
The reason for employing photons rather than electrons is that they are easier to produce in the laboratory, especially since the experiment would involve numerous pairs of particles being measured.
It was 1972 before Clouser and Friedman were ready to put Bell's inequality to the test.
They heated calcium atoms until they acquired enough energy for an electron to jump from the ground state to a higher energy level.
As the electron fell back down to the ground state, it did so in two stages and emitted a pair of entangled photons, one green and the other blue.
The photons were sent in opposite directions until detectors simultaneously measured their polarizations.
The two detectors were initially oriented at 22.5 degrees relative to each other for the first set of measurements and then realigned at 67.5 degrees for the second set.
Clouser and Friedman found after 200 hours of measurements that the level of photon correlations violated Bell's inequality.
It was a result in favor of Bohr's non-local Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics with its spooky action at a distance and against the local reality backed by Einstein.
But there were serious reservations as to the validity of the outcome.
Between 1972 and 1977, different teams of experimenters conducted nine separate tests of Bell's inequality. It was violated in only seven.
Given these mixed results there were misgivings concerning the accuracy of the experiments.
One problem was the inefficiency of the detectors that resulted in only a small fraction of the total number of pairs generated being measured.
No one knew precisely what effect this had on the level of correlations.
There were other loopholes that needed to be closed before it could be conclusively shown for whom Bell's theorem told.
As Clouser and others were busy planning and executing their experiments, a French physics graduate was doing voluntary work in Africa and spending his spare time reading up on quantum mechanics.
It was while working his way through an influential French textbook on the subject that Alain Aspect first became fascinated by the EPR thought experiment.
After reading Bell's seminal papers, he began thinking about subjecting Bell's inequality to a rigorous test.
In 1974 after three years in Cameroon, Aspect returned to France.
The 27-year-old said about making his African dream come true in a basement laboratory at the Institut d'Optique Théoretique et Appliquer Université Paris Soud in Orsay.
Do you have a permanent position? Bell asked when Aspect went to see him in Geneva.
Aspect explained that he was just a graduate student aiming for a doctorate.
You must be a very courageous graduate student, replied Bell.
He was concerned that the young Frenchman could be damaging his future prospects by attempting to conduct such a difficult experiment.
It took longer than he imagined, at the outset, but in 1981 and 1982, Aspect and his collaborators used the latest technological innovations, including lasers and computers, to perform not one but three delicate experiments to test Bell's inequality.
Like Clouser, Aspect measured the correlation of the polarization of entangled pairs of photons moving in opposite directions after being simultaneously emitted from individual calcium atoms.
However, the rate at which photon pairs were created and measured was many times higher.
His experiments revealed, said Aspect, the strongest violation of Bell's inequalities ever achieved and excellent agreement with quantum mechanics.
Bell was one of the examiners when Aspect received his doctorate in 1983, but some doubts remained concerning the results.
Since the nature of quantum reality hung in the balance, every possible loophole, however improbable, had to be considered.
For example, the possibility that the detectors might somehow be signaling to each other was later eliminated by the random switching of their orientation while the photons were in mid-flight.
Although it fell short of being the definitive experiment, further refinements and other investigations in the years since have led to Aspect's original results being confirmed.
Although no experiment has been conducted in which every possible loophole is closed, most physicists accept that Bell's inequality has been violated.
Bell derived the inequality from just two assumptions. First, there exists an observer independent reality.
This translates into a particle having a well-defined property such as spin before it is measured.
Second, locality is preserved. There is no faster-than-light influence so that what happens here cannot possibly instantaneously affect what happens way over there.
Aspect's results mean that one of these two assumptions has to be given up. But which one?
Bell was prepared to give up locality. One wants to be able to take a realistic view of the world to talk about the world as if it is really there, even when it is not being observed, he said.
Bell, who died in October 1990 at the age of 62 from a brain hemorrhage, was convinced that quantum theory is only a temporary expedient that would eventually be replaced by a better theory.
Nevertheless, he conceded that experiments had shown that Einstein's worldview is not tenable. Bell's theorem told, for Einstein and local reality.
Chapter 15 The Quantum Demon
I thought a hundred times as much about the quantum problems as I have about general relativity theory, Einstein once admitted.
Bell's rejection of the existence of an objective reality as he tried to understand what quantum mechanics was telling him about the atomic world was a sure sign for Einstein that the theory contained at best, only a part of the whole truth.
The Dane insisted that there is no quantum reality beyond what is revealed by an experiment, an act of observation.
To believe this is logically possible without contradiction, Einstein conceded.
But it is so very contrary to my scientific instinct that I cannot forego the search for a more complete conception.
He continued to believe in the possibility of giving a model of reality which shall represent events themselves and not merely the probability of their occurrence.
Yet in the end, he failed to refute Bohr's Copenhagen interpretation.
About relativity he spoke with detachment, about quantum theory, with passion, recalled Abraham Peiss, who had no Einstein in Princeton.
The quantum was his demon.
I think I can safely say that nobody understands quantum mechanics, said the celebrated American Nobel laureate Richard Feynman in 1965, ten years after Einstein's death.
With the Copenhagen interpretation as firmly established as the quantum orthodoxy as any papal edict issued from Rome, most physicists simply followed Feynman's advice.
Do not keep asking yourself if you can possibly avoid it, but how can it be like that, he warned.
Nobody knows how it can be like that.
Einstein never thought it was like that.
But what would he have thought of Bell's theorem in the experiments showing that it told for him?
At the core of Einstein's physics was his unshakable belief in a reality that exists out there, independently of whether or not it is observed.
Does the moon exist only when you look at it?
He asked Abraham Peiss in an attempt to highlight the absurdity of thinking otherwise.
The reality that Einstein envisaged had locality and was governed by causal laws that it was the job of the physicist to discover.
If one abandons the assumption that what exists in different parts of space has its own independent, real existence, he told Moxborn in 1948, then I simply cannot see what it is that physics is meant to describe.
Einstein believed in a realism, causality and locality.
Which, if any, would he have been prepared to sacrifice?
God does not play dice, said Einstein, memorably and often.
Just like any modern-day advertising copywriter he knew the value of an unforgettable tagline.
It was his snappy denunciation of the Copenhagen interpretation and not a cornerstone of his scientific world view.
This was not always clear, even to someone like Born who knew him for almost half a century.
It was Pauli who eventually explained to Born what really lay at the heart of Einstein's opposition to quantum mechanics.
During Pauli's two-month stay in Princeton in 1954, Einstein gave him a draft of a paper written by Born that touched on determinism.
Pauli read it and wrote to his old boss that Einstein does not consider the concept of determinism to be as fundamental as it is frequently held to be.
It was something that Einstein told him emphatically many times over the years.
Einstein's point of departure is realistic, rather than deterministic, explained Pauli, which means that his philosophical prejudice is a different one.
By realistic, Pauli meant that Einstein assumed that electrons, for example, have pre-existing properties prior to any active measurement.
He accused Born of having erected some dummy Einstein for yourself which you then knocked down with great pomp.
Surprisingly, Born, given their long friendship, had never fully grasped that what really troubled Einstein was not dice-playing but the Copenhagen interpretation's renunciation of the representation of a reality thought of as independent of observation.
One possible reason for the misunderstanding may be that Einstein first said that God is not playing at dice in December 1926 when he tried to convey to Born his unease at the role of probability and chance in quantum mechanics and the rejection of causality and determinism.
Pauli, however, understood that Einstein's objections went far beyond the theory being expressed in the language of probability.
In particular, it seems to me misleading to bring the concept of determinism into the dispute with Einstein, he warned Born.
At the heart of the problem wrote Einstein in 1950 of quantum mechanics is not so much the question of causality but the question of realism.
For years he had hoped that he may yet work out the quantum puzzle without having to renounce the representation of reality.
For the man who discovered relativity, that reality had to be local, was no place for faster than light influences.
The violation of Bell's inequality meant that if he wanted a quantum world that existed independently of observers, then Einstein would have had to give up locality.
Bell's theorem cannot decide whether quantum mechanics is complete or not, but only between it and any local hidden variables theory.
If quantum mechanics is correct, and Einstein believed it was, since it had passed every experimental test in his day, then Bell's theorem implied that any hidden variables theory that replicated its results had to be non-local.
Bohr would have regarded as others do the results of Allen aspects experiments as support for the Copenhagen interpretation.
Einstein would probably have accepted the validity of the results testing Bell's inequality without attempting to save local reality through one of the loopholes in these experiments that remained to be closed.
However, there was another way out that Einstein might have accepted, even though some have said that it violates the spirit of relativity, the no signaling theorem.
It was discovered that it is impossible to exploit non-locality and quantum entanglement to communicate useful information instantaneously from one place to another, since any measurement of one particle of an entangled pair produces a completely random result.
After performing such a measurement, an experimenter learns nothing more than the probabilities of the outcome of a possible measurement on the other entangled particle conducted at a distant location by a colleague.
Reality may be non-local, allowing faster than light influences between entangled pairs of particles in separate locations, but it is benign, with no spooky communication at a distance.
Whereas aspects, team and others who tested Bell's inequality ruled out either locality or an objective reality, but allowed a non-local reality.
In 2006, a group from the universities of Vienna and Gdansk became the first to put non-locality and realism to the test.
The experiment was inspired by the work of the British physicist Sir Anthony Legget.
In 1973, and not yet knighted, Legget had the idea of amending Bell's theorem by assuming the existence of instantaneous influences passing between entangled particles.
In 2003, the year he won the Nobel Prize for his work on the quantum properties of liquid helium, Legget published a new inequality that pitted non-local hidden variable theories against quantum mechanics.
The Austrian-Polish group led by Markus Aspelmeier and Anton Zeilinger measured previously untested correlations between pairs of entangled photons.
They found that the correlations violated Legget's inequality, just as quantum mechanics predicted.
When the results were published in the journal Nature in April 2007, Alan Aspect pointed out that the philosophical conclusion one draws is more a question of taste than logic.
The violation of Legget's inequality implies only that realism and a certain type of non-locality are incompatible. It did not rule out all possible non-local models.
Einstein never proposed a hidden variables theory, even though he seemed to implicitly advocate such an approach in 1935 at the end of the EPR paper.
While we have thus shown that the wave function does not provide a complete description of the physical reality, we left open the question of whether or not such a description exists.
We believe, however, that such a theory is possible.
And as late as 1949, in a reply to those who had contributed to a collection of papers to mark his 70th birthday, Einstein wrote,
I am, in fact, firmly convinced that the essentially statistical character of contemporary quantum theory is solely to be ascribed to the fact that this theory operates with an incomplete description of physical systems.
The introduction of hidden variables to complete quantum mechanics seemed to be in accordance with Einstein's view that the theory is incomplete.
But by the beginning of the 1950s he was no longer sympathetic to any such attempt to complete it.
By 1954 he was adamant that it is not possible to get rid of the statistical character of the present quantum theory by merely adding something to the latter without changing the fundamental concepts about the whole structure.
He was convinced that something more radical was required than a return to the concepts of classical physics at the sub-quantum level.
If quantum mechanics is incomplete only a part of the whole truth, then there must be a complete theory waiting to be discovered.
Einstein believed that this was the elusive unified field theory that he spent the last 25 years of his life searching for, the marriage of general relativity with electromagnetism.
It would be the complete theory that would contain within it quantum mechanics.
What God has put asunder let no man join together was Pauli's caustic judgment on Einstein's dream of unification.
Although at the time most physicists ridiculed Einstein as out of touch, the search for such a theory would become the holy grail of physics as the discoveries of the weak nuclear force responsible for radioactivity and the strong nuclear force that held the nucleus together
brought the number of forces that physicists had to contend with to four.
When it came to quantum mechanics there were those, like Werner Heisenberg, who simply accused Einstein of being unable to change his attitude after a career spent probing the objective world of physical processes which runs its course in space and time independent of us according to firm laws.
It was hardly surprising Heisenberg implied that Einstein found it impossible to accept a theory asserting that on the atomic scale this objective world of time and space did not even exist.
Born believed that Einstein could no longer take in certain new ideas in physics which contradicted his own firmly held philosophical convictions.
While acknowledging that his old friend had been a pioneer in the struggle for conquering the wilderness of quantum phenomena, the fact that he kept himself aloof and skeptical about quantum mechanics born lamented was a tragedy.
As Einstein gropes his way in loneliness and for us who miss our leader and standard bearer.
As Einstein's influence waned, Bohr's grew. With missionaries like Heisenberg and Pauli spreading the message among their own flocks, the Copenhagen interpretation became synonymous with quantum mechanics.
When he was a student in the 1960s, John Clouser was often told that Einstein and Schrödinger had become senile and their opinions on matters, quantum, could not be trusted.
This gossip was repeated to me by a large number of well-known physicists from many different prestigious institutions.
He recalled years after becoming the first to test Bell's inequality in 1972.
In stark contrast, Bohr was deemed to possess almost supernatural powers of reasoning and intuition.
Some have even suggested that while others needed to perform calculations, Bohr did not.
Clouser recalled that during his student days, open inquiry into the wonders and peculiarities of quantum mechanics that went beyond the Copenhagen interpretation was
virtually prohibited by the existence of various religious stigmas and social pressures that taken together amounted to an evangelical crusade against such thinking.
But there were unbelievers prepared to challenge the Copenhagen orthodoxy. One of them was Hugh Everett III.
When Einstein died in April 1955, Everett was 24 and studying for his master's degree at Princeton University.
Two years later he obtained a PhD with a thesis entitled, On the Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, in which he demonstrated that it was possible to treat each and every possible outcome of a quantum experiment as actually existing in a real world.
According to Everett, for Schrödinger's cat trapped in its box, this would mean that the moment the box was opened, the universe would divide, leaving one universe in which the cat was dead and another in which it was still alive.
Everett called his interpretation the relative state formulation of quantum mechanics and showed that his assumption that all quantum possibilities exist led to the same quantum mechanical predictions for the results of experiments as the Copenhagen interpretation.
Everett published his alternative in July 1957, with an accompanying note from his supervisor, the distinguished Princeton physicist, John Wheeler.
It was his very first paper, and it went virtually unnoticed for more than a decade.
By then, disillusioned by the lack of interest, Everett had already left academia and was working for the Pentagon, applying game theory to strategic war planning.
There is no question that there is an unseen world, the American film director Woody Allen once said.
The problem is, how far is it from Midtown and how late is it open?
Unlike Allen, most physicists balked at the implications of accepting an infinite number of coexisting parallel alternative realities, in which every conceivable outcome of every possible experiment result is realized.
Sadly, Everett, who died of a heart attack aged 51 in 1982, did not live to see the many worlds interpretation as it became known, taken seriously by quantum cosmologists as they struggled to explain the mystery of how the universe came into being.
The many worlds interpretation allowed them to circumvent a problem to which the Copenhagen interpretation had no answer.
What act of observation could possibly bring about the collapse of the wave function of the entire universe?
The Copenhagen interpretation requires an observer outside the universe to observe it, but since there is none, leaving God aside, the universe should never come into existence but remain forever in a superposition of many possibilities.
This is the long-standing measurement problem writ large.
Schrödinger's equation that describes quantum reality as a superposition of possibilities and attaches a range of probabilities to each possibility does not include the act of measurement.
There are no observers in the mathematics of quantum mechanics.
The theory says nothing about the collapse of the wave function, the sudden and discontinuous change of the state of a quantum system upon observation or measurement, when the possible becomes the actual.
In Everett's many worlds interpretation there was no need for an observation or measurement to collapse the wave function, since each and every quantum possibility coexist as an actual reality in an array of parallel universes.
This problem of getting the interpretation proved to be rather more difficult than just working out the equations, said Paul Dirac, 50 years after the 1927 Solvay Conference.
The American Nobel laureate Murray Gell Mann believes part of the reason was that Niels Bohr brainwashed a whole generation of physicists into believing that the problem had been solved.
A poll conducted in July 1999 during a conference on quantum physics held at Cambridge University revealed the answers of a new generation to the vexed question of interpretation.
Of the 90 physicists polled, only four voted for the Copenhagen interpretation, but 30 favored the modern version of Everett's many worlds.
Significantly, 50 ticked the box labeled none of the above or undecided.
The unresolved conceptual difficulties, such as the measurement problem and the inability to say exactly where the quantum world ends and the classical world of the everyday begins, have led to an increasing number of physicists willing to look for something deeper than quantum mechanics.
A theory that yields, maybe, as an answer, says the Dutch Nobel Prize winning theorist Gerard Toft, should be recognized as an inaccurate theory.
He believes the universe is deterministic and is in search of a more fundamental theory that would account for all the strange counter-intuitive features of quantum mechanics.
Others like Nikolas Gissin, a leading experimenter exploring entanglement, have no problem thinking that quantum theory is incomplete.
The emergence of other interpretations and the claim to completeness of quantum mechanics being in serious doubt have led to a reconsideration of the long-standing verdict against Einstein in his long-running debate with Bohr.
Can it really be true that Einstein, in any significant sense, was as profoundly wrong as the followers of Bohr might maintain, asks the British mathematician and physicist Sir Roger Penrose,
I do not believe so. I would, myself, side strongly with Einstein in his belief in a submicroscopic reality and with his conviction that present-day quantum mechanics is fundamentally incomplete.
Although he never managed to deliver a decisive blow in his encounters with Bohr, Einstein's challenge was sustained and thought-provoking.
It encouraged men like Bohm, Bell and Everett to probe and evaluate Bohr's Copenhagen interpretation when it was all prevailing and few distinguished theory from interpretation.
The Einstein-Bohr debate about the nature of reality was the inspiration behind Bell's theorem. The testing of Bell's inequality directly or indirectly helped spawn new areas of research, including quantum cryptography, quantum information theory, and quantum computing.
Among the most remarkable of these new fields is quantum teleportation, which exploits the phenomena of entanglement.
Although it appears to belong to the realm of science fiction, in 1997 not one but two teams of physicists succeeded in teleporting a particle.
The particle was not physically transported, but its quantum state was transferred to a second particle located elsewhere, thereby effectively teleporting the initial particle from one place to another.
After having been marginalized during the last thirty years of his life because of his criticism of the Copenhagen interpretation and his attempts to slay his quantum demon, Einstein has been vindicated, in part.
Einstein versus Bohr had little to do with the equations and numbers generated by the mathematics of quantum mechanics. What does quantum mechanics mean? What does it say about the nature of reality?
It was their answers to these types of questions that separated the two men. Einstein never put forward an interpretation of his own because he was not trying to shape his philosophy to fit a physical theory. Instead, he used his belief in an observer-independent reality to assess quantum mechanics and found the theory wanting.
In December 1900, classical physics had a place for everything and almost everything in its place. Then Max Planck stumbled across the quantum and physicists are still struggling to come to terms with it.
Fifty long years of conscious brooding, said Einstein, had not brought him any closer to understanding the quantum. He kept trying to the end, taking solace in the words of the German playwright and philosopher Gotholt Lessing. The aspiration to truth is more precious than its assured possession.
This concludes the reading of Quantum, Einstein, Bohr and the Great Debate about the Nature of Reality, by Manjeet Kumar. Copyright 2008 by Manjeet Kumar. This book was read by Ray Porter.
This unabridged recording was published by Arrangement with W. W. Norton and Company Incorporated and was produced in 2010 by Blackstone Audio Inc. which holds the copyright.
