I was walking behind these three women,
and one of the women turns to one of the other women
and goes, I would never date a guy who's not
seeing a psychologist.
And then all of the other women were like, mm-hmm.
Yes, I agree.
And what I realized is that their psychologists
had accepted into all three of these women independently
and enough, and this is a common enough thing,
that apparently women can just say
this within certain social circles
and assume that everyone will have the same brainwashing,
that you cannot be mentally healthy
without seeing a psychologist.
That was what was implied was what was being said.
That is the highest horror
of psychologically mispractice
that a like same thinking psychologist could imagine.
That a psychologist had convinced them
of largely two things.
One is, you can't be psychologically healthy
without seeing a psychologist.
And then two is, you can't be psychologically healthy
without continuing to see a psychologist.
They were creating dependency in their patients
to get a recurring stream of revenue.
Now, what this cult of psychology does
is people go to a psychologist with a problem,
and they then say, oh, that problem is likely tied
to a trauma early in your life.
Let's determine what this trauma is,
and then we can constantly meet about this trauma,
because if you don't have me acting as a constant bulwark
against this trauma, then it will fall upon you
and you won't be able to live a mentally healthy life.
And that's dependency.
This is actually the mechanisms
that Scientologists would use.
They would do a theme reading,
and they would ask you questions about things
like your parents or other things
that happened early in your life.
And then they would say, ah, you have some trauma
with your mom or your trauma with your dad.
And that's essentially what this cult of psychology is doing,
which is interesting to me that you have this one field
that is so vilified for milking people from their money
and creating dependency, which is Scientology.
And then you have this other field,
which Scientology labels as like the highest evil,
which is the psychologist,
but in a way it's because they're competing
for the same customers using the same mechanisms.
Oh, wow.
Why there is this fight here.
Would you like to know more?
Hello, gorgeous.
Hello, Simone.
It's wonderful to be here with you today.
What are we talking about?
Psychology.
Are you ready?
So people may not know this.
I started my early career in neuroscience and psychology.
So yes, I did some early work in brain-computer interface,
but before that, I was a psychologist
who focused on schizophrenia and stuff like that,
but also like more general psychology stuff.
And recently I have become horrified
and very disappointed in the field
because it seems to be turning into a cult.
And I mean that very literally
and as terrifyingly as it could possibly be interpreted.
So to people who don't know this about psychology,
one of the things that all young psychologists
are taught about when you're just starting out in psychology
is the horror of the fad that was hypnosis.
Because it turns out that when somebody comes to you
and you're in a position of authority over them,
it is very easy to implant memories in their mind
using specific procedures.
Many of those look like hypnosis,
but they also look like other things.
This is one of these big things
that they always teach you early in psychology.
It's that memories are not actually
that great a predictor of whether or not something
actually happened the way it's being remembered happened.
And this is all important for court psychologists
and stuff like that, but the real tragedy comes
when people go to a psychologist
to try to work out some problem they have.
And then that psychologist through mechanisms
that we now know can implant memories in a person's mind,
which is hypnosis, implant a bunch of memories of trauma
in someone's mind and then use those memories of trauma
to justify why that person is seeing a psychologist.
And then historically, there were many cases
of using those memories of trauma to cut the person off
from people who would have broken them out of the cult,
gotten them away from the psychologist.
There's the famous case of a young girl
who accused her father of rape,
which it seems he almost certainly did not do.
And yet he went to trial over this and everything
really had damage to his life.
And when I'm doing editing,
I'll find the name of the case and put it on screen here
because it's this really heartbreaking case
of how easy it is to accidentally brainwash someone
if they come to you as a psychologist.
And so there was this moment not too long ago
where I was in a room of really high profile people.
I'm talking about like top level people in our society,
controlling things and stuff like that.
And I was walking behind these three women
and one of the women turns to one of the other women
and goes, I would never date a guy
who's not seeing a psychologist.
And then all of the other women were like,
mm-hmm, yes, I agree.
And what I realized is that their psychologists
had accepted into all three of these women independently
and enough, and this is a common enough thing
that apparently like women can just say this
was in certain social circles and assume
that everyone will have the same brainwashing,
that you cannot be mentally healthy
without seeing a psychologist.
That was what was implied was what was being said.
That is the highest horror
of psychologically mispractice
that a like same thinking psychologist could imagine.
That a psychologist had convinced them
of largely two things.
One is you can't be psychologically healthy
without seeing a psychologist.
And then two is you can't be psychologically healthy
without continuing to see a psychologist.
They were creating dependency in their patients
to get a recurring stream of revenue.
This doesn't come as a surprise, right?
Because when we talk about governance
and we talk about what makes people do what they're doing,
when you have a career in which you maintain clients
and have repeat clients
because they continue to need your services,
any psychologist, psychotherapist, therapist, whatever,
counselor who is really good at their job.
That is to say helping people not need counseling
or therapy or psychoanalysis or whatever anymore.
If you're really good at your job, you lose your customers.
If you are really good at creating dependency
and reinforcing someone's mental struggles,
then you have a thriving career and customer base,
especially if they think that they need you
and that you are somehow helping even while you're secretly
or subconsciously making things worse.
So there's this huge adverse incentive,
one that we also really complain about
in the nonprofit world where the nonprofits
that tend to stick around and survive
are those which raise money effectively,
not which solve their problem effectively.
So I guess we're seeing the same problem in psychology
as we are in the world of nonprofits,
which is the successful psychologists are those
that are very good at getting clients dependent on them.
Correct?
So I think that this is a really critical point
that you've made Simone,
which is I don't think that anyone has really gone into this
or that many people have gone into this
with nefarious intentions,
nor do I think it's a problem in how psychologists are taught
because I was warned against this going into psychology.
The problem is that if you're a good psychologist,
you earn less money.
If you have less money, you have less room for advertising,
less money for advertising, less money for client acquisition,
and you have lower margins,
which mean you can get less high profile clients often.
So really what you're seeing,
and I think the reason you see this in the
quote unquote elite levels of psychology
more than I think the general psychological audience,
although I don't know how widespread this practice is,
is because of the people who either subconsciously
or accidentally fall into this practice
of accidentally brainwashing their patients
into thinking they need a psychologist constantly,
economically out-compete the psychologists
who aren't doing this practice.
And I think that this is one of those things
where no one is acting nefariously.
Nobody went into this saying,
I want to incept people with the idea
that they can't be mentally healthy without one
continuing to see me or two,
that they should cut themselves off
from everyone who's not seeing a psychologist
in terms of their sort of personal, emotional life.
But that's also a really interesting thing.
If psychologists tell people,
also the people who you are engaged with in your life
need to see a psychologist,
that's additional customers, right?
If it's, oh, well, you should stop interacting
with your parents unless they're also seeing a psychologist.
By the way, here's my card.
By the way, you shouldn't date people
unless they're also seeing a psychologist.
By the way, here's my card.
And so there's many elements
of how this sort of cult accidentally can evolve.
And I think that some psychologists
have some of these practices and not others.
And some psychologists,
I'm not saying all psychologists
are part of this cult movement.
What I'm saying is that it does exist
within the psychology movement.
And even when I talk to people with a psychology background
who aren't caught up in this,
they're like, oh God, yeah, I've definitely seen that.
And it's really scary.
So let's talk about the way
that psychology is generally supposed to work
when you go to see a psychologist.
And then we can contrast that
with the way you know you're dealing with probably
a bad psychologist or a psychologist
who is creating dependency.
It is typically you go to a psychologist
and you have some issue.
And what they are supposed to do
is help you rewrite your internal self-narrative
so that thing that is an issue
is either not an issue
or not debilitating to your daily life.
That is what a good psychologist does.
You might go to a psychologist
believing that you have some sort of a crippling problem
that you can't get out of
and they work with you to not have a crippling problem
that you can't get out of
and not have to see a psychologist anymore.
Now what a quote, unquote evil psychologist does,
this cult of psychology does
is people go to a psychologist with a problem.
And they then say,
oh, that problem is likely tied to a trauma
early in your life.
Let's determine what this trauma is.
And then we can constantly meet about this trauma
because if you don't have me
acting as a constant bulwark against this trauma,
then it will fall upon you
and you won't be able to live a mentally healthy life.
And that's dependency
because they're saying without me acting
as this sort of bulwark.
And what is really fascinating is when I was younger,
I was interested in joining cults.
So like not, I didn't want to join a cult.
I was interested in how people could be convinced
to believe things.
It seemed obviously not true to me.
And one of the things I did is I went to a number
of like psychology recruitment sessions,
not psychology, Scientology.
Sorry, the brady and slip of the tongue there.
I went to Scientology recruitment sessions.
And this is actually the mechanisms
that Scientologists would use.
They would do a theme reading
and they would ask you questions about things
like your parents or something like that
or other things that happened early in your life.
And then the theme reading is basically
a galvanic spin response.
So they could tell when you would get nervous.
And then they would say,
ah, you have some trauma with your mom
or your trauma with your dad,
depending on how you reacted galvanic spin response wise
to their questions around this stuff.
And that's essentially what this cult of psychology is doing,
which is interesting to me that you have this one field
that is so vilified for milking people from their money
and creating dependency, which is Scientology.
And then you have this other field
which Scientology labels as like the highest evil,
which is psychologists.
But in a way, it's because they're competing
for the same customers using the same mechanisms.
Oh, wow.
Why there is this fight here.
And interesting when Scientology evolves,
that was during one of the periods
where this is one of those really interesting things.
So if you go back to Christian science,
a lot of people are like,
oh, isn't that ridiculous
that they don't want to use modern medicine?
However, actually, if you look at the time period
when Christian science evolved,
modern medicine might have actually lowered life expectancy
because that was back when they were doing leeches
and bone cuttings and everything.
And so it actually made sense during that time.
If you look at during the early evolution of Scientology,
this was happening during the hypnotherapy epidemic.
So they might have actually had a point
that their mechanisms that was actually interesting
is their mechanisms might have been prescient
of the direction psychology was going to go 30, 40 years
in the future, which is just fascinating to me
that we now see them as evil.
And yet they were just creating dependency
in the same way psychologists do.
Now, of course they didn't go as far.
And so what psychologists have
that the Scientologists didn't have
was certain regulatory organizations
which can just bar them and stuff like that
so that they couldn't go quite as far
with molesting people or something
or creating essential slaves or any of the other things
that of course, for legal reasons,
I'm not saying Scientology has ever done any of these things.
But what I'm saying is that the tech,
if they might, because it's such a centralized organization,
they wouldn't have the same system
for preventing these kinds of extreme levels of abuse.
But that doesn't mean that the core techniques
that they're using aren't the same techniques,
that the field of psychology had allowed itself
or has allowed itself to drift into.
And this terrifies me.
Let me add another layer of complexity though,
because as much as this is terrifying
and as much as we frame this as like people unknowingly
entering into these relationships
where dependency is created and then turned into victims,
part of me wonders if this is an open secret
because we've had this conversation with friends,
we've had this conversation with people quite frankly
because we find it interesting.
And we've met many people
who have undergone really hard mental periods
that their lives most people have, I think,
who have ended up independent relationships with therapists
and just flat out told us,
yeah, I see a therapist a couple of times a week,
it's gotten to the point
where my insurance doesn't accept them anymore,
I'm paying out of pocket for this.
So this is obviously a big investment.
I know that this is a dependent relationship,
but also it's been a big help for me.
And even though I know that this is not right, I need this.
This is one of the problems with psychological biases
is you can know you have a psychological bias
and it doesn't help you get out of it.
You can know that you're in a culture,
in a dependent relationship,
but the psychologist has effectively created this dependency.
You can't easily leave it.
That's one of the problems.
You essentially need cult deprogramming to get out of this.
And does such a thing exist?
What can we say to our friends who are in those positions
or if someone's watching this video and they're like,
oh, wait, yeah, I am in a codependent relationship.
I'm paying out of pocket for someone.
This is really, it's not sustainable.
And obviously my problem's not going away, right?
Like I still have crippling anxiety
or this terrible traumatic thing that's interrupting my life.
What would you say to them then?
There is no cult deprogramming for therapists.
I think that that's the key is solving it yourself.
If you don't, if whenever you give your mind,
your mental state to another person,
you create enormous personal vulnerability.
And so yes, it's harder to do it on your own.
But the truth is that the things that the psychologists
are taught about how to engage us,
someone are just not that complex.
They're gonna say they are, they really aren't.
It's just personal narrative building stuff,
which you can read about in the Pragment Just Guide to Life.
But if you aren't interested in that,
then try to find another psychologist,
interview them early on like you should a psychologist.
And I would say the big red flag is the more a psychologist
is focused on the concept of trauma,
especially trauma as an immutable thing,
as not a goal to get over,
then they are likely on the evil side
or the dependency creating side.
If they are focused on either not focused on trauma
or their focus on trauma is helping you overcome
the trauma entirely, then they are likely,
more likely to be on the positive side.
But what's interesting is I've noticed that these ideas
that have been incepted into people
have worked their way in a way
into mainstream progressive politics,
where people now define themselves by their traumas
and they see them as like a major part of their self identity.
And I think what's really interesting
is other religious movements used to have defenses against this.
And this is one of the things we talk about
in the Pragment Just Guide to Crafting Religion
is that a lot of religious movements
essentially had roles that were like psychologists.
I mean, of course they did, right?
This isn't a new need for people
to some extent within the Jewish community,
like that's what your rabbi would do.
And in the Mormon community, you know,
you have solutions to this.
And within these communities,
because they didn't use psychologists to recruit people
in the way that Scientologists did,
they were genuinely interested in mental health.
And one of the best mental health focused communities
or systems that evolved to do this
that I just have endless admiration for
is the Catholic system.
So what the Catholic system is, the confession system,
what it allows you to do is go to someone,
say, this is something bad I've done
or this is something I've done
that is causing mental trouble for me or something like that.
And what they don't say very importantly
is know that thing wasn't actually bad.
They don't say, oh no,
you're just automatically forgiven for it,
which is what the Bible says, you know, as you repent,
but it's actually a better system
than even what I think from a psychological standpoint,
is to say, yes, what you did is bad.
Here is a concrete list of things you can do
to atone for the bad thing you did.
So it's an acknowledgement of the badness
and then creating a self-narrative within the person
that they can overcome that
through following this list of things.
Now, of course, they're also creating dependency
to the church to some extent, right?
Oh, you need to keep going every time you do a bad thing.
But what's really admirable about the system they created
is it's a very difficult system to abuse,
either accidentally or on purpose.
The pseudo anonymity of the system
makes it harder for a person to form a dependency
on a single individual.
The high level of ethics around not talking about,
and this is like a really important thing
for Catholic periods,
you cannot say what was told to you in confession,
even if it could save someone's life
or it prevent a murder,
which is actually higher than the level of trust
you have with your psychologist.
If you go to a psychologist and you say something
that says just that you could kill someone else
or self-harm, they actually have a duty to report you,
like serious risk of your own life,
where the Catholic priest has a higher level of trust
in that.
And even if you have a dumb person
who could accidentally give a person bad advice,
they're actually working within a fairly narrow range
of answers they can give you.
And it's really hard for them to give an answer
that creates that much psychological damage.
So there are mechanisms for better systems in this.
The problem is that these mechanisms aren't available
to the masses or to the secular
or like religiously derived masses
that are no longer in these traditions
that offer services like this.
So I know you don't really like alcoholics anonymous,
for example, because what it has become
is actually quite corrupted
and it has various adverse incentives at play.
It's another example of an organization
that was started with good intent,
but essentially has become a cult,
but that's for a different video.
Right, that's for a different video.
And not all of it, factions of it.
I do want to ask you about their buddy system.
You know, that you, when you go into AA,
there's a lot of stuff that is whatever,
but one of the things that you do have,
rather than a therapist, rather than a priest
that you confess to, rather than a centralized authority,
you just have another one of the people of this group
who shares your struggle being your accountability buddy.
And it seems like sometimes these people have,
they've been through it more than you have,
but at least, so they're more advanced.
Yeah, so what are they really doing?
They're preventing you from leaving AA.
You could say they're preventing you
from getting back on alcohol,
but just as much of preventing you
from getting back on alcohol,
they consider a failure scenario two things.
You getting back on alcohol or you leaving AA.
What are your thoughts on, and we'll say-
And this is where the whole idea
to take a step aside here.
This is where the concept of a dry drunk within AA
comes from, if anybody doesn't believe me.
Look at this concept.
Many people in the cult version of AA
believe that quitting alcohol through a mechanism
other than AA is as bad as continuing to be an alcoholic,
which to me shows the point is staying in AA.
It's not getting off alcohol,
which is what I mean when I say this is a cult,
and it's not all of AA.
And the same way it's not all psychologists,
but the buddy system-
Let's return to mechanisms that people can turn to
if they don't turn to a therapist,
if they're not Catholic and they don't wanna go to confession.
Do you think a buddy system,
so someone maybe who's been through the same thing
that you have or someone that you really trust as a friend
is a good alternative to just figuring it out by yourself?
Cause I don't think everyone's really ready for that.
Just a side note,
as somebody who really studied cults and loves cults,
buddy systems are really common in cults.
It's one of the most common systems.
We love Mormons, we'll have a video on them in the future,
but Mormons due to an extent use a buddy system
during a person's mission trip
to prevent them from deconverting
so that they have somebody they can turn to constantly,
but that also is supervising them to an extent.
And when you look at cults,
actually one of the reasons why cults historically
use buddy systems is for converting people.
But what some cults found,
and there's some great research on that,
that was actually done by the cults themselves
because they kept records,
I think the Mooneys were the ones who did this,
is it was never approached somebody as an individual
because they'll think that it's like a sexual thing
or like you're hitting on them or something
or like it's weird.
But if you approach them with a buddy,
which is the smallest group you can do this with,
they have a much higher chance of not being afraid of you
and not seeing you as threatening.
So yes, buddy system is actually often a sign
that you're joining a cult.
And I need to stress, I don't think Mormonism is a cult,
they just, the buddy system is there to prevent deconversion.
But to the point that you were making,
can a buddy system be good?
It may be good,
but I really think the ultimate buddy system is a spouse.
And what you really have to type is spouse
that can help you work through these things for yourself,
which Simone does for me all the time,
I've been brainwashed by my spouse.
That's really what I'm saying here.
I've been brainwashed
into just having absolute mental dependency on my spouse.
Well, what I hear you saying is,
buddy systems are a viable therapy mechanism.
Isn't that what someone who had brainwashed me would say?
Hmm.
No, I know what I'm saying is buddy systems may work,
but they're not a terribly good system.
Well, I think a buddy system is a really good system
if you're trying to opt into someone's lifestyle or solution.
So if you think-
If the buddy system is managed by an organization
that you can have total trust,
has your best interest at heart.
I'm referring to a friend.
I'm referring to a spouse.
I'm referring to a mentor.
I'm not referring to anything that's organizationally related.
I'm referring to the dynamic of someone that you trust
helping you work through something.
Well, then you better have total trust in them
because you know what, that buddy,
there's a reason why there's all these rules
against sleeping with your psychologist and stuff like that.
If you're a female and that buddy's a male,
they're probably gonna try to sleep with you
unless you have like enormous trust in them or vice versa.
No, this is how people create dependency.
This is how I understand
if you have total trust in the person you're going with
in this buddy system, great.
But the problem is that you can often misjudge someone.
And when you use someone to be this kind of sounding board,
you outsource the keys to your mental kingdom
to someone else,
which puts you in a position
of enormous mental vulnerability.
But Malcolm, I think what you're missing
is when people are severely depressed,
when people are severely traumatized,
they may not have-
So the question should be solved
with pharmacological intervention
and potentially even more extreme interventions
like electroshock therapy
works really well for extreme depression.
There are solutions to the more extreme psychological problems.
This is same for things like schizophrenia
and stuff like that.
But those aren't psychologist problems.
Those are psychiatrist problems.
It's a different fricking degree, okay?
It's a different, it's a completely different level.
One prescribes things and the other doesn't.
Go to the one that prescribes things
if that's what you're looking for.
If you're looking for solutions
that you can't come to yourself
or you can't come to with a buddy.
And I do agree, a buddy,
all I'm doing is highlighting the importance
of understanding that if you go to a buddy,
trust that buddy,
but the truth that you could probably trust a buddy
better than you can a random psychologist.
That is true.
Like the only thing you really have faith
that the psychologist isn't going to do,
is there likely not or less likely going to
do something that's just absolutely egregious to you.
But they are much more likely
to just create a generic dependency.
Whereas a buddy may have a slightly higher probability
of doing something absolutely egregious,
but a much lower probability
of creating general dependency.
So long as you prepped in with framing for this,
which the pragmatist got into life,
which is our shortest book by far
and sells for 99 cents and all the profits go to charity.
So like we created it actually when we wrote that book,
it was to try to create an alternative to CBT.
CBT is actually a great system.
We just wanted an alternative
that people with less training could use
was more reliability.
CBT standing for cognitive behavioral therapy.
But it was originally meant to be a
if then training manual for psychologists.
And actually an AI was going to be trained on it
to become a psychologist.
One AI team reached out to us after reading it.
If you read it and you're like,
this sounds like a psychologist training manual.
That's actually the way it was written.
And so it could actually help you in that scenario
to prevent the more extreme ways
you might engage with something,
but then also just self-reflection
with this very simple concept.
And I'll present the concept to you.
You have an internal self-narrative.
Who you are, what your role is in the world,
what events have caused you trauma,
how you relate to those trauma.
This is all part of your self-narrative.
It's the narrative you tell yourself.
The core goal of this person you're going to
is for you to go to them,
say this is how I would like to rewrite my self-narrative
or this is my self-narrative today
and here's how it's causing me problems.
And to work with you in rewriting that self-narrative,
which is actually self-narratives are incredibly malleable.
Even though we pretend in society today
like they are this immutable part of who we are,
they are not.
It's very, like research shows are very malleable.
So you're going to this person to rewrite your self-narrative
into one that is less damaging to your daily life
or your goals for who you want to be or yourself.
And that's just a very doable thing.
You don't need to read the book,
just go into it with that concept.
We'll also understanding that this person
who's rewriting your self-narrative could rewrite it
to say, you absolutely need to keep seeing me
and giving me money and give me all your money.
And then do all these things I tell you to do
or you will never be mentally healthy.
And that's the danger.
So that's the red flag to look for.
Speaking of red flags,
we have to go get our kids from daycare.
So let's go run, run, run, get that.
And I will start dinner.
I love you so much, Malcolm.
I'll see you soon.
