When you look at our prison system,
the vast majority of people in it are at very low accused.
And when you deny that they had a systemic disadvantage
when compared to you,
when you tell people to throw that out,
that what?
You are taking the most vulnerable people in our society
who are in a situation to do something
they had no control over and completely acting
like they had the same advantage as you did in life.
It is sick.
It is sick.
It is not moral.
And you need to get your fucking shit together
and actually look at the data
instead of trying to blow smoke in people's faces.
So you can play your little virtue game, okay?
Because people are suffering for your bullshit.
And so you can feel like a hero
without having to challenge actual real world problems
and fix them and take responsibility for the advantages
that you were born with, which other people worked.
He ends up making an argument that needs to say
that he has achieved everything
that he has achieved in life
without systemic advantages.
And he has just willed himself to this place that he is.
Simultaneously while flaunting that systemic advantage
right in every sense, like to a fault,
like to a point of illegibility.
Would you like to know more?
So Malcolm, what if I told you that obviously
wealth doesn't predict success
because there are tons of millionaires and billionaires
who just do nothing with their lives
and piss away all their money.
And obviously being like super, super poor,
like under the poverty line is a problem.
But above a certain level,
it really doesn't matter about how much money you have.
Oh, I think that would make a lot of sense.
I think that's exactly the type of thing
a wealthy person would argue.
Right, though.
So I got to talk about how we got on this topic.
We had a fan of the show stay over at our house
because they happened to be passing through the area.
And one of the things that they mentioned
because they were like, well, this is an area
where I question something that you guys talk about a lot.
Specifically, he believed that IQ didn't matter at all.
And the reason he believes this
is because another smart person who he looked up to
had argued this very passionately,
specifically Naseem Taleb.
He wrote this medium post about this
called IQ is largely a pseudoscientific swindle.
And I read this medium post
and I saw it as a really interesting opportunity
because self-contained within the post itself
was the proof that he was manipulating data
and essentially lying to the reader.
But what we want to try to do on this episode
is to not just show that, yes, IQ likely does matter,
but give you the tools necessary to,
even if you don't understand the scientific language
was which a person is arguing,
i.e. in this case advanced statistics,
even if you don't understand that,
understand the telltale signs that a person is lying to you
and be able to tell that they are lying to you
even if you don't understand what they are saying.
And better than all of that, get to deeper truths
than you even could from reading an article
from the perspective of somebody who agreed
with what he is true or what you already believe.
And by that, what I mean is if somebody
who really believes in career is invested in IQ mattering,
writes an article that IQ matters,
well, they can't really trust it
even cause they might be lying with statistics as well.
If somebody who deeply believes IQ doesn't matter
or at least tries to argue that
has sprinkled throughout his article
little admissions to where IQ does matter,
you can know that at least in those areas
it definitely matters because he has everything at stake
in showing that it doesn't.
So that's why learning to read articles
in this way is really important.
Now, before we go further with this,
I wanna elaborate on the analogy
that Simone started the show is
because I think this is where we're going as a society.
And a lot of these people today
who were born with advantages over people,
born with usually really high IQs,
and then they pretend like they've achieved
everything that they've achieved on their own,
it is not the look that they think it is.
It's very much the new, I don't see race.
Pretending you don't see a systemic advantage
that you have had over other people your entire life
and taking credit being like,
well, I was starting from the same position they were
is not humble, okay?
It is dehumanizing and it is cruel and evil
and it prevents us as a society
from potentially solving systemic issues
for people who weren't born with your immense privilege.
I say this to Nassid because he is somebody
who was born with this immense privilege.
Yeah, he's clearly someone who is very smart
and who benefits from a high IQ.
And if he were to in good faith take an IQ test,
he would probably end up with a very high IQ score.
Like it's pretty apparent.
I wanna start off too with some caveats that like,
you know, a lot of what he says is we agree with,
you know, IQ, like if you have a really high IQ,
it doesn't mean you're gonna be super successful,
obviously not, you know, this is why with our school
we select for I will as we say and not IQ
because, you know, being really smart
does not predict success, but he claims
that's what like IQ enthusiasts also claim,
which is not, it's just not true.
So he makes a lot of false claims on that.
I just wanna say that we agree.
He also says a really key thing with IQ is like it,
where it is most predictive and where it is the biggest deal
is where there's really low IQ, but he seems to like,
I don't know, just discount that.
That's not important when actually like,
it's been a really big deal.
This is why lead remediation, you know,
like reducing lead exposure for populations
has been such a big deal.
He also-
Which was caught and measured through IQ.
This is the place where IQ in public policy
has had a positive impact on the lives
of pretty much everyone living on earth today.
Yeah, because people were willing to admit that,
you know, the low IQ is a problem.
And then also he talks about, you know,
people misusing IQ often in very unsavory, disgusting ways.
You know, he points to racism a lot.
That's totally true.
But all sorts of messed up people use like misuse,
all sorts of science and pseudoscience
and other nonsense to forward their agendas.
Just because you see one idiot use something in a poor way,
doesn't mean it's not, you know,
it's not a relevant field in other ways.
So-
Before we go further with this,
I think we can break this down into a few core points
when you're analyzing an article like this.
Okay, okay.
Yeah, let's do it.
So one is you're looking for what the motivation is.
Then you want to look at the data sets that they present.
You want to look at what they think the alternatives are
that they're presenting.
If IQ doesn't matter, what are the alternatives?
You need to look at where they concede
that the other side has points.
And you need to look at what I call repeated hand flails.
A repeated hand flail is a really bad argument
that is used repeatedly
and that is obviously a bad argument,
but that at first glance can seem
like it's a really powerful argument.
So I'll start with a repeated hand flail
that he uses throughout the piece.
Because it's really obvious and it really got on my nerves.
Which was IQ doesn't matter
because the same individual,
if you test them again with an IQ test,
on average that test is going to differ
from their first score by about a third of standard deviation.
And that's a big difference.
And therefore that proves that IQ tests don't matter.
Now, I ask a person to just,
and this is how when you're hearing something like this
and you're like, okay, he's using a lot of words
like the standard deviation
and comparing this to different parts of the IQ stuff.
Ignore all of that.
Just use your common sense, okay?
So replace IQ test with a different test.
Like a biology test, right?
Like I'm taking a 10th grade biology test
and I am comparing my knowledge of biology
to the other students in the room's knowledge of biology.
Now, if I retake that test,
if you retake any test about,
you are going to differentiate from your previous results
by about a third of a standard deviation.
If it's like a really big test.
That's just normal.
Anyone should know,
you're not gonna get the same results
like every time you retake a test.
That's a normal function of tests.
However, that being the case,
that doesn't mean that biology test
isn't measuring anything
in terms of a student's knowledge of biology.
Interesting biology.
And so this is the first thing.
When they are criticizing something,
like if they're continually using an argument, think,
okay, but is there something else
that we all generally agree on?
That the bar is a good way
to measure how good a lawyer is doing
or that driver's exams are a good way to measure,
do these have different results
when a single individual retakes the test?
And the answer is yes.
Well, then why does he keep bringing this up?
Why is it so important?
It is because, well,
it's just a weird rhetorical tactic
he keeps going back to.
Yeah, I think connected to this kind of
is at the very beginning,
and this was like a big trigger for me.
He says technical backbone,
like he links to a technical backbone
as here's just like at the top of his article,
here's my link to basically what he implies is,
oh, if you really wanna understand why I'm correct
and you wanna see it on a technical standpoint,
an academic peer reviewed standpoint,
this will explain everything.
And you click over to it and it's just a research journal
article pointing to examples
of people mistaking correlation with causation.
It isn't actually related to the arguments
he makes in his blog post.
And it's one of those things that really bothers me
because often people will link to something
and be like, oh, here's what backs up my argument.
And it, I mean, usually it's at least broadly related
to their argument.
This even wasn't really related to his argument.
He sometimes argued that, oh,
people don't understand correlation and causation.
But yeah, that really bothered me.
People are like, read this other thing.
You mentioned that I would note as well,
should be a big red flag with people.
Smart people can write in a way
that dumb people can understand.
Yes.
When we were right, people like who watch our channel
and stuff like that, they sometimes accuse us of talking,
like we have a theothorus in front of us.
Okay, whatever.
I don't think that we do that.
To me, I talk really plain
and that reminds me of that scene in Idiocracy
where they're like,
I think it might be because of these drugs the army put me on.
But if you could just get me well enough
to get back to base.
Right.
Kick ass.
Well, don't want to sound like a dick or nothing,
but it says on your chart that you're fucked up.
You talk like a fag and your shit's all retarded.
What I do is just saying thing.
Yeah, you know what I mean?
Like, no, I'm serious here.
I need help.
There's that fag talk we talked about.
But yeah, and there's that scene
where he's just trying to talk a normal
and the other person just from a different cultural group
here that is intentionally training to sound erudite.
Well, but he does really gatekeep throughout this essay.
For example, like in one sentence,
well, however, if you take up a perian,
havenky and view of intelligence in another sentence,
he's IQ doesn't detect convexity of mistakes.
Like, what?
So with the point being here is what I was saying,
is that for us, when we use words that sound,
I don't know, it's a somebody different from us
that we're using as the source or something,
they are still intelligible in context.
They are not intentionally meant to get a viewer
to disengage or sort of shut down
and just listen to the other one.
And be like, oh, I guess I'll have to take your word for it
because I don't understand this
and therefore you must be smarter than me.
So I'm just gonna assume that you're right.
Yeah.
And I would say that if you notice that happening in a piece
and never ever take away from that,
this person knows what they're talking about.
Yeah, but can you believe he's like literally
in an article that he's using to disprove IQ as like a thing,
he's using IQ correlated vocabulary nonsense.
Using SAT words.
Yeah, I'm like, the fuck, you know, he talks always,
he's like, you know, this isn't Gaussian.
And okay, you know what, honestly,
like I've been out of academia long enough
to have forgotten that Gaussian was in reference
to a normal distribution.
He could have just said normal distribution.
This man who apparently throughout his writing
makes it very clear that he really hates academia
uses a lot of academic speech,
which is also really interesting.
The techniques and I love the first point you mentioned,
which is a huge red flag.
If somebody says, here's a source
and the source has nothing to do
is what they're talking about really
or is really just meant to shit on academics.
That's all it was trying to do.
And he doesn't say that's what this is.
You need to be aware that at the very outside of this piece,
he's saying, I am willing to mislead you
to try to make my point.
That is what is being signaled here.
But first we gotta go back to this framework I set up.
Okay, so what is his motivation with this piece?
Because he cites his motivation
throughout the piece very plainly.
He cites very clearly that he believes
that if IQ is a real thing, then the racists are correct.
And racists will be able to implement racist policy,
which will hurt people if IQ is a real.
This is like second paragraph.
People bent on showing that some populations
have inferior mental abilities
based on IQ equals intelligence.
Those have been upset with me for robbing them
of this quote unquote scientific tool.
His goal right here, he lays it out.
Second paragraph, I am trying to rob racist of a tool.
Now see the way I read that section
is he gives a bulleted list
and he's like basically IQ was something championed by,
first he says racist and eugenicists,
and second he says psychometrics peddlers
looking for suckers.
And I thought what he was trying to do there
was basically associate this domain
with unsavory people and exploitative people.
I think he also uses the association to discredit
anyone who talks about IQ, but just saying they're racists.
Okay, so he's using it for two reasons.
But it is very clear from the piece
that he believes that if IQ is a real thing,
then the racists are right.
I get in the outro, the argument that quote unquote,
some races are better at running,
hence inference about the brain is stale,
mental capacity is much more,
he goes over this over and over.
It is very clear.
So he's implying that all races are equally good at running?
No, he's implying that doesn't mean that there would be,
okay, listen to this point.
This is actually a really good point
of somebody messing with you.
The argument that quote,
some races are better at running,
end quote, hence some inference about the brain is stale,
mental capacity is much more dimensional
and not defined in the same way,
running a hundred meter dashes.
What?
So what he's saying is that because this is a more
complicated thing to measure,
that it axiomatically doesn't vary
between different ethnic groups.
Oh, okay, right, right, right.
Because intelligence is harder to measure
and like nail down in this glommy weird thing.
It's just a hand wave.
Now there are reasons why,
and we have done videos on this,
why if you can measure anything in a group,
measure anything in a group.
And it's clear that he believes this
and this is why he is so sold on this point.
You can measure anything in a group like tennis ability.
You are going to find systemic differences between groups.
That's just natural.
The reason why IQ based race realism is irrelevant,
and we've done this before,
is because it changes so quickly in your generation.
If you look, like we were looking,
okay, we had 50 embryos, like just our family.
And we choose five embryos out of those 50
based on IQ, pure generation with existing technology.
And our kids only marry other families who did that.
Within just five generations,
the average member of our family would be three standard
deviations higher in IQ
than the average American citizen today.
And keep in mind that within the next 75 years,
we're likely looking at IQ dropping
by a standard deviation.
So for like just astronomically higher.
And what this shows is that it doesn't matter.
This would be true if we were black.
This would be true if we were Asian.
IQ doesn't matter not because it doesn't differ
between groups.
Everything, if you measure it,
if you can put a number to it,
it's going to differ between groups.
But any selective or evolutionary bottle,
like you're trying to say.
It matters because it doesn't persistently differ between.
And it can quickly change.
And it matters a lot more what like family you come from
or what religion you come from.
Yeah, or what environment you're in
with the selective pressures are.
What small, yeah.
So that's why it doesn't matter.
But he hasn't thought of that argument.
And so he is just completely dedicated
because he knows the moment you could put,
and this becomes very clear later in his argumentation,
the moment you could put a number on general competence
that there would be differences between ethnic groups.
Because of course, I mean, they might be minor differences,
but people would still pick up on that.
And then that motivates racism.
And you can actually tell this is his core motivation
by, again, I say, what is he proposing
as the alternative to IQ, right?
So if he was being, I think, genuine,
I just think IQ tests are bad
and we could be measuring this better,
you would be proposing a way to measure it better.
But he doesn't propose a way to measure it better.
Yeah, that's true.
And we would respect that.
I mean, I think we inherently under,
we would agree with him that current measures of IQ,
they could definitely approve.
But let's, I want to read this.
If you want to detect how someone fares at a task,
say, loan sharking, tennis playing,
or a random matrix theory, make him or her do that task.
We don't need theoretical exams for real world function
by probability challenge psychologists.
So think about what this is saying
and how completely insane this is.
He is actually saying that I am unwilling
to have any sort of broad measure
of competence put on a person.
And the reason he has to take this position
is because whatever measure of competence he found,
you would find differences in it between groups.
So he needs there to be no standard measure of competence
given his world framing that he has laid out.
If you can put a measure on people's competence,
then it will differ between groups
that it can be used by racists to promote their agenda.
That is a core thing.
So going into this piece,
he's going into it with the world perspective
that if you could put any sort of broad measure
of competence on a group, that it will lead to racism.
And so we should not have that.
But think about how insane that would be for a society.
That would also mean, well, you can't have SATs.
You can't really have any sort of a broadly applicable test.
Every test that needs to only study
what a person is about to do.
But the problem is that we hire people
and we accept people into college.
Based on totally unrelated.
To do broad ranges of tasks.
One of the core places like he was using
as he mentioned in the piece, is in the military.
And that's because you need a broad spectrum of knowledge.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Well, it doesn't seem to be predictive of outcome.
And again, we want to emphasize here that we're not,
we don't disagree with the basic argument he's making.
The school that we're designing,
whenever possible, tests people through natural assessments.
Hey, can you write content that audience,
like widespread audiences?
Okay, well, let's see if you can write a fan fiction
that a lot of people read.
Like we believe in natural assessments
and we believe that's the best way to tell
if someone's good at something,
but we also are practical.
Yeah, well, I think also at the same time,
we accept that some people are born
with an intellectual state that gives them
a huge systemic advantage over other people.
And this, again, it's not an ethic thing.
As we said, it changes so quickly
and it's irrelevant to tie this to ethnic groups.
But, and again, in most of these gene people,
you go to these genetics channels, right?
And they'll tell you on these channels,
yeah, it looks like in the developed world
in the next 75 years, IQ in the developed world
is going to drop by about one standard deviation.
And then they're also like complaining.
It's also, so the developed world is mostly white people.
That means white people on average
will be dumber than everyone else
because we're not seeing this effect
in the developing world.
So it's one of these things we're still play that game.
It's not, it's not.
If we were going to go back to the wealth analogy,
obviously like first, and we also agree,
having a super high IQ doesn't mean obviously
you're going to be super successful.
There are lots of people with crazy high IQs
who do absolutely nothing,
who do a lot of really dumb stuff.
However, when you have a really high IQ
and you also have a bunch of other factors,
like drive, ambition, values, a vision for something,
you are going to have a much easier time achieving things.
And it's just, it's similar to having a lot of wealth.
There are tons of billionaires and millionaires
who genuinely don't do anything very interesting.
Ignoring your privilege is not a virtue.
Yeah.
So I got to continue with the piece of them.
So the, so what you see here, first of all,
is that the solution he's arguing is impractical
and specifically caters to the reason he wrote the piece.
Now, another thing to note is you need to go through
and see, okay, where does he concede
that the other side makes a good point?
Never, never.
No, he does.
Oh, no, he does.
I guess when he says that basically like super low IQ
does have an impact, right?
He does admit that.
No, but he says something
that absolutely destroys the entire piece.
Really? I missed that.
Yes, I will read it
because he says it so dismissively
that you could miss what he's saying.
Okay.
Okay.
The best measure, charlatans.
IQ is reminiscent of risk charlatans
insisting on selling value at risk var
and risk metrics saying it's the best measure
that best measure being unreliable
blew them up many times.
Note the class of suckers for whom a bad measure
is better than no measure across domains.
Now, Simone, you just heard that
and you probably heard nothing
because when it was written poorly,
it was structured poorly.
It didn't really get across this point,
but it did make a concession.
Okay.
A very important concession
that IQ actually is the single best measure
that we have access to for adult success.
He conceded it's the best measure.
He just thinks even being the best measure,
it is not a good enough measure.
Because it isn't perfect.
Because it's imperfect.
And therefore we shouldn't use it at all.
But the fact that he has now conceded
that out of all conceivable measures ever developed,
it is the best one.
That kind of sinks everything else
that he's talking about.
Because what that means is that when you're dealing
with broad base science,
which regularly needs to use something like this,
like land in the water hurting a population,
or is this academic solution working or not working?
Or is IQ declining in a population?
Or is IQ increasing in a population?
In another part here,
he mentions the Flynn effect should warn us,
not just that IQ is somewhat environmentally dependent,
but that it is at least partially circular.
So he's saying he concedes when IQ measures
support his belief system.
Then they're real.
Then they're real.
Which is that IQ is nutritionally based to some extent
is shown by the Flynn effect.
And I had the reverse final thing,
but the Flynn effect means that the Flynn effect is real.
So he's willing to use it when it supports his worldview
and he distances himself from it
when it goes against his worldview.
Oh dear.
And then the final thing that I would say is,
and he fortunately does this for you, the reader,
is look at the actual data points the person is using.
He will put up data points and be like,
oh, look, the data points are all over the place.
And I'm gonna put them on the screen for the viewers here.
But if you actually look at these data points,
you could eyeball what it would look like
if you drew a line through this scatter plot.
It would look like a line going up into the right.
I know, but he seems to not understand,
I don't know, linear regression.
No, so he believes that because there is high variability
and keep in mind high variability once a person is rich.
So basically he concedes two things.
He concedes that low IQ matters and that IQ
is really highly determinant of how much money you make
under a certain amount of money.
However, anyone who even does believe in IQ,
like us would largely say, yeah,
but people who are earning like over a hundred K a year,
the amount that they earn is largely just luck-based.
It's not based on competence.
Anyone would tell you that.
But most people are earning under that amount.
And that is why we focus on things like IQ
because that's where it is determinant.
So, hold on, but this is just like more broadly.
The real key thing was a piece like this,
when you're going through it,
is to look for what they are conceding
because that can tell you the few things
that are really strongly true.
The points he concedes is that IQ is the best measure
we have available to us right now
of correlating with adult success.
He does concede that it works really well
for low paying jobs and that low IQ
does really seem to hurt people.
He does concede that it works really well
for things like the military.
He does concede that, so across all of these areas,
I think what you can see is that,
yeah, IQ probably is a really useful measure.
And all of this comes back to-
But you forgot, he also makes this argument
that it's immoral.
He cleans the concept as immoral.
He uses that word.
The concept of IQ is immoral.
And again, this comes to,
now this comes looking outside of a piece, right?
So, before I was like, okay, don't look outside the piece,
but you can just sanity test it.
Be like, okay, well, if IQ is a bad measure
of competence, right?
Does it correlate?
What other things do I correlate
with competence as an individual?
Or do the person think broadly,
I guess if I was trying to determine
how good a group would be at, say,
graduating from college,
because adults have a very big financial incentive
to be able to determine that.
Well, they don't use IQ tests.
What are they using?
They're using SMH to Google.
What's the correlation between IQ tests and SAQ?
0.84, like really high, like very high correlation.
And so this is the problem.
All sort of tests of intelligence,
because intelligence is cross-correlated across domains,
are going to correlate with each other.
If I was looking at a school,
and I was looking at people who were scoring well
on biology tests, I could broadly guess and bet
pretty effectively that they would also score better
than other students on history tests or on mass tests.
And this is why when you're looking at things like IQ,
but then what's interesting,
and a lot of people might not know this,
is that then you expand this to other domains.
You look at the probability of raping someone.
It's also a lot lower.
You look at their probability of being in jail.
It's also a lot lower.
You look at their probability of murdering someone.
It's also a lot lower.
You look at their probability of getting in a car accident.
It's also a lot lower.
Generally, within any of these things,
it's almost, I'm not gonna say it's irrelevant
what you're measuring,
because some are better measures than others,
but you're clearly measuring something
if it's cross-correlated against
all of these different domains.
And so I think a lot of people will try to like blow smoke
in your face,
and it's really good to be able to recognize
when they're doing that.
And for them, like I even think from his perspective,
ideologically, what's at stake for him?
One, he thinks if IQ can be proven to be real,
that means that racism is right, which it doesn't.
As we have copiously pointed out on this show,
it is not intergenerationally,
durably tied to an ethnic group enough to matter.
But anything that you can measure and put a number to
is obviously going to differ between population groups.
Duh, but that doesn't mean like one is better
or something like that.
It would, I guess, if it didn't change in between generations,
but it changes so, so, so quickly.
And then the second is that he ends up making an argument
that needs to say that he has achieved everything
that he has achieved in life
without systemic advantages.
He has just willed himself to this place that he is.
Simultaneously, while flaunting that systemic advantage.
In every sense, like to a fault,
like to a point of illegibility.
Yeah, and if you look at people like Simone and I,
I will admit that I, well, actually I don't think
I have a high IQ.
Well, I do have a high IQ.
I do have a high IQ when it's measured.
What I mean is that Simone might not mention this,
but she's in the top fraction of a percent.
She was measured recently for the autism exam,
but hold on Simone, I won't brag on you.
So what we do need to know is that the way that my brain
works when it comes to things is different enough
that it's not just like being smart.
Like typically when I start something,
I'm really bad at it.
Like when I started high school,
I was in the top, you know, half of my class.
I know I graduated obviously really near the top,
but I started bottom half.
When I went to SAT prep, I remember I almost got laughed
out of the room because I said I wanted to go
to Harvard or Stanford,
which obviously I did end up going to for MBA,
but they were like,
but you are the single lowest scores
in the entire prep class.
What are you talking about?
So I'm one of these people who always starts
like really lower than other people.
And then somehow ends up,
if I'm just persistent at something,
really sort of figuring out and getting it to click
at the end of the day.
But I think it might just be
because I see things differently,
but this seeing things differently
has to have some genetic component.
The advantages I have over other people,
I should never deny them
because that removes my ability to empathize
with an individual who tells me,
you don't understand.
I can't just do this thing
that you went out there and did.
Well, I wonder,
so one argument that Naseem Tileb makes also in his essay,
which we haven't, I think touched on a whole lot,
is like, you know, only pencil,
like paper pusher academic types
who to play with bureaucracy in follow direction
perform well on IQ tests.
And I mean, to your point, right?
You as actually a very anti-authoritarian anti-bureaucracy,
I'm not gonna fucking listen to you kind of person,
do really suck at a lot of IQ,
correlated whatever tests in the beginning,
but you also have the good sense and tenacity
to learn the system.
And I think a lot of what these tests
may also be measuring is people's willingness
to work with the system to their personal advantage.
And a lack of willingness to work with that system,
a lack of willingness to adapt and read directions
and listen is, you know,
regardless, they might not be measuring intelligence,
but it's measuring-
It's measuring willingness to learn
how to do what you need to do to get ahead in life.
And let's keep in mind what IQ is really measuring
because I think a lot of people miss this.
It is not, we use it as a quote unquote intelligence measure,
but it's really, it's claimed to fame
is that it has the highest corollatory factor
with life outcomes and that like economic outcomes mostly,
but other life outcomes.
And that's what we're looking at.
That's why we care about it as a statistic.
And I would say life outcomes were intelligence matters.
I would argue that the amount that you make
over 100K a year, your intelligence doesn't matter.
You're mostly dealing with luck at that point.
And so it does not surprise me at all
that it wouldn't be correlated at that point.
But in his world of, I guess, ultra smarty pants
who have made billions of dollars a year,
like that's where he's applying it
instead of at population levels.
Yeah, I think a lot of people like him,
people like him, I don't know if they, for years,
have even come into contact with people
who have an IQ like below 110, they just don't.
So I think it's also hard for them to even understand
like the true variance in IQ that's out there
and the effect that it has on people.
Yeah, and I would say the most important reason
why IQ matters right now and why people need
to be paying attention to IQ right now,
especially when he's, well, IQ only matters
when it's really low.
Well, if we're dealing with a quickly dropping IQ
for genetic reasons, which it looks like we are about,
again, one standard deviation drop in the next 75 years,
is what we see not just from IQ
being measured in developed countries,
we see this, the polygenic scores.
This is like the genetic makeups
as they are correlated to IQ.
We can see them appearing at a lower and lower frequency
in genetic banks over time.
We can then correlate the genes associated with a high IQ
and look at what other things they're highly tied to.
They are extremely highly tied
to a person's fertility success.
So the same genes that are correlated with IQ
are also correlated with low success in fertility situations.
Like you're looking at a car
and you can measure how fast it goes and predict that.
You can predict how fast it might go
by looking at its engineering.
You can read a report about how fast it's supposed to go
and all of these numbers correlate.
That's sort of what we're looking at with this IQ drop.
If it turns out that's real and we are ignoring that,
well, then IQ is really gonna fucking matter
because almost all of us in the developed world
are going to be at this incredibly low level of IQ
that even he says,
oh, this actually does have a very big effect.
And that's a problem that you ignore this
because it says something.
Yeah, it's kind of like being like,
well, money makes no difference
unless you're like impoverished.
And yet like humanity's moving in this direction
toward poverty and let's just ignore the issue though
because it doesn't matter at all.
Yeah.
And so, yeah, I just wanted to close out with that.
That is the number one reason
why we can't just ignore IQ right now,
even though it might be convenient to ignore IQ right now.
And it's a shame, but, and as we pointed out,
IQ being real does not support the racist positions
so long as you are actually familiar
with the genetics of IQ.
It is because IQ is so heritable
that it doesn't matter from an ethnic perspective
because it's extreme level of heritability
is what allows it to change so quickly intergenerationally.
Yeah, which thank goodness.
And how persistently tied to an individual's ethnicity.
Yeah.
I mean, and let's be clear,
we would prefer a world in which everyone had
the same potential for achievement on everything.
You know, like a blank slate world would be way cooler.
We would prefer to be in one.
But, you know, to pretend that is how it is
just because you feel like that's a more moral world
doesn't mean it's a more moral world, right?
You could be like, oh, death is immoral.
So I don't believe in it,
but that's not going to change the fact
that you're going to die.
So.
Well, and it can cause you to make decisions
that hurt a lot of people.
And that's what gets me the most about this.
You know, when you look at our prison system,
the vast majority of people in it are at very low accused.
And when you deny that they had a systemic disadvantage
when compared to you,
when you tell people to throw that out,
that what you are taking the most vulnerable people
in our society who are in a situation
due to something they had no control over
and completely acting like they had the same advantages
you did in life.
It is sick.
It is sick.
It is not moral.
And you need to get your fucking shit together
and actually look at the data
instead of trying to blow smoke in people's faces.
So you can play your little virtue game, okay?
Because people are suffering for your bullshit.
And so you can feel like a hero
without having to challenge actual real world problems
and fix them and take responsibility for the advantages
that you were born with, which other people worked.
And there you have it.
I love you.
Yeah, there we have it.
Okay.
Have a good one, Simone.
You too, gorgeous.
For anyone who wants to go to that pronatalist conference
that's being held in Austin,
a few points of clarification.
We are not running it.
We have no control over who's going.
We don't make any money from it.
However, we will be speaking there and we will be there
and we would be happy to meet up with people
who watch our show if you happen to be in the area.
Might even put something together
if you guys reach out and we get a critical mass of people.
We have secured a discount code for our fans,
which is pronatalists all caps.
And it should get you about 30% off the price of a ticket
if you are going.
Again, this is not affiliated with the foundation,
but if we can make things cheaper for our fans,
we're gonna do it.
And if we can meet with people
who are interested in this topic
or further evangelize our brand of pronatalism,
we are very excited to take every opportunity
we can to do that.
