This really shocked me because it was the more conservative Mormons, the ones who would be considered more extremists, who thought that we were more similar to Mormonism in our beliefs, and it was the less conservative Mormons who thought that our beliefs were more distant from Mormons.
If you look across the Mormon tradition, when I started talking to more Mormons and more conservative Mormons about the way they think like the metaphysics of the universe actually works, there is more diversity within Mormon beliefs.
Then there is within any other religion that I'm aware of.
What's extra interesting is there's both that diversity, but also this like quiet, like we don't talk about this diversity.
Yeah, we don't talk about this.
We don't talk about it.
So let's talk about one here, right? Like multiple mortal prohibitions, right?
This was fascinating to me because it has shown that I fundamentally misunderstood Mormonism in our previous videos on Mormonism.
Would you like to know more?
Well, this is very exciting.
I get to use my new fancy speaker because it's because it's metal like it right now.
I feel like I'm holding a frozen rod of ice right now.
It is so cool.
Is this your new camera?
Yeah.
OK, well, I am really excited for this episode and I am always so disappointed when there's an episode that like I absolutely love.
But like we don't get a bunch of watches on it or something.
No one's going to watch this.
Yeah, I don't know.
In terms of watching something that I thought I didn't want to watch, I watched all of Saturday Warriors per your request and it was cheesy and it was.
But oh my gosh, I cried.
I cried.
I cried.
So people who aren't familiar with Saturday Warriors, it was recommended to us because we've been talking a lot with a Mormon fan of the show to try to understand the religion better.
And he suggested that we check out this movie.
And it is really interesting because he said that like it gives a good example of why a lot of Mormons had a lot of kids.
So you can see their perspective.
And throughout the entire movie, you're having your heart strings pulled by this little girl who's stuck in heaven because her parents haven't had a kid yet.
And they haven't had all their kids.
They haven't had the seventh kid that they were supposed to have.
Eighth kid.
Eighth kid.
Emily, what's wrong?
I'm the last kid to be born.
What if by that time, mom and dad don't want me?
But I've seen lots of families make promises and then break them.
Not us.
Emily, I will see to it personally that you're not forgotten.
You promised to me?
I promise.
Yeah.
And then the other another one of their kids, the bad guys in this, you want to talk about getting us on board with you?
Bad guys in this were called Population Zero.
And they were a rock band that had seduced one of the sons into thinking abortion was cool and population reduction was cool.
Look at this.
Erlich says that population growth will lead to famine.
And in this decade, hundreds of millions of people will starve to death.
So what's the solution for his population control?
Well, people will need to be coerced, but it's for a good cause.
I mean, it's the only answer unless you don't like eating.
I think it's a little extreme.
Come on.
Well, this is serious.
People need to stop having so many kids.
No offense.
Jimmy, how come your parents can't keep their hands off each other?
You want to find out?
The earth is sick and we are the cancer.
Every day the babies are destroying the world.
Eating all our applesauce, what can we do?
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
Far out, man.
Play that again.
Just messing around, man.
No, Jimmy, for real this time, and keep that melody.
Every day the world is getting smaller by fall.
Bursting at the seams, what can we do?
Your population is the answer, my friend.
Without it, the rest of us are doomed.
Who can survive?
Who can survive?
Not one of us will be a...
Literally, anti-natalist rock band.
Hilarious.
Right?
Can you get more?
But this whole line of conversation started for us.
It was a really interesting moment for me.
I was on stage, and I have talked with the transhumanist Mormons before,
like the weird, technophilic Mormons,
which I think a lot of Mormons would consider kind of different from mainstream Mormons.
And the fact that our ideology and our belief system really aligns closely with theirs,
that did not surprise me at all.
Right.
Here's what shocked me.
So we're on the stage, it's Kevin Dolan.
Kevin Dolan is of the conservative faction of Mormons.
So much so that he's often, when people talk about like the Deseret Nationalists,
that's who they're talking about.
The Mormon separatists.
However, Mormon extremists disregarded federal warnings and established Port Joe Smith
deep inside the arachnid quarantine zone.
Too late, they realized that Dantana had already been chosen by other colonists.
Arachnids, would you like to know more?
So that's the faction.
And we were on stage and he just came out,
because I thought that he would see our religious beliefs,
our synthetic religious beliefs where we say,
okay, broadly in years from now, if our people alive,
they're probably going to be closer to gods than humans.
And that this, or the way we would think of a god than a human,
and that they wouldn't relate to time the way we relate to time.
And so it's sort of like a self-manifesting entity that is influencing us today.
So he saw this, he actually related it to interstellar.
He said, your beliefs are basically interstellar, right?
I don't know, I haven't seen it recently, but I was like, yeah, sure, why not?
And he's like, that is just Mormon.
Like he's like, you guys are basically just Mormons.
And that surprised me.
Because that did not align what I understood a conservative Mormon would think.
And I was like, wait, wait, wait, wait.
And so then I started talking to some other Mormons who were at the conference
about Mormonism.
And they're like, yeah, you guys are just Mormons,
or your beliefs are very similar to Mormon beliefs.
And this really shocked me because it was the more conservative Mormons,
the ones who would be considered more extremist,
who thought that we were more similar to Mormonism in our beliefs,
or as they would say at the Church of Latter-day Saints.
And it was the less conservative Mormons who thought that our beliefs were more distant from Mormons.
Isn't that wild?
Well, it's not wild when you dig into it.
Yes, right.
This was fascinating to me because it has shown that I fundamentally misunderstood Mormonism
in our previous videos on Mormonism,
and in our previous writings on Mormonism,
because I fundamentally one misunderstood,
well, the biggest thing is I misunderstood how they determine what they think is true.
And there's a very interesting thing that Mormons do
that no other faith in the world I'm aware of,
because like we have studied a lot of faith.
And none of the other ones do this.
Which is if I go to one Mormon and I say,
hey, I've heard a lot of Mormons believe X,
or like church fathers believe X and have talked about X frequently.
So like two examples here might be like eternal progression
or like multiple mortal prohibitions.
These are two things we'll both talk about on this podcast.
It is not infrequent if they do not believe in multiple mortal prohibitions or eternal progression.
They'll just say, no, no large group of Mormons have ever believed this.
None of the common Mormons ever believed this.
None of the church fathers ever believed this.
And many of you point to them like texts, like no,
like this is in like stuff that was put out by by major church fathers.
They'll then say, okay, maybe some Mormons do believe this,
but they are influenced by the devil.
What really influenced by the devil?
Yeah, this is regularly what you see.
And this is fascinating to me because like Protestants, for example,
I'm, I'm, you know, if you're talking about like pre-millennialist
or post-millennialist Protestants,
so people who don't know what I'm talking about here,
in the conservative Protestant community,
one of the biggest debates is does Jesus like,
like does the rapture happen before the tribulation
or does the rapture happen after the tribulation?
Do like, like devout Christians actually have to go through this period of tribulation
or will they be raptured beforehand?
And then the period of tribulation has been to help people, you know,
anyway, nuanced discussion, but none of them are going to say,
no, there's not some other group that has this other view.
And if there is, they're, they're being manipulated by the devil.
They're like, no, we have a serious difference in faith.
And we study this and, and these are the arguments from my faith.
So there's people out there who are mistaken, but you know, they're not like demons.
Well, and, and, and the, the reason why,
so this has really confused me about Mormonism,
because whenever I tried to study Mormonism in the past,
if I was going to get like a broad view of Mormonism,
I actually would always get the best broad views from people who had left the church.
Hmm. Yeah.
Well, often those are the people who are talking about it.
Well, yeah.
So, and I should point out, I'm not saying that Mormons never disagree about this stuff,
but if you want to see like the actual disagreements that Mormons are having,
go to the comment section on Mormon blogs.
Don't go to the articles themselves.
And this then came to why would the conservatives be more accepting of our beliefs than the non-conservatives?
Why would they think that our beliefs are closer to Mormon beliefs?
And this is because the more sophisticated Mormon theology,
the more interesting Mormon theology from my perspective,
and, and frankly, it's sort of wackier, wackier in that it is less in a line with just generic in theology,
actually typically the older Mormon theology,
or the Mormon theology you would know if you dug really deep into Mormon history.
Well, I mean, that was really interesting about one way that it was explained to us.
Is it like from like most really unique LDS theological concepts,
you need to have an IQ of at least 130 and most like most Mormons don't.
They don't really care.
They're not really involved in it.
And it's really about the lifestyle and even a lot of leadership,
just like theology is not like the primary thing of action here.
It's, it's.
I'll actually read a quote from one of the early church fathers,
which I found very interesting and quite prophetic of our own belief system.
Orson Pratt, this is the guy who was born in 1811, wrote this, right?
And, and so when I first went to them, I was like, yeah, but you know,
we believe that like intergenerationally,
like we don't believe that everyone's going to inherit their own planet one day or something like that.
And they're like, oh, no, no, no, that's not actually.
So they pointed me to this Orson Pratt quote,
but not everyone's going to inherit their own planet one day.
Some people will as humans, like similar to humans as we are today,
will be elevated to a state of Godhood.
And they're like, some Mormons believe that some Mormons believe other things.
You should look at what the actual, you know, quotes from these early church fathers.
So I'm going to read this quote by Orson Pratt.
This is on whenever he uses the word intelligence, he's talking about the soul.
And so he sort of has this hypothesis that maybe the soul exists as individual soul particles,
which when people die, can break apart and reform.
So like we may have some soul particles in us that previously came from like plants or something like that.
So we say we can suppose that these particles possessed of the power to move themselves would not have exerted that power during the endless duration proceeding their organization.
If they were once organized in the vegetable kingdom, and then disorganized by becoming the food of celestial animals,
and then again reorganized in the form of spirits of animals, which is a higher sphere of being,
then is it unreasonable to suppose that the scene particles have from eternity been passing through an endless chain of unions and disunions,
organizations and disorganizations until at least they are permitted to enter into the highest and most exalted sphere of organization in the image of God.
So that's really fascinating.
And here's a quote from Brigham Young.
When the elements in an organized form do not fill the end of their creation, they are thrown back again, like Brother Kimball's old potteryware to be ground up and made again.
So you hear these two and these purport an idea of sort of human souls going through a cycle in which they eventually become God like souls through this sort of forging and reforging process,
which is actually really, really similar to our belief if you made it entirely materialistic.
Isn't that something the idea that like our kids are a part of us in a chance to improve on us, you know, intergenerationally and that they have, you know, what we would think of as the soul, which is the collection of ideas and genetics that make us up.
They have aspects of that but reforge to improve and that eventually this thing will become a deity.
Very, very, very, very, very, very similar beliefs, but these are early church beliefs.
And so early Mormons like Mormons who are of the most conservative faction would align more with these earlier beliefs than the more modern church beliefs.
And so the question would be why did the church changes beliefs, and this comes to a really unique thing about Mormonism I didn't fully grasp.
So it is that Mormonism unlike any religious tradition in the entire world, the current prophet, the current head of the religion has more say than their original book or the founder of the religion.
That is the current prophet can override Joseph Smith can just say Joseph Smith was wrong when he said that.
No other religion you as a Muslim would say like Mohammed was misunderstood, or this was misquoted or this was, or you would say this about Jesus, you know, you wouldn't say the pope cannot override Jesus.
Like that would be considered insane.
Yeah.
It actually gets even wilder than that.
There are instances I have found where current prophets, like Elder Fielding in Answers to Gospel Questions volume five will claim that Joseph Smith said things that he definitely doesn't seem to have ever said or at least was never recorded in anything I can find.
For example, that's where the quote that goes something along the lines of the prophet Joseph Smith said that reincarnation is a doctrine of the devil.
And have you not read that the devil would deceive the elect where when I tried to look through textual evidence, I cannot find Joseph Smith saying anywhere that he thought reincarnation was a tool of the devil.
And in fact, I can find many sources that seem to indicate and many of his contemporaries seem to indicate that he did believe in some form of reincarnation.
Though Joseph Smith did say that the doctrine of transmigration of souls or souls passing directly to your children was false.
So imagine if you had something like the pope saying Jesus said that this is of the devil.
And you're just like or a current, you know, imam saying Mohammed said this is this is a doctrine of the devil.
And yet there is no evidence for that.
This would be incredibly confusing to an outsider trying to learn about the religion and what the boundaries of the belief system actually are.
And it leads to a religion.
I had talked about Mormon being an accelerationist religion in the past.
What I undersold how accelerationist it is.
Well, I think you didn't even know the extent, I think.
Yeah, yeah.
So it made it really hard for me because I'm trying to go out there and understand what do Mormons actually believe.
And I was continually thwarted because I was thinking about it like a Protestant or a Catholic or a Jew.
Thinking about it like a Protestant, like just my typical.
Okay, I'm looking at their books.
What did their books actually say?
What did the founding fathers?
What are the most important people in the movement actually say?
And they'll just like dismiss this stuff.
Like this famous speech by Joseph Smith.
Oh, I put a thing here where he basically lays out the idea that, oh yeah, humans will eventually become gods.
Some modern Mormons just throw this out.
Why do they just throw this out?
And that God started like a human today, right?
And you can look at, here are some quotes that AI generated when I was having it, like asking it about Mormon concepts.
What?
It said, God was once as humans are now, but eternally God.
That is exactly what we believe about God.
He was once as humans are now because he was once us, like literally us.
But he also was eternally God because that's the way we think time works.
A being like God and Christ means unity of purpose, not abilities.
So being like God and Christ means unity of purpose, not abilities.
You would say, yes, exactly.
That's what this intergenerational improvement means.
Or you could look at something like their belief in pre-life, basically, right?
Like in this movie, it started with all of them sort of in heaven, living their pre-lives, having their pre-families.
Hi, I'm Todd.
Richards.
I know.
We're in love.
And so we were wondering if it's possible if you could put us down in the same town.
Right.
Or the same street.
At least at the same time, if possible.
How about the same family?
Yes.
That would be great, yeah.
No.
Oh, no, no, no, no, no, no.
We believe something very similar, but it's due to how we see time.
Because we see all time is happening at once.
We believe that all of our kids, our friends, do know each other and are waiting to come into existence, but in the future.
Right.
So to be, to clarify, in the movie, Saturday Warriors, it begins with everyone in heaven and they already know each other and they know that they're going to be family.
And they're like, oh, I can't wait.
This is going to be so great.
What kind of dance should I do first for mom and dad?
Something classical?
Or?
Cha-cha.
Cha-cha.
So, maybe just a twist then.
Yeah.
Whereas like, we don't think there's some anti-chamber before.
It's just that everything that has happened and will happen is happening and it's sort of all at once.
And it's already happened.
Yes.
Like my little daughter when I interact with my little daughter in 10 years and it's kid number 12 that everyone told us not to have
Is that little girl who's being denied life by us choosing not to have a kid?
It is a life that we would have robbed
Right just as much as Mormon think that you have robbed a person of their life
One thing that I want to say which I think is really interesting is when I look at these Mormon videos
They're very similar to
How if we were trying to explain our belief systems to a child or somebody who is living in like the early
1800s we would have explained our belief system which makes it feel very
contiguous with Mormonism in fact one part of our
Holiday future day that we haven't really talked much publicly about and we've been
Solidifying actually after after seeing this movie how it would play out is the day of martyrs which comes before future day
Which is dedicated to readings of the martyrdom of man one of the books that we see
Like we would see Joseph Smith as being divinely inspired by the same entity
Which we believe inspired us in which every member of the family both the kids and us
Explained to past iterations of their parents
So that would be our parents in our case why they should have us and why it is a good thing that we would come to
Exist and what we plan to do with that existence
Well, also thinking our ancestors not just you know our biological ancestors
But the ancestors of humanity in general for the hardships that they underwent to give us our current
Technological and material bounty as the martyrdom of man states even in the 1800s
That's your average English person back then lived a better life than your Anglo-Saxon King and you know from our perspective today
Your average American probably lives a better life than the Queen of England when that book was written and this is through the
intergenerational
martyrdom of our ancestors and ourselves to make things better for the next generation and it is a
This is where they sort of take up the mantle of that responsibility
This cycle of continual improvement while also hopefully instilling an amount of gratitude
For how good they have it vis-a-vis
What the daily life of most humans used to be like hundreds of years ago?
This is meant to instill in our kids that they exist for a reason and that being alive is a privilege
and it's a privilege that comes with
duties and responsibilities to
Justify your own existence. I should note here though
It's less relevant for this particular conversation that the day of martyrs is also dedicated to reading from Fox's book of martyrs
Not just the martyrdom of man. These readings are meant to remind kids and our family more broadly what our duty is in
face of
tyranny or those who would claim to have mental authority over our belief systems
Well also reminding them to never become that person themselves never become the person who is
Telling somebody else what they have to believe is true and not true because the highest level of freedom an
Individual has is the freedom to choose what they believe and that freedom must both be protected
but also in parts on individuals the duty to
Think carefully about those things and decide with prudence
How you think things actually work without allowing other people to tell you what to believe now
Obviously, we haven't talked about this publicly yet because it's one of the belief systems
That's probably gonna get us most shamed by anti-natalists, but it is very very similar to these scenes in Saturday Warriors
I love how a lot of our more publicly facing
Documents are more just like philosophy and stuff like that
But we get into actual like religious insanity if you are actually a regular listener to the podcast
So I swear when like anti-natalists are prepping for a debate with us or something
This is what they must be imagining far as I'm concerned this Saturday night. There's not even gonna be a fight
I will torture his body
So that he's so learns to be humble. I'm gonna knock him out round one bitch. God chose me for this fight
God is the teacher
Derek is the student wait
What do you say?
Yeah, God chose him
God's lessons are
So beautiful
God's lessons are beautiful. I'm sorry. Who put this fight together
This is what I do if y'all got an actual crazy person to meet for me to fight well, that's not fair to me or him
I'm sorry, is this a crazy now this gets really interesting and it's sort of I think the core failure of
Mormonism and modern Mormonism is that a lot of
Mormonism recently in Mormon trends and like why they pretend or or move towards not having these beliefs is a
Drive to be seen as quote-unquote normal Christians or just another branch of Christianity
and in that
Quest they have abandoned many of the spiky and more unique parts of their history and theology
Which were honestly the more sophisticated and compelling parts to me now that I have the cooler stuff, right?
But I think that that's the case with most
Religions that like if you actually dive deep into the dogma and you really really get into it and get technical
It does get weird. No, no, Protestant think so evangelicals. They've gone so much
No, I'm referring to like Catholicism Judaism Islam like I'm going into like I'm not
I'm not talking about
When those religions become softer when they abandon the weirder parts as themselves
They're typically doing it in an effort to conform with the urban monoculture
And that's my point when I'm when I'm talking about when you get to the core of a religion and it gets weird
I'm referring to hard religions, right?
I guess you're right to an extent
But what's really interesting is that Mormonism hasn't attempted to conform to the urban monoculture as much like there's a faction that's doing that
But where they have lost most of their traditions is in trying to conform to conservative
iterations of other Christian denomination where they have become tried to become more like just another type of evangelical Protestants
When they are nothing like and this and so the question is is why are they doing this?
And this is when I look at Mormonism as an outsider and and I look at the collapsing fertility rates within Mormonism
I actually think that this is a problem of the genetic vortex
So we talked about how religions and genetics can reinforce each other where people with specific genetic predilections can convert to a religion
Disproportionately which can lead to those sociological profiles being higher within that religion. I think historically
Mormonism really selected for and in culturally and genetically. So I think there's two things going on here
an extreme amount of
social anxiety and and desire to engage in social
Status competitions, right?
And I think that this is why if you look at like the way that like alcohol ravaged Native American communities
I think things like tiktok and social media have ravaged Mormon communities same was
Tiktok is the alcohol of
To of Mormon people. Well that and that this desire to fit in is what drove them to abandoning
I think the more
Interesting and to my perspective sophisticated aspect of their religion but also to deny that they're different
So this is another really interesting thing if you look across the Mormon tradition when I started like talking to more Mormons and more
Conservative Mormons about the way they think like the metaphysics of the universe actually works, right?
There is more diversity within Mormon beliefs
Yeah, then there is within any other religion that I'm aware of like what's it?
What's extra interesting is there's both that diversity, but also this like quiet like we don't talk about this diversity
Yeah, we don't talk about it. We don't talk about it. So so let's let's talk about one here, right?
Like multiple mortal prohibitions, right? Okay define what that is. So this is the so there
Okay, so there's different theories on what it means or ways that the church relates to it, right?
All right
some people like the most mainstream perspective in the church is
You exist before you're born like this is one prohibition you come to life, right?
As a human and then you die and then comes the next part like whatever comes after that
Okay
Some Mormons though believe that you actually sort of get reincarnated or like the quote
I was talking about earlier like that doesn't just mean that your soul holistically gets reincarnated
It may be like a dissolved recombined reincarnated
But that's a huge diversity in beliefs about what happens after death
There really are some Mormons that believe that that most people are going to get their own planet and become gods
Like if they're good people and they follow Mormon teachings my father my brother and I had been there at the hospital
As we walked out my brother and I who went to the car together
Smile they looked up in the mountains and remember that mother had always said she loved the mountains so much that he and I laughed and
Guess that if in fact the celestial worlds are really flat a sea of glass
She'll be eager to get away to build her own worlds and the first thing she'll build will be mountains
But a lot of Mormons don't believe that at all
They believe in like more of a traditional heaven like that's a while different in beliefs like you do not see like you look at a
Belief system that has many different beliefs right like a huge diversity like Hinduism. Yeah, but at least they agree broadly on what happens after you die
Yeah, no, this is so interesting and also like that over time
There's been a shift within the LDS church on like what cannon gets more emphasis like
One person said that currently they feel like it's 35 percent book of Mormon 10 percent Old Testament and 25 percent New Testament and then
You know, maybe like 30 percent DNC plus pearl of great price
Which I hadn't even heard of before but then like they they also thought that the Book of Mormon probably peaked in
1990 and New Testament is probably at its peak now
So these like shifts in emphasis too of like which which which text is getting a lot of emphasis which to me sounded a lot like
Jewish tradition it seems like in Jewish tradition like different texts will get emphasis at different times as well
So just I just had no idea there was this level of dynamicness, right? This is insane a lot in common with Jewish tradition
Yeah, except it has a weird mix of Jewish and Catholic versions of how they determine right well because like with with Jewish traditions
Like you just you know like there are names for the different subsets of like these guys believe this thing and these guys believe this thing and
Emphasize this text and blah blah blah so you like know who's and the one who wins is the one who gets the most followers, right?
And then but with with Catholicism, it's like no we're like here's where we are
You know this these this is the official stance with it was a Judaism
It's like you have these fall you these different theologies like bubbling in the background, right?
And then the one that wins is the one that covertly gets the most social acceptance within the community
Right, and then that becomes what the current prophet will say or whatever. Yeah, and that is
Genuinely fascinating, but it's and it's not even the current prophet with the LDS church either
And I remember seeing this with my friends in college who were Mormon like everyone kind of has their favorite
their favorite and like
People will wax nostalgic about in like different subgroups and subcultures within the LDS church will have their like it was this guy
He had he had it figured out and I thought that that's really interesting too that like
that there is a disproportionate influence of
You know the current
Had honcho essentially, but some groups
Still give the disproportionate emphasis to their favorite past one, which is super interesting
Yeah, so then this all becomes very interesting because when I first asked this question are we actually just Mormons, right?
I came at it thinking like a Protestant
I'm like, I'll go to the text and see the outlines of what beliefs make someone a Mormon, right?
Oh, yeah, like what what metaphysical understanding of reality etc etc, right?
Like what is the boundaries of their metaphysical understanding of reality where if you pass out of it?
You would know definitely no longer be a Mormon anymore. Yeah, and what I found is that's not the way Mormonism works. Nope
And so well then it becomes a cultural question or rather what we think of Mormonism
And then I think whether or not we are Mormons depends on what Mormons thinks
Like yeah, it's up to them because our beliefs aren't really changing other than the way that we relate to Mormonism as a cultural group
Yeah, so but I think we we're the same way about
Judaism like yeah, you know what whether we
Consider our kids to be Jewish depends on what other Jews think and so many Jews have been like well
If you're matrilinearly Jewish then you're Jewish and so we're like well, okay, then our kids are Jewish
But like yeah, it's interesting that we to a certain extent define whether or not we fall into another religion's category of being part of them
It's like well, you tell us, you know, like we're doing our thing over here, but you tell us
but hold on now this gets interesting to us so then
With our perspective and we're talking about this concern more he goes
Oh, your beliefs were divinely inspired they came to you via revelation in the same way that you know
Joseph Smith's beliefs came to him and if you look at Joseph Smith from our religion's traditions, right?
So there's a video where we talk about like the demons we make for our kids and I'm like
I just took those demons from books that were popular during my lifetime
But I still think that they are likely real
Representations of the way that the demonic force the basilisk as we call it the the evil side of the future police that tests us
Call it the basilisk after Rocco's basilisk
We recently came up with this and I really like this at the term for the adversary the basilisk
And the other word that we came up with recently was agents of Providence instead of you the other word future police
Which sounds a little too hokey for us for you Malcolm
So so we believe that we were influenced by modern-day media
But that modern-day media was inspired and to an extent constructed by God the beings that exist in the future, right?
So when you look at the traditional complaints about Joseph Smith, hold on a minute
Pull this up at the beginning here
Where you know a lot of people will say well, you know if you look at the
Mormon theology it appears to borrow a lot from what we're like at the time sci-fi books like
I'm you Hebrew is which was a book that said well
Maybe the lost tribe of Israel went to the United States and had some other things that aligned with Mormonism
And then a voyage to the moon which was a popular sci-fi of the time
Some Mormon stuff actually has a lot of parallels to that and so people will say well
He was just copying you know fiction of his time whereas from our perspective. We'd say yes
That's how God works. Yeah God inspired that fiction so that it could influence Joseph Smith. Yeah. Yep
Or they'd say no he was just making this up like reading things out of a hat that that in order to and it's like
Yeah, that's what we did with our religion. I still think it's divinely inspired
I still think that the God create like like motivated us through whatever means they could to create an entirely new like
Or we thought new religious structure that we now find has a lot of parallels with early Mormon
You know theology, right? So we look at Joseph Smith's doing that. We're like, yeah
That doesn't mean it wasn't divinely inspired at all
In fact to us when we're determining whether or not a belief system was divinely inspired
We look at its efficacy its spread and the quality of life of its members
And from that it is self-evident that Mormonism was one of the many belief systems that was divinely inspired
Like we think that Christianity
Given the impact it's had on human history given the importance it's had on us in
In developing the way we see the world and everything like that that christ was literally
a divinely manipulated or inspired being and
As evidence of that
Is the effect that he has had on the world
So much so that if mary says well, you know, he was created
Who's to say the future beliefs like if they're really going to influence like one person's life
They're like we're really investing in this person having a huge impact with the agents of providence
If we're really investing on this one person having a big impact on human history
Who's to say they didn't actually fertilize his mother?
Right like that could have happened in which case that is god fertilizing his mother, right?
So so in that instance, you know, we do believe an agent of the divine now
I think that's probably less likely than other other options that they could have used available to them
But for all of these things they they do not
Have any discord with our belief system. So from us. Yes
Joseph Smith was self-evidently a divinely inspired individual and he was inspired by the same
Things that inspired us and yet his revelation in the early church father's revelation was an incomplete revelation
just as he would say, you know the
Just the Protestant texts are an incomplete revelation
And so in that sense
Yes, but we aren't like culturally Mormon and we don't relate to truth the way Mormons relate to truth
Although our family people often think we're Mormons people who aren't Mormons when they visit us
I remember one guy we tried to sell our company to him. I don't know if you remember this
And you know, we were walking with him and he goes, you know, I'd sell my company to you guys
But I really don't feel comfortable. You know, you guys are really a little too strong with this whole Mormon thing
And we're like what like just maybe maybe you're more Mormon than you think Malcolm
Maybe I don't know. I drink I hear a lot of Mormons do that too. You know, it might be
I mean, you know, there's like the whole no caffeine thing, but then like everyone's
You know drinking tons of like
I don't know but but I will say that I now feel much more of a kinship with this religious tradition
than I did historically
and
One thing that I believe about Mormonism, you know, after studying it more after looking at the the the actual diversity of
Seological beliefs with in Mormonism
Is I do not think that the centralized structure that that makes up the Mormon church right now is long term stable
It's sort of like if all Mormons actually just hashed out their theological differences, they would realize that they're not the same religion
well, but I think you're what you're missing here is that for the vast majority of
LDS church members, it's not about the doctrine. It's about the lifestyle and I think there's more agreement on that
Well, you know, so this is really interesting. They're part of the same cultural group
Yeah, it's cultural group. So within something like, you know, Judaism when they are having theological differences
They'll debate it with like biblical texts and stuff like that
What's really interesting is when I look at Mormon theological debates, they do not often go back to text
They will relate to modern science
Depending like whatever science was common during their time period
They will relate to
philosophical constructs very similar to like a metaphysics department at a university
They are very unbounded by text
In the debates that I've read and like the comment sections on blogs that are supposed to be about conservative Mormons
And so in a way, you know being part of this larger cultural group and saying, okay
We'll agree to just have those of us
We'll all participate in this larger cultural group, which is under the central hierarchy
But those of us that are smart, we're actually allowed to think very broadly
Around the way we relate to the divine around the way we relate to the concept of
Don't you feel like you're kind of describing what what we describe as the index where like you have a bunch of culturally aligned
We kind of all want the same thing things groups
Who share a dating pool who share a lot of cultural resources that work better at scale
Who may have some different metaphysical
Views on how things work, but ultimately work better together and are just pulling and sharing these resources
I feel like that's
Very stable and I feel like it's a
Pretty smart solution
Yeah, so
Here's my take. So would would you say would you say we're Mormons or we're not Mormons?
To what I said earlier, I think it depends on what various Mormons would say to some Mormons. We're Mormons to other Mormons. We're not Mormons
Yeah, well, I I agree with that and I think we're we're way more Mormon than many Mormons. I'll say that
Okay, well, I'd be very interested to see where where Mormonism ends up going
If they can maintain this centralized structure, that would be very interesting
If they do end up dividing into different subgroups
That's where and I think that this is well the core reason we're not Mormons
It's the way we relate to truth is a bit different than the way Mormons relate to truth
and that we we really care about this level of
Technical correctness and the same way that like even when we went into Mormonism trying to look at their scripture
Oh, but like we want a hard sci-fi version of religion, right?
But I also I don't think I think many and we've met them now
I think many people in the LDS church who consider themselves to be quite devout
Are taking the same approach. Well, and that's why I think that if we look in a hundred years or in 200 years
What becomes like if our religious system continues down the road?
It's going down and our kids are raised within that system
If they met a Mormon in 200 years because I also think that Mormonism is changing
From one of these technophilic factions and they're still around in a hundred years. I think there would be almost no difference
Hmm very very very very similar belief system. Well, there you go
But I do not think that we are whatever Mormonism is today and whatever we are today
I think are two slightly different things
However, I think whatever we are today may actually be more appealing to some people who maybe historically
Would have been within the Mormon church if the church does go woke or something like that
And that's where I think that we may end up merging in the near term
If
Well, like I saw one guy who had like donated to biden is in line for church succession
So they may go. Whoa the next guy going or they may go super conservative
It's hard to say no the next guy is very conservative
And so what happens? Does that mean the conservatives leaves the movement? Maybe maybe they don't if they do
Then that's where I'm like, okay that group of Mormons that has left the central church
Maybe it's just our bristling was hierarchy
We would be very open to joining
Any aspect of the merman church that broke from the central hierarchy, but so long as they are
Under the central hierarchy. We just have too much of an instinctual
distaste in other words
We we bristle at the idea that there would be something like a conference sunday and some random guy would sit up and talk about like
These are our values. This is our lifestyle and we're like, no, no, don't speak for us. Don't speak for us
This is not okay. So yeah that that we can never square with I think
Yeah, that's fair, but I think that one day will be Mormons. Yeah. Yeah, I mean I have been called an honorary Mormon for many years of my life
so
By that means it's is she really culturally identified with Mormon in college
She never drunk or anything like that because all of her friends are Mormons
And I went to a Mormon preschool too like all of my like most I guess culturally formative and like comfortable periods of my life
Were in exclusively Mormon groups
so
Until I met you and then you're my new home
So thank you for that. I love you. I love you Simone and yeah
It was so funny watching that movie because I was like, oh, this is just what we believe like a saturday morning preacher with
That's called saturday warrior saturday warrior. Yeah saturday warriors. Check it out if you're watching
I'll add a link to it's on youtube. You can watch the whole thing. There was a remake in the 90s
Really engaging
Answer my friend
Without it the rest of us are due
When I saw that I kept being like, oh, that's just us like that's the way we see kids
That's the way we see
You know the future that's the way and it also really relates to our views around things like IVF in a way that differentiates us from
Catholics and that I believe that we are killing the kids
We do not we need to do everything in our power to bring these kids to life
Yeah, we you know everything else is the kid who we have left
Because we have killed a kid that I need to answer to one day one of my kids that wouldn't be here with us
You know, yeah, there's this one scene in which the the parents are in the hospital three months pregnant and like
The the pregnancy is kind of iffy and the mother's kind of you know
Like in a lot of pain and who knows what's going to happen and like the unborn girl
Is watching in the hospital room kind of like
Like is everything going to be okay? And she's like this cute little girl and you're like
No
This pregnancy has to go through so it's yeah, they really you know
They tug at your heartstrings despite it being dated and cheesy and I hate musicals and it's a musical
I'm telling you man. I cried like a baby every every kid we don't bring into our family is someone that we have erased from the timeline
Yeah, well this this really if if someone struggles to understand what we mean when we say that it might help to watch this
musical
I really like
It comes back to anime every time. Well, anyway, I'll edit in and editing. It's called shakugana no shana
but it's an anime where
It represents sort of their soul in their existence
And the the bad guys in this anime
They will wipe out they eat these people's existence. So they wipe out this flame and and when the flame goes out
Nobody suffers like the individual doesn't suffer the people around them don't suffer because they are erased from history
Yeah, it's an endless goal. Yes. They are erased from ever existing
And when you watch this it's heart-wrenching to watch this happen to people because to me
This is so much worse than just killing someone. Yeah, the lost potential breaks our hearts
You
That kid
But why
They are replacements of people who had their existence consumed
by denizens of the crimson world their torches
Their replacements
What are you talking about?
This world's balance would be disrupted if they disappeared too suddenly
Therefore replacements for those people are provided to soften the impact. They're temporary
but then you're
Saying we're
Life no
The real you has had its existence consumed and is no longer living right now. You're nothing but residue
I I don't exist anymore
Well, yeah, and this is what we think a
Moral action equivalent to wiping out one of these fires that destroys a person's soul and they never exist within a timeline
This is what we think is happening when we don't bring a kid into this world that we otherwise could have
Anyway, absolutely
We'll do a longer video on when we think life begins and how we can think of that in the near future
But we actually are going to chat with a Catholic father about this first because we want to better understand the Catholic perspective
Yep
All right. Love you to death. Love you too. Gorgeous
