What does the word meaning denote in the expression meaning of life?
Is it a directive, a feeling, or something else entirely?
Well, I think it's not a straightforward manner to discuss the meaning of life, right?
Because it's pretty clear that there are multiple meanings,
and those meanings are associated with different events and situations.
I think you can still intelligently address the issue of the meaning of life,
because meanings tend to arrange themselves into a hierarchy of value and relevance,
and they have to do that because otherwise there's nothing but, as William James suggested,
sort of a blooming and buzzing confusion.
So the issue is multiple meanings in a unified, integrated framework.
Meaning is partly an impetus for action.
It's very important to remember that human beings are active and living creatures,
and that one of our primary problems, in fact, perhaps our primary problem,
is how to act in the world.
But that also involves other questions like how to perceive, how to prepare for action,
how to plan for action in the future.
And so all of those questions are associated with meaning.
For me, meaning is the abstract impetus towards action, fundamentally.
And it's an important thing to give some consideration to,
because part of the Western intellectual tradition tends to abstract rationality
or consciousness from embodiment, and it's very much the case that we are embodied creatures.
The idea that our brain is in our head and that our mind is in our brain,
it's a useful idea for certain purposes, but it obscures much while shedding light on other things.
So meaning is tightly associated with action, with the abstraction of action,
but then also with the construction of the perceptual frameworks and emotional responses
that are necessary to conceive of the world in a manner that allows you to act in it.
So one of the things we know, for example, is that when you walk into a room like this
and you see the furniture of the landscape arrayed in front of you,
that one of the things that you directly perceive is actually the meaning of that furniture.
And you might think that you see the object and infer the meaning,
and that's what you would think if you were a traditional Western rationalist or even a materialist,
but it actually seems to be the case that when you walk into a room like this,
the room tells you what to do at a level that's below conscious realization,
and it's partly because, well, you know exactly what chairs are for.
You might ask yourself, for example, what is a chair?
It's a complicated question because it could be a beanbag and it could be a stump,
but fundamentally a chair is something to sit in,
and when you see a chair, the chair tells you directly as a perceptual consequence that you sit in it,
and that's the meaning of the chair.
And so you can't understand meaning in that manner without considering meaning in relationship to embodiment.
And so meaning is really how we propel ourselves through the world
and how we organize ourselves and arrange to propel ourselves through the world
in a manner that's productive, relatively free of suffering, even though that's a meaning,
and sustainable across many situations and contexts.
So that's a rough framework for the initiation of the discussion.
For me, I think the first thing I would say is that word meaning is being used as a metaphor.
We're taking basically a term from language, a sentence is meaningful,
and we're using it metaphorically to try to denote something that is probably pre-linguistic,
although it shows up in our language.
A sentence is meaningful in that it does something to information
in such a way that we get a fundamental connection between ourselves and the world.
And I think that's, for me, what is fundamentally going on when we talk about meaning.
We're talking about the fact that there's a fundamental process of selection
that the brain, the embodied brain, which I agree with you is a very important thing
to constantly remind ourselves of, has to face.
There's way too much information available at all times,
and of all of that information, only some of it is going to be useful or helpful to an organism.
And somehow that information has to be found.
It has to be found in a very reliable manner.
It has to be transformed into a form that is relevant to this body in this world,
such that I can frame problems, solve problems, achieve my goals.
And that process of zeroing in on relevant information, what I call relevance realization,
means that we are fundamentally thrown into a atmospheric kind of relationship to the world.
There's a salience landscape constantly being projected at all times of how things stand out to you,
what gathers your attention, what arouses your metabolic resources or dampens them,
what creates certain motivational and affective states.
Because this relevance realization process is not a cold calculation, like a computer.
It's instead a deep involvement between the organism and its world.
And that involvement has, as Jordan says, it's often and most prominently going on below consciousness,
and it's an ongoing, evolving process.
I mean, one minute something is salient.
Look, that became salient to you, now it's not salient anymore.
So that process is constantly evolving.
And so we shouldn't think of meaning as a static thing,
but this ongoing process by which the organism is constantly fitting itself to the world
and having the world fitted to it so that its actions can be undertaken in a fluent manner.
Now the thing that I think is very important about this,
meaning making process, or as I prefer to call it, relevance realization,
because I think meaning is standing in as a metaphor for that,
is that this process is, it's below our consciousness, it's below our rationality,
it's below our language use, it's below our deliberative reasoning,
precisely because it's constitutive or presupposed by all those processes.
Until you do relevance realization, you can't use a language.
Until you do relevance realization, you can't form representations.
Until you do relevance realization, you can't even form your own autobiographical identity.
The world as a place that has categories and you as a cognitive agent with a sense of identity in it,
both co-spring from this relevance realization.
It is a deep binding of you and the world at a fundamental level.
And that's why when it's threatened in any fashion,
human beings will experience a deep kind of trauma, absurdity, horror, a deep kind of anxiety.
And so when I think people are talking about meaning in life,
what they're trying to gesture towards is they have structures in place
that maintain and enhance that relevance realization such that two things are possible.
They can reliably keep at bay absurdity and horror,
and they can reliably afford the ongoing evolution, the growth of that relevance realization
so that they can find some kind of fulfillment in that identity
that they are cultivating for themselves as a cognitive agent
and the world into which they are fitted.
And so I think the degree to which people are talking about meaning in life
is the degree to which they're talking about those kinds of structures
that affect that co-creation out of relevance realization of cognitive agency
and a world in which cognitive agents can solve problems in an intelligible manner.
We should also maybe decide if we agree on something.
We're going to agree on many things, I suppose.
And a lot of a discussion like this is often terminological
and it's partly going to be the case between John and I
because his intellectual background is different than mine,
although it overlaps in some important ways.
And so partly what I'm hoping to do with the discussion tonight
is to make sure that we actually understand each other.
This is definitely not a debate in which one of us is going to win.
What we're hoping to do is to have the kind of conversation
that allows for the scaffolding and the further development of ideas,
which is really what an intellectual conversation is.
So I want to offer you a couple of propositions
and tell me what you think about them.
The first thing is that I don't believe that the question
does life have meaning is actually a reasonable question.
I don't think it's properly formulated.
And the reason I believe that is because
that isn't really what people want to know when they ask that question.
Life has lots of meanings.
The Buddhists would say that life is suffering.
And you know, we might not think about suffering as meaning,
but fundamentally it's anxiety and pain
and with some disgust thrown in there maybe for good measure.
And those are meanings.
And even if you're nihilistic and you're not oriented towards
a belief in some sort of ultimate meaning structure,
that doesn't mean you can escape from the meaning of life.
What it does mean is that the meaning of your life is misery,
suffering, anxiety, and a real decrement and quality.
So we're trapped inside the question of the meaning of life.
There's no getting outside of it.
You can say there's no ultimate meaning,
but then you have to define ultimate.
And then the other thing that I thought...
So let me just make sure I got the first proposition.
The first proposition is the question,
I want to make sure I got your wording right,
does life have a meaning as opposed?
I just want to store that.
I can either respond or wait until you put your second question out.
Yeah, yeah.
I just don't want to lose the first question.
The other thing that might be useful, clarifying,
I understand what you mean by relevance realization.
I have a formulation of it in my own language,
so I'm going to make a couple of comments on that as well,
and you can tell me if you agree or disagree on that.
So one of the things that's quite...
One of the ways that you can approach the idea of meaning
is by making a separate assumption
about what the fundamental structures in the world are.
I mean, materialists and empiricists
tend to believe that the fundamental structures are,
we'll say, atomic particles,
even though we know we can go higher resolution than that.
There's atomic particles and there's this space
in which they're distributed,
and what that means is that the combination of quantum particles,
quantized particles plus space,
allows for the array of physical entities in patterns.
Like music is a pattern,
and there seems to me that there's something profoundly similar
about patterns and information,
and it seems to me that what we experience as meaning
is something like our interaction with information.
Now, I just want to say one more thing about that.
The problem with information in some sense
is that there's too much of it.
So one of the things you could say about life's meaning
is that there's absolutely way too much of it.
You can certainly experience that
if you ever have an experience of awe,
or even of overwhelming absurdity.
Those are both quasi-religious experiences.
So relevance realization is actually, as far as I can tell,
it's the limitation of what's essentially
an close to infinite field of information
that's so rich that it can't be exhausted
into a narrower form that's focal and useful
for this particular time and this particular place
for this particular set of activities.
So it's a narrowing process.
Yeah, okay, so I'll respond to the second thing first
because that will actually help me to respond
to your first question about the posing of the question.
Yeah, I think that's a good way of putting it.
Although I would want to emphasize
that I don't think that process is just a selection process,
it's an important transformation process
because we do something to the information,
and you made reference to this in the embodiment.
It's not just that we have sort of passively taken in the information
or selected it from the environment.
We make the pieces, like you said, we find patterns.
It's how the pieces are relevant to each other,
how they're relevant to us.
Again, and I'm trying to emphasize this,
not just as some sort of cold calculation
about that information, but a way in which...
I mean, we say it like we make sense.
It's constitutive of our cognitive agency.
Just like our bodies take in matter,
but they don't just select the matter,
they transform it and restructure it,
so we have the ability to operate in the world.
Our minds don't just select the information,
they take in it, they transform it and structure it,
so analogous to our bodies,
we gain skills and abilities to interact with that world
from which that information was selected.
That's why I think people love to watch bands improvise,
because really what they're doing,
especially if they're doing it collectively,
is they're engaging in a collective process
of the spontaneous transmutation of patterns.
And I think the reason that people find that so deeply meaningful
is because it is representation,
like an ongoing abstract artistic representation.
I think it's an exemplification of what we do in the world.
That's right. I think one of the reasons why we like art
is we play with the variance...
We're playing in the Piagetian sense of playing,
in the sense of developing our skills.
We play with the relevance realization machinery for its own sake.
But that allows me to go back to your...
I think asking for the meaning of life,
it carries with it sort of...
even saying the meaning in life,
it carries with it the presupposition that meaning is sort of there to be found,
and it immediately steers us away from this ongoing process
in which we're taking in information,
transforming it, structuring it,
altering ourselves, fitting to a world
that is then also itself, restructuring itself, changing itself.
And so there's this ongoing, evolving relationship.
So one of the reasons why I don't like the question,
the meaning of life, is it proposes a ready-made answer to be found.
It presupposes a static thing to be discovered,
or even a static relation to be realized.
And it also carries with it the idea that...
It's like, like you said,
it's like there is an answer to a question that has been posed,
when I don't think the issue facing us is a riddle
or a question in that sense that some proposition will satisfy.
I don't think there's anything that...
I'm sorry, this will sound incredibly pretentious,
but I'm being asked about, I think.
I don't think there's anything...
I'm trying to make him sound pretentious.
I don't think there's a proposition that anybody can say to you
that will render your life meaningful.
I mean, you might do things with that proposition
that might fit you better to the world
so that horror becomes less prevalent
and flourishing becomes more prominent.
But to think that the answer is in the proposition
is to misunderstand the role of propositions in our cognition.
The propositional level is very high up
and sits on many recursive levels of relevance realization
that only at their very tip produce this kind of propositional processing.
The meaning is much more our knowing how to interact with the world,
knowing how to fit my hand to this glass is part of that process.
And that's not based on sort of just...
It's not primarily based on my beliefs about the glass.
It's based on a much more complex dynamical system
by which my body, my perception, the glass, the atmosphere
are fitting together so that I can grasp the glass.
So one of the things that I found interesting,
I learned this, I think, mostly from Gibson,
who wrote a book called...
One of the things Gibson presupposes,
he has a very interesting way of looking at the world
and it's tied deeply into our fundamental presuppositions
about the structure of reality
because one of the big issues about meaning in some sense
is whether it's fundamentally constitutive of reality
or if it's what would you call an emergent property
of something more fundamental.
Now the answer to that question in part is exactly what do you mean by reality
and also the question is also what do you mean by truth
and this isn't Pontius Pilate's question,
it's a whole different kind of question.
Now the modern neuroscientists in some sense following Gibson
make the claim that when you look at a glass like that
that what happens in your brain is that the pattern of the glass
maps itself onto the pattern of your gripping hand
and that maps itself onto the pattern of pouring and drinking
and that a lot of that happens potentially before or alongside
your conscious perception of the glass as an object.
So we know for example that there are people who claim to be blind
who can still map objects onto their body.
So that's called blind sight.
So developing that idea, it's appeared to me
that there's good evidence that what we see when we look at the world is meaning.
We don't see objects and infer meaning, we see meaning and we infer objects
and so then the question is well is the meaning real
and then that answer to that is well what do you mean by real
and it'll only take me a minute to lay this out.
This starts to depend on whether you're a Darwinian or a Newtonian.
If you're a Newtonian then the real thing is the material object
and we also know that Newton in some important ways was wrong
but if you're a Darwinian and you almost have to be a Darwinian
I really don't see any escape from it unless you don't know what you're talking about fundamentally.
There's reasons for that is that the thing that determines whether or not
you're going to survive and propagate which is by the way the best solution
you can possibly answer to the problem of life if you're a biological organism
and you have a Darwinian philosophy, the question you're trying to answer is
what is the appropriate meaning to perceive in each environment
because that determines your action and your action
the consequences of your action determines whether you survive and propagate
and so if you take the question of meaning from a Darwinian perspective
you can actually say as far as I can tell that the fundamental constituent elements
at least of experience and perhaps of reality itself
are the meanings that you perceive before you infer the object.
Now that's a pretty radical ontological claim and I've never heard anyone else actually make it
except for maybe the pragmatists.
It's a variant of pragmatic philosophy but I've tried to wrap my head around that argument
and see if I can destroy it but I can't so I'm just wondering what you think about that.
I have a lot to think about that and I have a lot to say about it.
First of all, before I get into the Darwinian Newtonian thing
which I've seen you do a couple of times before and I've always found it very interesting.
It's one of my little tricks.
You belittle it, it's one of your good tricks. I mean it's a very good one.
It's a very good point.
First of all the question, I do think that fittedness to the world does create
I think Plato had a fantastic insight that above and beyond any particular desire we have
we have a desire for what we desire to be real in some sense.
One of the ways to rob meaning from your life is to suddenly realize
that a bunch of things, a bunch of the things you've desired
or the bunch of the things that you thought made you happy are illusory in some sense.
In fact people will do a bizarre thing and I do this every time in a class.
I'll ask how many of you are in really satisfying, deeply satisfying personal relationships
and surprisingly many people put up their hands.
Those are the self-deceptive ones.
And then I do the following.
I say how many of you would want to know if your partner was cheating on you
such that it would destroy the relationship
and almost all of them put their hands back up again.
They would rather have the truth than have all of that other stuff that they find so good be illusory.
And I think that was one of Plato's profound insights.
This connectedness to reality is a fundamental drive in us.
You know John, when you're asking that you're basically asking people whether or not
if they were in a perfect garden they'd be willing to check out the snake.
Yes, right.
And the answer of course we all know is that well of course people will check out the snake
because that's just what we're like.
But I do think there's something important to that.
I think ultimately the platonic orientation towards truth
is grounded in that notion of a deeper drive towards real.
I think asking the question about whether or not meaning is real
part of it I want to challenge the presupposition behind the question first
because the presupposition behind that is that only things are real
and that relationships, relations between things aren't real.
And I think it is very, so it might strike people as odd for me to say
yes of course I think relevance is real
I don't think it's part, and this is where I might differ with you
but I think we'll have to negotiate it.
I don't think it's part of the physical fabric of the universe
nor do I think it is just a subjective illusion on our head.
It is a real relation between us and the environment.
Just like evolution is a real relation between an organism and its environment.
It's not a property of the environment.
It's not a property of the organism.
It's a real relation between them that explains both the history of the organism
and the history of the environment.
So that would be a lovely thing to see if we can get clear
because that's a very profound argument, like a profound debate.
There are Heideggerians who took opposite positions on that.
Yes, I'm aware of that.
And some of them were psychologists, right?
And so I'm just going to outline it for the audience
and to make sure we're thinking about it the same way.
One stance is that meaning, so to speak,
is a consequence of the operation of these elaborate patterns of construction
in your mind and that you're imposing that on the world.
So it's like a structure issue.
Yeah, that's a romantic issue with meaning.
And then the other one is that meaning is in the world, so to speak,
and that what you do with the structures in your head is limited and narrow it.
And I think in some weird way both of those things are true.
But here's something that I've been thinking about for a long time
and I want you to maybe help me figure out a bit more.
So I'm going to go at this from two perspectives.
So back in the late 1800s,
Nietzsche basically formalized a set of observations
about what he thought was happening in Western society
and then the world at large, right?
And the basic argument was something like this,
was that the metaphysical presuppositions of religious systems
and the metaphysical presuppositions of scientific systems were not in sync.
They weren't of the same paradigm.
And that as Western scientific investigation had preceded,
it became obvious that either the truths of religion weren't true
or at least that they weren't of the type that science recognized as truth.
And Nietzsche basically described that as the death of God.
And so he said that three things would happen in the aftermath of that.
He was a prophet. He was like an Old Testament prophet.
He said that totalitarianism would become unbelievably attractive to people,
especially in its hyper-socialist variants like communism,
and that millions of people would die in the 20th century as a consequence of that
and that it would be a necessary battle.
And he said that like 40 years before the Russian Revolution
and so like, yeah, go Nietzsche.
You try to predict the future like five years ahead, see how far you get.
And then the other thing he said would be that nihilism would rise to pathological proportions
because it's basically the polar opposite of totalitarianism, right?
You wipe out the religious structures.
People move towards ideology to reattain that certainty,
but it's rigid and deadly, or they fall off into chaos itself.
Okay, then Nietzsche made one more proposition which was that
the only solution to that would be for human beings to transform themselves
into meaning-creating creatures.
And so what Nietzsche basically did, and I think this was a mistake in his metaphysics,
was that he assumed that the objective description of reality was correct,
that reality in and of itself was dead and meaningless,
but that human beings could interact with that in such a way
as a consequence of their individual choices to make that richly meaningful.
And that we needed to do that because the alternatives would be nihilism or totalitarianism.
One more comment on that.
So, you know, Jung was a student of Nietzsche, a profound student,
and he was actually trying to solve the problem that Nietzsche put forward,
which was, oh, wow, we got nihilism on the one hand
and we got totalitarianism on the other hand,
and, you know, those don't really seem to be very good solutions
since millions of people die because of one
and millions of people commit suicide because of the other.
It's like those are suboptimal solutions in all likelihood.
So, but Jung in some sense took issue with Nietzsche's fundamental proposition,
which was that human beings were meaning creating creatures.
And I actually think it's the most profound critique of Nietzsche
because what Jung pointed out, this is something that just blew me away when I first understood it,
and it has to do with your relevance realization issue in a deadly way.
It's like, imagine the things that attract your attention and your interest.
Well, okay, so then you might think,
well, is that a voluntary process or an involuntary process?
And to answer that, you can think about it.
It's like you're working on some dismally wretched, boring,
and stultifying thing at work or as a student,
and your attention is like fragmented everywhere.
You think about the dust bunnies under your bed
and that maybe the dishes need to be done
or maybe the rug needs to be walked
and the rug needs to be vacuumed
and it's like bloody well anything other than that boring task.
Even though you know you have to do it in order to say pass a course
or pass an exam or get the assignment done,
you can't control your damn brain.
It's wandering everywhere.
And then, so the weird thing about that
is that you cannot voluntarily control your relevance realization.
And then you have the contrary problem,
which is that there's a YouTube video about kittens
and it's like bang man, you're focused on that.
And so one of the things you might ask
is just who the hell is in control of this relevance realization?
And that was Jung's question.
It was like, well where Nietzsche fell apart,
Nietzsche fell apart was that he assumed that human beings
were primarily meaning making creatures.
But then if you try it, it's like,
hey, I'm going to find it really meaningful to go to the gym
three times a week next week for half an hour
and I'm going to push myself right to my limits.
It's like I have every reason for doing it.
I know why I should do it,
but I'd rather sit on the couch in my underwear and eat cheetes.
Cheetos.
So you've got to ask yourself, man, who's in charge.
And one of the things that the psychodynamic theorists were so damn good at
was pointing out that, well, you think it's you, but it's not.
And so then that begs the question.
It's like, where's the meaning coming from and who is in charge?
And so I know that's questions that you're trying to answer,
but it doesn't exactly seem to me that we're overlaying that on the world
or that if we are, we don't have much voluntary control over that.
Okay, well, I don't think we're overlaying it on the world
and that's what I meant by a real relation
and I was comparing it to evolution.
I think to talk about us being meaning makers in the Nietzschean sense
is to fall prey to the romantic illusion
that the world is a blank slate.
I mean, you have the blank slate of the enlightenment
in which reason the world writes on us
and then you have the blank slate of the romantics
in which the world is a blank slate,
like the unpainted canvas that we...
And Nietzsche constantly used the artistic metaphor
and even created the idea of a lifestyle
as if our lives are works of art
because the world is just an empty canvas upon which we project our meaning.
Well, and there's totalitarian presuppositions in there too
because one of the presuppositions of totalitarian ideologues
is that there is no such thing as human nature
and that people can be constructed in any way possible.
Exactly, and that's why existentialism comes out of Nietzsche
because existentialism posits that our essence and our nature
is completely the property of our own self-definition.
So what I'm actually doing is I'm rejecting both of those blank slates.
I'm saying the world is neither a blank slate
that we romantically project upon
nor is the mind a blank slate that experience just empirically draws upon.
What I'm proposing instead is a dynamic interaction between the two
and to say that who's in charge is kind of an odd question
but before I answer that,
I want to take a little bit of exception on your interpretation of Nietzsche
because I think it might help
and it also might get us back to the Newton-Darwin thing
which I promise to get back to too.
I mean, Nietzsche lays, and again, Heidegger followed up on this,
he actually lays the history of nihilism much further back.
He says that the history of nihilism starts with Plato
and that Christianity is just Plato for the masses
because my interpretation of Nietzsche is that the main cause of nihilism
goes back to the Acts of Revolution.
It's the creation of the two-world model
and the idea is that this world gets its meaning, its value,
it has an instrumental value in getting us to some other world,
to some world in which we will finally find the fulfillment
and the protection from horror that we don't find in this world,
a heaven, right?
And then what happens, right?
It wasn't just the clash between the scientific and the religious worldview.
What happens is that the scientific worldview calls the second world,
the heavenly world, into question.
But what happened is we have millennia of Christianity and Platonism
tutoring us to believe that this world is not meaningful in itself
because it's only valuable insofar as we get to this heaven.
And when science says, I imagine that there is no heaven,
or John Lennon, right?
Then we're left.
My favorite beatle.
We're left, right?
That really dates me, doesn't it?
Then we're left with this world that we've been tutored for millennia,
has no value in it.
And so I think what Nietzsche was trying to do,
I agree with you, there's a romantic streak in Nietzsche
and like I said, I reject that romantic streak
that the world is a blank slate upon which we paint our lifestyles.
That is ridiculously hubristic in nature.
But there was another thing Nietzsche was trying to do,
and so I think there's, I mean Nietzsche has multiple voices,
it has anything.
So in addition to the romantic project,
which I often find really bombastic,
there is another project that he called trying to revalue the earth,
which was to try to see the earth as a place in which we could be at home.
On its own terms, for its own sake.
So that was more Heidegger, I think.
No, no, Heidegger talks about learning how to revalue the earth
and loving the earth as a repeated theme throughout Nietzsche's work,
and loving the body is a repeated theme in Nietzsche's work.
Because he thought that just like we had the two worlds,
we had the two parts of us, we had the body,
but the body only existed in service of the soul,
and the body therefore has no inherent value,
because its only job is to get the soul to the only place where it has real meaning,
which is heaven.
And then his point was, if we lose the heaven and if we lose the idea of the soul,
we have to get back to revaluing the body, revaluing the earth.
And what I'm proposing in this sort of evolutionary model of relevance realisation
is exactly that the body and the earth co-create this real relation
that fundamentally homes us and fits us into the world.
And that the meaning crisis and therefore, it's not just...
I mean, yes, I agree, there are definitely historical forces for it
and the rise of science and the demise of the wisdom traditions and the religious traditions.
But I think the meaning crisis is in some sense also a perennial problem.
You see it cross-culturally, you see it cross-historically,
because people can always get trapped between these two kinds of perspectives
they can have on themselves.
They can always fall prey to these kinds of two world models.
And so I think the thing I want to say is
part of what's going on right now in the meaning crisis in the West
is we're trying to...
And this is the way Nietzsche, I think, was prescient, as you said.
He was a prophet.
By the way, he predicted four things.
He predicted that he would be famous eventually.
Although that he would basically starve to death in the meantime.
Right, but why I am so great was one of his...
Timing is everything.
Yeah, exactly.
And so what he was prescient about is the fact that...
I mean, basically since the actual age in 800 BCE and onward,
we've had this two-world model.
And now we're going through a radical re-embedding.
And for a lot of people, that's caused a kind of nihilism.
But one of the things I would throw out to you is that
there's a possibility in an emerging cognitive science,
and a cognitive science in which embodiment and embeddiment
are becoming central for appropriating that re-embedding process
as a way of discovering, rediscovering how we can be at home,
fundamentally at home in the world,
and how the earth and our bodies co-create that home
in a way that, again, protects us from horror
and allows us to flourish as cognitive agents.
So you did something I think is lovely,
and I don't think that it's people who aren't quite deeply educated can do,
is you pushed the problem quite a bit farther back in time.
So I want to one-up you on that.
Okay.
So I do think it's a deeper problem than Nietzsche pointed out.
He pointed out the more articulated modern end of it.
And we see that as the conflict, say, between science and religion.
But if you can push these sorts of things back,
I think to the dawn of self-consciousness itself.
And one of the reasons that I've been so obsessed with the book of Genesis
is because I read Genesis as a dramatic representation
of the coming to self-consciousness of mankind.
Because what happens with Adam and Eve when they eat the fruit
that the snake delivers to them,
which is very interesting sort of phenomena from an evolutionary perspective,
which I can talk about later,
what happens to Adam and Eve is very, very specific.
I mean, the first thing that happens...
I'm sorry, I might get the order wrong.
But the first thing that happens is that they realize
their eyes are opened and they're like gods
knowing the difference between good and evil.
And that's very interesting,
because it associates the development of self-consciousness
and the rise of articulated and complicated morality.
And so I've thought about that for a long time.
It's like, okay, you realize you're naked.
What does that mean?
Well, you don't want to be naked up here on the stage,
if you're speaking properly to the audience you are.
But maybe you don't want that.
Okay, well, why?
Why don't you want to be up here naked on the stage?
It's everyone's nightmare, right?
Well, you know, you're kind of flawed and saggy,
and there's parts of you that are not that beautiful,
even if you happen to be a supermodel.
And you're not as bright as you could be,
and your hair might be going a little bit,
and your teeth aren't that great,
and you're not as smart as you could be,
and you've got a lot of flaws,
plus you're going to get sick, and then you're going to die.
It's like, right, right.
So that's all nakedness.
If you think about nakedness as vulnerability.
And so we had to come to terms with her vulnerability
when we became self-conscious.
So then you might think,
well, what the hell does that have to do with morality?
And I did figure that out.
It took me like 15 years of thinking to figure that out.
It's like, if I know I'm naked and vulnerable,
and I know you are the same,
then I know what will hurt me.
And once I know what will hurt me,
I know what will hurt you.
And so animals prey on each other.
Lions eat gazelles,
and worms eat lions, and all of that.
But there's nothing like a human being
for sheer outright atrocious torture.
And you don't get that without self-consciousness.
So that's where I think the knowledge of good and evil comes.
It's like it's no longer prey and predator.
It's like torture and victim.
So that's one thing.
And part of that sets up this dichotomy in human beings
between whatever it is that our consciousness seems to be
and our self-consciousness,
and this terrible, limited burden that we carry around
as a body that we're conscious of.
So there's that dichotomy.
That dichotomy emerges back at the beginning
of the dichotomy of self-consciousness.
It's a problem we're trying to solve all the time.
And I mean, Nietzsche's criticism of Christianity
was that he believed that Christianity
failed to solve that problem
because instead of dealing with the reality of the catastrophe,
which is, say, the degenerate form of our material body,
the church basically damned that to perdition,
describing it as a work of the devils, so to speak,
and then concentrated on spiritual salvation.
Now, you knew this element of Christian religious thought
and the Nietzschean transformations of that,
and that's part of the reason why he went back to alchemy,
because one of the things Jung was interested in was
why did science develop?
It only developed in Europe as far as we know,
and the Greeks didn't have it, and the Romans didn't have it,
and the Chinese didn't have it, and the Indians didn't have it,
and it's like, well, they weren't stupid.
What was up with them and why Europe?
What exactly happened there?
It's not like we precisely know the answer to that,
but one of the things that Jung suggested,
and it's brilliant as far as I'm concerned,
the cognitive apparatuses that we're blessed with are compensatory,
so that if we formulate a theory about one domain
and take it to a real extreme,
the unconscious mind will start to formulate a counter proposition,
which is formulated of all the things we notice
that don't fit in with that theory,
and then they start to flap around
and associate with each other as a consequence of emotional contagion,
and they start to manifest themselves in patterns,
and that once that counter position emerges
as a sufficiently complex and dynamic living system,
it has the opportunity to fight with the other system,
and sometimes you'll have a revelation,
and the revelation is basically the overthrow
of the current perspective by the new emergent perspective.
Jung viewed alchemy in that light.
He said that the Christian concentration on hyper-spiritualization
was extremely useful, this is something Nietzsche agreed with,
was unbelievably useful for the discipline of the mind,
so Nietzsche, of course, is an anti-Christian,
at least that's what he said,
but he also said that Catholicism tempered the European spirit
like nothing else could have,
and he really meant the whole Judeo-Christian tradition,
which was the attempt to force everything
into a unified and hierarchically arranged interpretation.
Nietzsche's idea was once you did that once, man,
you could go do that all sorts of different places,
so alchemy as a precursor to science
was based initially on a fantasy,
and the fantasy was if we paid enough attention
to the transformations of matter rather than of spirit,
that we could redeem what Christianity,
with its emphasis on the spirit, had failed to redeem.
So it was sort of like all the 14th century Europeans woke up
and said, hmm, Christ died for our sins,
and we're supposed to be redeemed,
but a lot of guys are down there with leprosy in the ditch,
so it doesn't seem to have exactly fulfilled its promise,
and so he felt that the European imagination
started to drift into the transformations of the material world,
but that was also part of what was fundamentally a redemptive process.
It was just a more comprehensive redemptive process.
It was, all right, well, we kind of got the spirit organized,
now it's time to do something about the dreadful body
that we're dragging around with us
instead of merely damning it to perdition.
And one of the things that you might think about,
because we're also thinking about practical issues here,
is, well, we talked about multiple meanings,
kind of multiple low-level meanings.
There's the meaning of food and the meaning of water
and the meaning of sex and, you know,
the meaning of being too hot and too cold,
and there's all biological subsystems
that take care of those sorts of things.
It's like those are organized hierarchically in principle,
so there's something lurking at the top.
And I think part of what religious mythologies do over years,
centuries, thousands of years,
is try to get a picture of what should be at the top.
That's like the monotheistic impulse.
What's the highest value?
And here's something to consider.
You know, you can wonder about this in your own lives
when people think about the meaning of their life.
What they mean is, are all the subsidiary meanings
meaningful given that there's an ultimate reality
of suffering and limitation.
And so one of the things that might be asked,
and I think that scientists do ask this in part,
is maybe we shouldn't deal with that question
before we fix everything we can possibly fix.
And so one of the things that I would also suggest
is that when you're motivated by meanings
that are other than subsidiary,
say the same meanings that animate mammals and reptiles
and even bloody lobsters, for that matter,
when you're working at higher-order levels of meaning,
partly what you're attempting to do
is to generate solutions to the micro-problems
of negative meaning that always beset you.
You know, it's like, well,
is there something wrong in your family?
Well, that's meaningful.
The meaning is negative.
So does that make your family worthwhile or worthless?
Well, the question is,
depends on what you do with your family.
And you know, so the problem with nihilism,
as far as I can tell, is that the nihilist presumes
that the finitude that we perceive
invalidates the utility of being.
It's like, well, that's pretty arrogant, you might say.
You might say that judging the whole world in that light,
which is what that comedian just did on that TV show
that he laid into God, I can't remember his name,
blaming him for bone cancer and children, for example,
which really does suck, you know.
So the point is, is that one of the things
that we find meaningful and we could find meaningful
and that's reliable is,
let's leave the damn question aside about the ultimate meaning
of reality in its corrupt form, which is now,
and try to fix the damn thing.
Really try to fix it.
And then see what happens,
it's clear that we can make things better
and it's bloody clear that we can make things worse,
so you might ask, okay, well, if you organized
your little value hierarchy underneath the proposition
that it's up to you to work to bring the kingdom of God
to life instead of hell, then maybe the whole problem
of the negative meaning of life would go away.
It's like you never know, beats the alternative,
which is to damn the whole thing to perdition,
which we really tried hard to do in the 20th century
with a fair bit of success, or just to think,
oh, well, this is meaningless and useless
and I don't have any responsibility
and there's no such thing as meaning,
and it's like, sure, walk down that road, man,
see where you go.
Okay.
It seems the both of you agree that there's this
lower level meaning system that we have,
which is almost like a moment to moment perceptual system
where we know how to interact with things.
And both of you disagree, both of you agree
that there's no higher level, the meaning of life.
But in alluding to the meaning crisis
and just general morality, you seem to assume
that we can somehow cobble this ability
to know how to interact with the glass,
to somehow interact with societies.
So how do you think we're able to do this?
First of all, to be careful,
and I said there's no ultimate meaning,
and like I said, I was also not saying
that that means that there's no ultimate meaning
because if you say a problem is poorly formed,
you're rejecting both the positive
and the negative answer to that question.
It doesn't imply that, therefore,
the ultimate meaning is that there's no meaning.
It's like saying what's north of the North Pole.
The answer is not anything.
It's to reject the question.
So I first want to challenge that move you made.
Secondly, I do think that...
I want to reply...
I do think that what I'm trying to argue for,
and I think Jordan is, but I'm not clear
because he said about 17,000 things in his last thing.
I want to try and reply to them.
I'll spin them out, you sort of.
I'm arguing for a deep continuity
between those lower level processes
and the highest levels.
And I think Nietzsche tried to foreshadow that,
and this is again what I mean about the...
Nietzsche said, the height of my spirituality
reaches into the depth of my sexuality.
To try and find...
He was using both of those in a metaphorical extension.
I'm not only arguing for the lower level...
It's a pretty good statement for a virgin, too.
He was referring to Nietzsche, by the way, not me.
So I'm arguing for what I think is a very important thesis,
which is a deep continuity between the lower level
and, just speaking of it metaphorically, the higher level.
I do think there is an important issue
in which we can talk about that higher level
as distinct from the lower level
of just trying to solve our daily problems,
which I think is important.
Namely, and that's something that I think is important,
is that we can talk about that higher level
of problems, which I think is important.
Namely, and that's something that you referenced, Jordan.
We face a perennial problem of our self-consciousness,
and the problem with our self-consciousness
is it means we have this enormous capacity
to take a perspective on our own ability to take perspectives.
I mean, one of the things about being a conscious being,
and this is what I mean about a salient's landscape,
is we not only know facts, like propositions,
and we know how to do things,
we also have perspectival knowing.
This is the work I did with Leo Ferraro.
We know what it is like to be a certain thing,
to take a certain perspective,
to take a certain stance on the world.
I know what it's like to be a father.
I know what it's like to be a teacher.
And that perspectival knowing,
of knowing what it's like to be something,
is, again, this atmospheric meaning.
But the thing we can do
is we can take a perspective on that lower-order perspective.
We can stand back and say,
what does that perspective look like?
Let me give you an example.
I'm thirsty.
And so I have a thirsting perspective on the world.
Things that are watery are salient to me.
Things that might contain water.
You're getting thirsty right now, too, right?
It becomes salient to me.
But I can step back,
and this was something also discovered in India,
by the Buddhists,
I can step back
and take a look at my thirsting perspective.
I can say, what's it like to be a thirsty person?
And now I'm no longer thirsting,
because I'm now motivated
by something different than my thirst.
I'm motivated by my curiosity
about my lower-order thirst.
And then I can step back
and say, gee,
what's it like to be curious?
And then I can step back and wonder,
what's it like to be somebody asking
what's it like to be curious?
And then you can step back and say,
what's it like watching someone
listen to someone talk about being curious about it?
Exactly.
That's what I'm trying to make.
The point I'm trying to make
is what happens is
we have the capacity
to very quickly
move ourselves to what Nagel calls the view from nowhere.
To this bird's eye
or God's eye perspective
on all of reality,
in which we, by these recursive
asking of questions,
we have become deeply disengaged
from our involvement with the world.
We have an enormous capacity
for self-transcendence.
And I think this was also one of Nietzsche's insights,
although I think Nishitani called him
excellently to question on it.
Our capacity for self-transcendence,
our ability to rise above ourselves,
is also the very same thing
that can cause us to fall into despair
and absurdity.
Because we can empty the world
of all that involved meaning
by our capacity to transcend ourselves
to such a degree
that we are overlooking it all
for like five seconds here.
Okay, so I have a proposition
that goes along with this. You guys can think about this.
And I think
it's one of the advantages
of contemplating the notion
that meaning might be an actual phenomena
in and of itself. So I would say
you might say, well, when should you stop
recursing? Which is
what's the right level of analysis? Because I could say
who cares about this damn talk? The Sun
is going to envelop the Earth in four billion years.
It's like, you know, because that's
the ultimate meaninglessness of everything.
And my answer to that is
that's a stupid place to stand.
And the evidence for that
is, think about it this way, is that
if your capacity to experience
the kind of meaning that imbues your
life with
forward motion and with faith
and with joy and with gratitude,
imagine that that's actually a function
that you have psychologically.
And then imagine that that function
kicks in when you're looking at
things from the right perspective.
And so you might say, well
is this talk important? It's like
what's important to me right now? It seems to be
important to you guys. It has some potential
importance tomorrow and next week.
There's all meaning there. Is it
important from the perspective
of the age of the cosmos?
Well,
probably, but probably
perhaps not.
And so then I would say, well what does that do to
my sense of engagement with the issues at hand?
It undermines them and I fall into
a pit of meaninglessness and so then
I would say, well, hey let's not fall into that pit.
Let's pick a level of analysis
for the problem at hand
that most richly imbues it
with a sense of meaning and then
let's assume that that's part of the mechanism
that calibrates our soul, so to speak
and pay attention to that.
And so because I tell my students this all the time.
Wander around
and notice what's
meaningful to you. Just notice it.
It happens. You
can participate and you're absolutely right about that.
But it happens. Okay.
Try to stay where meaning
is optimized. And then I also
mention to them briefly
that that's kind of what the Taoist symbol is about
because the Taoist symbol is predicated
on the idea in a sense
that the world is made out of disorder,
chaos and order and
that there's a balance between those two things
and that if you stand on
the border between order and chaos
so that things are structured properly
but you're still a little uncertain and curious
then that's a richly meaningful
place from a phenomenological perspective
and it's like that's the right place
to stand. How do you know?
Because you want to be alive despite
the fact that you're suffering. It's like
hey, there's some evidence. You can't get
there though without, you know, the initial
presupposition that there's something deeply
real about meaning and
I think real is life sustaining
that's part of what real is. That's a
Nietzschean idea too. Okay, well
let me respond to that.
I want to push back on you on that a bit
because I think that's not being fair to
Nagle's argument because the point Nagle was trying
to make is, you know, you said
that's a stupid place to stand. It depends on what you're trying
to achieve. Right, if you're trying to do
science and you're trying to reduce
the way we self-deceptively
project bias onto the world
then you progressively move to
these higher views because
every time you, I mean
that is what we do. That is how we try to reduce
bias. I mean, when I can take a
the reason I, it's good for me to take
a perspective on my lower-order perspective
is it helps me to determine bias
and distortion in this perspective.
So if I want to remove bias and distortion
if I want to get at reality and truth
and let's assume we have that platonic drive
then that feeds into
this drive to go higher and higher
and higher and higher
because as I go higher and higher and higher
I am removing distortion. I am
removing illusion.
That seems to me to be, that's
partly why I'm a pragmatist, fundamentally
and it's because you're right
about that. Yeah, but pragmatism
is parasitic on an independent notion of truth.
You have to be able to know
independent of its usefulness that
something is useful.
You have to have some way of saying
I know that it's true that this
is useful, that my perception
of its usefulness is not itself distorted.
Okay, I'm not disagreeing with that at all.
I think that what
correct me if I'm wrong.
You basically
you seem to be making an argument that goes
something like this, is that
there are different lenses and different
levels of resolution for different tasks.
That's right. I agree with that.
Absolutely. But I'm also making the argument
that
the drive towards the view from nowhere
has just as deep
a purchase on us. That platonic quest
to get at the
the undistorted. We shouldn't
be assuming that nowhere is the ultimate
stance. It's like it has
its zone of relevance and you've laid
that out quite nicely. That's exactly what
I'm saying. But what I'm trying to say is
just to say to someone
don't go as far
as you can because you might
fall into absurdity
to me sounds like
well, give into
self deception because
that will be comforting.
I guess this is partly
my experience as
a clinician speaking as well.
Because sometimes people get overwhelmed
by absurdity. They don't go there.
You know what I mean? It's not the right place
for them to be. But I would also say
that you shouldn't pick problems that are bigger
than the ones that you can solve.
I disagree with you.
We've got to clarify that because I don't think that you
I mean we're doing that right now.
I know.
I know. But we're also
not claiming to have the answer.
But that value as I said from the beginning
isn't in the answer. But in the
self-transcendent transformation of the question.
And what I
was trying to say
is that
yes, I agree that
right
I don't think
absurdity is caused by
the fact that you're
the highest level. I mean again
that's not Navel's point. Absurdity is caused
by the fact that we can
find a clash between any
two levels we pick. He gives this example.
Okay. Okay. So
he gives this example and
please understand this because we're
older than you. There was a time
there was a time when people's
phones were in specific
locations.
And if somebody called
you you were often not with your phone
and so you had to have a recording device
to pick up the messages.
I know we had just discovered
fire but that's what it was like.
So he gives the example from
that time because he wrote the article in the early 80s
and so there's this individual
he calls up and they're like
and he picks up the here's the pickup
and he says he's been all prepared. He says
Susan, just don't talk. I got to
tell you this. I got to get it out. I
love you. I've loved you for a long time. It's really
interesting. And then he hears
Susan's not here right now.
Please leave a message.
And you're laughing because
humor is also about this juxtaposition
of perspectives.
And what's happened is that
act that seems so meaningful from
one's perspective is completely
inconsistent with the machine's
perspective, the recording
machine. It's the clash between
perspectives, not a particular
perspective per se
that I think is what the experience of
absurdity is. It could be and
but it might be or.
Well, I think no because
here's why I would challenge you. Okay, okay.
Because I would put Spinoza against
Nietzsche. Spinoza advocating
advocated going to that highest
view and then found a way to reconcile
it with the lowest perspective
the engaged perspective and he said that was
the blessed life. Okay, okay. So he argued
that the, I mean I think
that's why The Ethics is a great book that deserves
to be read in contrast to Nietzsche, right?
Is he argued that there
is a way to reconcile
those two perspectives. He called it
Scantia Intuitiva. And it's the
reconciliation of those two perspectives
that alleviates absurdity.
Not the preclusion of going to one
or the remaining in fixed in the other.
And I think that that's very
in a very, that's very similar
in some profoundly important ways.
There's important historical differences to what Buddhism
is trying to advocate.
Buddhism is about
you know, in meditative practice
we practice sort of going deeply immersive
and in contemplative practice we go
deeply out and then the point in Buddhism
is that those are supposed to become
eventually completely interpenetrating
so that the absurdity that's caused by the clash
between perspectives is removed.
I think the fault, as you said earlier
is not in any perspective but in the
self-consciousness that pits perspectives
against each other. Good, that's very nice.
That's very nice. I mean I think that's a very
good one. And I
take no issue with it.
I want to take that line of reasoning
in a different direction. We'll
play that same line of
logic in another way.
So Victor was
asking earlier, and it's a level
of resolution perspective again. It's like
okay, well this is really great, it's the meaning
of the glass. It's like well yeah, what does
that have to do with the meaning of life?
I think the person who answered
that best actually was Piaget.
Let me tell you a little bit about Piaget
because the first thing about
he was a famous child developmental psychologist
by the way, the most famous of the 20th
century. He was actually
trying to solve the
conflict between religion and science.
You never hear that about Piaget but he had
messianic experiences when he was a young
man and he wrote a novel about it and he wanted
to reconcile religion and science.
He actually did a pretty damn
good job.
So here's the issue
and you can think about it this way. So this is how
a baby builds himself or herself
up.
So learn to move
finger.
Learn to move hand.
Learn to move hand and arms.
Learn to move body, hand, arms,
legs and feet. Learn to orient
head.
Learn to use integrated body
to
undertake independent tasks.
Then
learn to use integrated body that can
undertake independent tasks in
concert with another integrated
body that can undertake
specific tasks. You do that when
you play a game. The game is
we'll say the game is
we're two little girls having
tea. So what's the goal?
The goal is that we learn how
to be mutually
respectful while we're sharing
nourishment, which is a big deal by the way.
It's something humans are unbelievably good
at. It's extremely sophisticated.
We're very social eaters, so if we're
not eating socially, we're fat
or anorexic. We
have to eat socially to regulate our
own behavior because we're social eaters.
And so we're learning how to play
the game of sharing food.
But the game has other rules than that.
It's like we're learning how to play the game of sharing food
in a way so that we're playing the game
so that we want the game to continue.
So that's an important
point. And then if we get more
educated, then we say we're learning to play
the game so that it's enjoyable
for a larger number of people
in a larger number of situations
across larger spans of time.
And so that's a hierarchical
organization of fundamental abilities
into
solutions that have generalizability
across more and more contexts.
Now Piaget built that way
up. And he said
this is associated with this idea of
levels too.
Piaget believed, and this is
his scientific justification for
emergent morality in some sense,
is that
it's within a Darwinian framework, again,
not within a Newtonian framework. So Piaget
had a proposition, and the proposition
was this.
You're the bully at the moment.
Victor and I are having tea.
And you want us to play a different game.
You want us to play, I don't know
what do you want us to play? Pull the cat's tail.
You're a bully after all.
And so
we don't want to play pull the cat's tail.
And so what do you
have to do? Well, you have to
expend a lot of time and energy
enforcing the game. And the reason you have to do
that is because we don't want to play the damn game,
so we're going to do everything we can
to stop you, to subvert it.
And so what that means is that you're going to
and we're going to expend a tremendous
amount of energy in a pursuit
where we could have picked a pursuit
where there was virtually no energy spent
or resources. So Piaget's idea
was that an
equilibrated game,
which is a game that everyone will play voluntarily,
if you pit that
in an open competition, you could say a Darwinian
competition, against
a disequilibrated game that requires
force to maintain your basic
totalitarian state, if you pit
those in a one-to-one competition or your
totalitarian personality, if you
pit them in a one-to-one competition
in relationship to the attainment
of virtually any goal across
multiple contexts, the equilibrated
game will win.
And that's why it's better.
And there's other reasons too. It's better because
it isn't only a solution
to a problem that's posed in one place.
It's a meta-solution
to a meta-problem that's posed in many places.
I'll just give one example.
Okay, so
you all tell your kids
be a good sport.
And your kids, being intelligent kids, think
well, don't we want to win this game?
It's like, of course
you want to win the game. Okay, so why can't
I bash the guy next to me over the head with
my hockey stick, as long as I don't get caught?
That's a Canadian example, right?
So I'll tell you a story.
I went to this hockey game once, and my son
was playing, and that was really fun.
And he was in a, like, the final
game, and
there was a kid on his team who was
he was a great hockey player, very, very good
hockey player. But
it was all him, man.
He had the puck he wouldn't pass, and he was
pretty good at scoring and so on, but he wasn't
playing with the team, and he was
playing to win. It was fine, fine, fine.
So my son's
team lost. It was a great game. I think it
was, like, four to three at the end, and the
other team scored in the last 30 seconds or whatever.
And then all the kids came off the
ice, and the parent of this
one kid, who's like the little hero
hockey player, comes up to him, and
the kid had, like, smashed his stick against
the cement, and he was all
running around and cursing the referees,
and the father
came running up to him and said,
you were robbed. You know, you absolutely should
have won that. And I thought,
you're such an idiot.
And he was, he was truly
an idiot, and a pathological
one at that. And he was
really destroying his child's soul.
And here's, this is
not funny. It's true. That is what
he was doing. I saw it happen over a long
time. That was just a microcosm
of their relationship and his attitude towards
the world. Now, why was that
wrong? It's like, the kid
wanted to win. It's like, yay, go
man, went to win. He was a
really good hockey player.
So what was wrong with what the father
did? Okay. So then we step
back and we say, it's
not important whether you win or lose. It's how
you play the game. So what does that
mean? Well, it doesn't actually
mean what it says, because it actually is important
whether you win or lose. You should be trying
to win. But then
the question is,
what are you trying to win?
Now, then that
gets complicated. It's like
while you're trying to win
being the best hockey player on your team,
are you trying to win that hockey game?
Or are you
trying to win the opportunity to be
invited to play as many games as
you can possibly play with as many people
in as many contexts as you possibly
can across the entire course
of your life? Okay.
That's what winning means.
And so the rule is
don't win the
local and proximal event
at the price of being a
player in the multitude of
iterable games. That's the moral principle.
You know? Don't put
the cart before the horse, so to speak.
And the reason for that is that
a game is a microcosm of life.
That's a Piagetian idea, which is why,
by the way, we like games and we'll watch
them and we're thrilled about them and we engage
in them all the time. But the game
isn't the issue.
The issue in some sense is the set
of all possible games.
And the most moral action is
the action that will enable you to have
the highest probability of winning
the set of all possible games.
And it's even a little more complicated than that,
which is you have to be
a player in the set of all possible
games in a manner that supports the
existence of as many games as possible.
And that's, and so
you see what I mean, and human beings can do that
because we can go up that damn chain
of abstraction, right? We don't have to
just concentrate on this
or a game of let's make
tea, you know? We can play these metagames
and pose these metag questions.
And one of Piaget's claims was
don't kid yourself
about this. There are rules.
There are rules. There are rules for games.
There's lots that aren't playable.
The rule for a sustainable game is
everybody wants to play.
Now, another rule is that some people get
to try to win, you know?
So, but obviously
that's not where the abstraction level
tops out. And so I love that.
It's like, oh, that's so cool.
There's a hierarchy of moral value
because that's action orientation.
And it's an emergent property of the way
that complex systems organize themselves.
They're basically dominance hierarchies, by the way.
And not only that, that
system of organization has been around
for so long, and I think it's
about 400 million years,
that we're actually biologically
adapted to that structure.
Because we know that there are dominance hierarchies
that can sustain themselves quite nicely across time.
And those usually value
the individual and the relationship between
the individual and society.
And there's those that don't. And we're really
adapted to the ones that do because those are
the ones in which we live when we live.
And so this is deeply biological
and it's also emergent at the same time.
So it's a testament to your notion
that it is
necessary to be able to reconcile
the local view with the ultimate view.
And the more you can ensure that those
levels aren't in conflict with one another,
that's exactly what a Piagetian
equilibrating state is. Is that the union
has been attained across the multiple levels
of hierarchical organization.
That's...
Take that.
I will take it. You know
that I've always liked
this argument of yours. I think it's one of your best.
And
which is not a left handed insult of your other argument.
I really like this
argument. I think it's a good work.
And I've thought about it and I want to share
some thoughts I have about it with you.
I thought, I think that
and this is to allude back to
Spinoza again in contrast to Nietzsche,
I think
then again this is the platonic insight.
I mean because Plato of course had
a metaphor also for
this moving up the levels. It's the metaphor
of coming out of the cave into the real world.
And I think what I
want to say is the highest level
of the metagame is the game
because games are again things that exist
between us and the world, right?
I think the highest
level of the metagame is the game
of intelligibility.
I mean I think
what we have to have
ultimately, and this is what Habermas was
on about, right? You have to have
shareable intelligibility
to do. That's the highest
thing. We have to constantly
be committed to that.
That the grounding
normativity of all of our moral
normativities is actually
this normative demand make things
intelligible. And I think
So do you think about that as a
precondition for the emergence
of cooperative games? Yes. So it's like
getting the rules straight.
Getting the language by which you can
formulate the rules straight
and using language in a very extended
metaphor. And so
I think
part of the issue for us, though as human
beings, is
that we do have this drive to
get at what is, try to
to get the
maximal intelligibility project. And I think
science tries to do that in some ways.
But
the problem is that we then
and let me talk for a couple
minutes on this. We hit
a kind of perennial problem. We have
these two different notions
vis-a-vis intelligibility about what
realness is. And I thought, I wanted
to ask you about this because I want to know if this lines up
with your chaos order thing.
We have one notion of
realness that what to say
that something is real is to say
that it is coherent,
it is confirmed,
it is coherent. Things have
come together, right?
And there's this mutual
fittedness. And then we also
have a notion that no, what's real
is what catches us by surprise.
What was outside of our system
and that what we didn't know
right? And that's when we get at reality.
So we have these two notions of realness
and I think we have two for very
good reason by the way. I think we
actually have three.
Those are two of them for sure.
So I think what we have is we do have
this confirmation notion
and then we have this
surprise notion. And science
tries to pit the two against each other.
So what you try to do is you try
and do the theory part which is all the
confirming coherence part. And then you run
experiments in which the world can
basically make you go, oh shit.
And then you've got to, oh, right?
At the level you wanted to.
Yes, of course. You don't want to burn down
your lab. Or you don't want to horrify yourself
oh my god flowers can talk or something like that.
Yeah, too much chemistry there.
Right.
And so
part of the problem though
is that although science in one sense
tended to try to
science is largely
to some degree a psychotechnology of trying to
integrate those two together so that they work coherently
for us but also surprisingly
for us. Part of the problem
though is when Descartes, and I guess I'll put
Descartes before the horse here, is
what? Is that Nietzsche's horse?
Yeah.
We were talking about putting the cart before the horse.
I was like, Nietzsche,
Descartes did something
he really exacerbated those two
and he put a chasm between them.
He said, look, what's real
is sort of what's
externally measurable
by mathematics. So the mathematical
properties are the real properties
and all the subjective ones are just in my head.
But then he said this opposite thing.
You know what's most real? My mind.
And how it touches itself.
And this is completely
inexplicable. It's just this direct contact
thing. So, and then what he said is
right?
He didn't ever try to reconcile them
and so what we've done in the West
is we careen between these two different senses
of realness. We careen between
real is the mathematical out there-ness.
No, no, real is the subjective
inhere-ness. And you can always
pit one against the opposite because
this could all be a dream.
Right? Oh, no, no.
If it was a dream, you'd be naked.
So I'm a naked bully.
Okay, so
but of course
then we do the opposite and say,
oh, no, that's just an illusion. You're just
dreaming and we do the opposite thing.
And so what I'm suggesting
has happened is
our attempts to
our attempts to
ground or get a clear purchase
on the metagame
are exacerbated
by the perennial problem
that we have these two conflicting notions of
realness. Right? Yeah.
And then the historical problem that
Descartes basically
put this chasm between these
two different notions. He created
Cartesian dualism. There's
these two worlds. This is subjective world
and the objective world, they share no properties.
There's no way to reconcile. And what we do
is we constantly there. We constantly
undermine. Our notion of
realness is rendered permanently
unstable. And so
I'm not at all challenging you
to understand that. I feel like you've just
like, tossed me a pumpkin in slow motion
so I can bat it out of the park.
Okay, well let me just
finish and then I'll let you hit the pumpkin.
Um,
so once again
what I'm trying to indicate is
I think you're right. I think
I think it deeply
matters to us to reconcile
the meta
game and the highest meta game I think is
the realness game against the lower game
and and and I think
that is the grounding of our our
moral drive. I think that is deeply right.
Now what I'm suggesting to you
is there's a perennial problem given
our sort of fundamental epistemic
machinery that undermines
our sense of realness
and that is interacting with a historical
factor
Descartes separation of the two worlds
and those are now reinforcing each other in a vicious
way in our time so that
we can't get a stable enough
notion of realness so that
we can bring about the very reconciliation
that you say we long for
and we need and that's part and parcel of
what I mean when I say we're in a meaning crisis.
It's great. It's great.
That's the other one I think. So, okay,
so
you know
there's this there's this brand of psychological
thinking that's basically based in
Freud via a guy named Ernest Becker
who wrote a book called The Denial of Death
in the 1970s and it won a Pulitzer Prize
it's a pretty good book and it takes
Freud's idea that
religion is a
defense against death anxiety
and it develops that
in a very intelligent and comprehensive manner
so Becker was trying to update Freudian
psychoanalytic theory and kind of had the last
word on it and I really think he did that. It's a brilliant
book but it's really wrong.
But it's wrong in a great way which is something
to say about a book.
I'd like to be wrong like that.
Yeah, it'd be great to be wrong like that in some important
way. Yeah, absolutely.
So, first of all, religion
one of religion's diverse and
multitudinous functions
is that it provides some
security
against the anxiety of death. It's not the reason
for it. It's like you got to beware of people
who ever say that one thing
is the reason for, you know, that's an
ideologue, right? It's like, well, it's all
economics. It's all sex. It's all
fear. It's like, no, it's not.
That's not right and it's simple-minded
and it's wrong.
So, you know, that's a flaw
to some degree in Freudian thinking although he was
very smart. He knew about aggression and all sorts
of other things. Anyway, it's back to Becker. So there's
this idea that
our meaning systems
that's the internal structure we use to organize
the chaos of the world
protect us from the anxiety of death.
And then, so that's one
form of meaning for Becker.
And modern mortality salience.
Yeah, it's the same thing. That's Becker's.
It's an elaboration of Becker. It doesn't
really have much to add to Becker, actually.
So
there's something
that's right about that because we do use
our belief systems to defend ourselves
but we should be very clear about this. Okay,
first of all
culture is not
a belief system.
I agree. The representation of culture is a belief
system. That is not the same thing.
Culture is what's keeping the electricity
on. Okay, and that's not
defending us against death anxiety,
although it is. It's actually defending us
against death, which is much better,
right, because we're not sitting outside freezing
to death. Right, and that's nothing psychological
about that. It's like, there are
the lights. It's warm. The floor
isn't moving. John isn't attacking me.
And, you know,
seriously, it's like...
Right.
That's not belief, man. That is that he's not
attacking me. And so
we represent that belief and that also
makes it somewhat
pliable and manipulable and fragile
because we can also undermine it, but
culture protects us from death
and the representation of culture
protects us sometimes from death anxiety.
Okay, so now
Becker also pointed out
that there was something else that seemed to give life meaning
and that was associated with the Cartesian
notion of consciousness. So he thought that
people were...
apart from being protected from
terror, which we needed to be,
we also needed to convince ourselves
that our lives were worthwhile.
And we basically did that by deluding
ourselves that we were engaged in some
sort of heroic project and
somehow we could deceive ourselves well
enough about the importance of that, through self-deception
mostly, that that also added
another layer of meaning to our life.
Okay, the problem with Becker
fundamentally was that he didn't read Jung
and he said right in the introduction to his book
I've never had any patience for Jung
and I never thought he said anything to say about
in his books on alchemy and that was
really too bad because if he would have read them
he would have got the book right instead of wrong.
So, so imagine
this way instead. So I wrote a paper
a while back called Three Kinds of Meaning.
Okay, so the one
meaning is the meaning that announces
itself when something that you don't
want to have happen happens.
It's not exactly what you don't
predict because we don't predict
we want.
Now, part of wanting
is predicting. But if you think
about it as predicting, you don't take into account
motivation. It's a huge mistake.
We're not like cold, cognitive
expectations. No, I agree with that.
Okay, so sometimes things don't turn out
the way we want.
That's meaningful. Sometimes
the meaning is kind of cool. It's like
you make a joke and I didn't expect it. It's like
ha ha! And I laugh because I can
transcend the unexpected and that's
delight in my own capacity for
conscious creation, you know. So that feels
really good. And I like the joke because
of that. So, and that's not an illusion
by the way. It's not self-deception.
I did transcend the conceptual
structure momentarily with you and it's like
good for us, you know.
So, it's not an illusion.
Okay, but now and then something goes
unexpected in a way, undesired in a way
that we don't like. So, for example
you find out that your wife
has had like six affairs in the last three
months and that she's never been faithful
to you at all in the last 20 years.
It's like
that's rough, man.
Especially if you liked her, you know.
Ha ha ha!
Yeah, well, you know, if you didn't
like her, it might be good news.
But, and I'm actually
serious about that too. But okay, so you think
well, how upsetting should
that be?
It's hard for your nervous system to calibrate that,
but here's a rough mode
of understanding the calibration.
The existence
of your faithfulness
in your spouse is an axiomatic
precondition for a set of models
that you erect about how the world
will lay itself out in
a way that you want to. Which is to say
you've modeled a future
with this person. It's a future you want
and then if she's not there
or if her faithfulness is absent,
that collapses.
But what does it collapse into?
It collapses into the unstructured void
fundamentally. And that's really hard
on you. If you're
betrayed like that, this is why betrayers
occupy the lowest circle of hell, right?
If you're betrayed like that, it's even worse.
Your future's gone
and that sucks because you put a lot of work
into it probably and you need to stabilize
the bad thing because it's rife with uncertainty.
But then your present is gone
too because who the hell
is this person you're living with
and more to the point, what kind of moron
are you? And so that means
your model of the most
important person in your life
is gone, collapses
into the void and you have
no idea what the hell's up with you
either. How could you be so blind? How could you be
so naive? How could you be so foolish? How could
you be so gullible?
How evil is this person? How evil
are you? How did you
did you instigate
this in some unconscious manner? Were you
looking for punishment all along?
And then there's the whole problem of your past.
It's like whatever you thought it was
it isn't. It's something completely different.
You didn't know who you were with when you were
doing all the things that you thought you were doing.
So that's a collapse
if you think about this game hierarchy
we talked about a
the stable marriage part of a game
hierarchy is way the hell up the abstraction
level. And so
it decomposes
into a very large subset of operations
and perceptions. And when you blow
that you basically blow out a huge
chunk of the personality.
And then what shines through that is the
void essentially. It's terror.
It's depression.
And it's not just psychological
because you actually don't know where you are
who you're with anymore and so the way your body
responds to that is by assuming that you've been
drop naked into a pit of lions.
And really your cortisol levels go way up
your heart rate goes it's like you're in a
state of chronic chronic
horrible stress physiological stress
and that will kill you it's not just psychological
it hurts your brain it hurts your immune
system makes you diabetic
it makes you obese it's you name
it it's like cortisol is bad news.
So your body is
estimating the proportion of the territory
that you inhabit that has now become
uninhabitable right. And so
there's a that's the meaning of chaos
that's the meaning of chaos and it's an
a prior meaning and a lot of it is
you should be frozen in terror
like you're looking at the Gorgon's face
and the other part of it is
how wait a minute there's there's a
little treasure there too it's like the
dragon with the treasure maybe you can stop
living a false life right you can put
yourself back together you can start living
in truth you can find a relationship that's
actually genuine and so that's like the
that is precisely that the treasure
that the dragon guards that's why we have
that story by the way and that's also why
it's the oldest human story that
we know so
I suspected it traces itself
all the way back to the time 60 million
years ago when we were throwing branches at
snakes so it's all that
story wasn't a story then right it was
a pattern of behavior so
there's the meaning of chaos
and then there's the meaning of order
and the meaning of order is the
regulation of chaos just so
that the meaning that's useful shines
through and it's sort of the kind of
idea that Huxley had about consciousness
as a reducing valve I think that was Berkeley too
right was it Berkeley no Berkeley has a different
idea okay okay problem had the same idea
okay okay so so that's
two meanings meaning of order
stable security it can tilt
towards tyranny if it gets too much
and then there's the meaning of chaos which
can be horrifying at high levels of
abstraction and interesting at lower levels
and then there's one other meaning
which is the third class and the third
class is the meaning that you experience when you're
mediating between order and chaos
and that's the that's the heroic
meaning it's like you're you've got
one foot in order so maybe you've got your
scientific theory and you know you're out
on the edge of that you're on the frontier
the scientific frontier and you're
poking your beak out into the unknown
and as you're doing that you're seeing new
patterns and you're you're incorporating
them and you're dissolving
and reconstituting the whole structure
of the known that that is
order and that's that's
meaningful delight that's when you're doing
that you know you're in the right place and
you say well what's the meaning of life it's
that's we have three there's the meaning
of chaos look out
it's promise and catastrophe
we have the meaning of order
that's security and tyranny
and then we have the meaning of exploration
and that's the hero
myth and it's not a false
thing it's not self-deception it's like
you're out there transforming
chaos into order and that's
habitable territory for you and everyone
else it's like otherwise
it's bloody freezing to death and chewing
on bones with the dogs you know it's like
we don't want to do that
so it's not it's not
non real and we also don't know
how far we can push it like if all of you
stayed properly on the
border between it order and chaos
and we're attempting to
rectify in your environment everything
you could in a meaningful way it's like
God only knows how much better you could
make the world and like I would say
that's it that there's an ultimatness
about that and the
ancient Egyptians had figured this out a very
long time ago and it was partly for that
reason that they worship the God called Horus
who is the eye everybody knows
the Egyptian eye and both the Egyptians
and the Mesopotamians had figured out that
the fundamental attribute
of the heroic spirit
isn't rationality it's the
capacity to pay attention
and what's so cool about that that's the
Cartesian issue right
consciousness is the capacity to pay attention
and attention looks beyond
the pyramid of the known it's the little
eye at the top it's looking
beyond and it's extending the pyramid
and it's transforming the pyramid when it
needs to be transformed and everybody
can stay safely and nicely it's
going inside of that and it stays
dynamic so
that's really the redemptive meaning
I think because
you can't be secure
you can't
you're too fragile and things are too complicated
so you can't put your faith in ultimate security
that's what totalitarians do
and that doesn't work it just turns
genocidal so what can you
put your faith in
well
you can put your faith and it's not even
faith it's an observable phenomena
concentrate
on doing things that are meaningful
that you can do
they'll announce themselves to you it's like
you have something's bugging you it's like fix it
you'll find that that's quite meaningful
so and that meaning redeems you
right in that moment because
if it's meaningful enough
you're not self-conscious
and anxious and hurt and suffering and
devastated you're like on top
of the game and so then you might say
well what if you just stayed there all the time
well then problem solved
so and you might say
well no that's fine say it
but you could try it
that's the thing that's so cool about this it's actually
this is kind of an existential argument
in some sense it's like
you can run the experiment
I tell my students all the time
watch your life
see what you're doing that's really
low quality and meaningless
that you could just stop doing
so you don't have to answer ultimate
questions to do that it's like
it's not what is truth
it's what is falsehood
and it's way easier to figure out what falsehood
is than truth so if you're doing
stupid moronic things that hurt you and your family
and you know it and you could stop
and you think you might stop
which is quite a set of constraints right
then stop
and then see what happens
and the first thing that'll happen is that things will tilt a bit
little less chaos
little more order little more freedom from you
for you
so sometimes it's the opposite
it's like you've got your family around the neck
it's like don't do anything I don't want you to do
it's like tyrant you know
so then the trick is to loosen up
the old tyrant a bit and get a little more chaos
in there and that'll optimize the meaning again
and so
you said right at the beginning of the discussion
that meaning wasn't a proposition
that's right and I would say well one form
of meaning is propositional that's the orderly
meaning
but the transcendent form of meaning
upon which even order depends
is the dynamic
meaning making
but that's what I meant
yeah I know I understand that
that's what I was trying to convey with this notion
that I think is completely
accessible to current cognitive science
of this evolving relation
I mean because
one of the key ideas in the Darwinian model
is you integrate
you have the chaos
you have the opening up of the variations
that are often due to mutation
and random events
and then you have natural selection
that is the ordering that's the selection process
and then what evolution means
is exactly this constant interplay
between them and that's what I meant
when I think cognition is not
a set of beliefs in our head
it's the brain's ongoing
evolved fittedness to the world
and I do think
I agree with you that
learning to
learn what it is to be a wise person
is to learn to situate yourself
in such a way that that relationship
becomes very attuned
it becomes very self-propellant
it's
I think
you went to Egyptian
but I think it's what Socrates meant when he said
wisdom begins in wonder
at the point about
when we're in a state of wonder
and Descartes actually
contrary to what a lot of people thought about Descartes
we're different from the other animals because we're not
motivated just by fear and desire
we're motivated also by wonder and that's what makes us unique
because wonder is about
being on that horizon of intelligibility
that moving horizon
which behind us
is what has been confirmed
but in front of us is what has not been explored
yes
so I do think that
that's the Taoist symbol
as you know I am a Taoist
I practice Tai Chi
I do challenge the idea
well maybe you used the term a little bit different
I do challenge the idea that that is
not a rational state
I think we have reduced the notion of
rationality too much to logical
argumentation so for example
I would say that the Buddhist notion of mindfulness
of reflecting
on how we pay attention
so that we make it more reliably capable
of putting us on that
so that we more reliably
flourish and achieve our goals
is as much a form
a cognitive style of rationality
as good logical argumentation is
precisely because by
being on learning how to
structure your attention so reliably
keeps you on the horizon
of wonder is precisely to place yourself
in the optimal place for
flourishing as a human being that constitutes
I think for me a fundamental kind of rationality
and we're again giving into the
romantic notion that there's this deep
dichotomy between you know
attention and experience and logic and rationality
we should abandon that dichotomy
and we should see
that there is as much rationality
right going on
in you know the training of mindfulness
as there is in the rationality
of training logical argumentation
so let look I
appreciate what you're saying but I want to point out
well let me say because
rationality ultimately comes from
ratio from rationing it's fundamentally
about the logistical distribution
of your resources for success
right as a human being it's not
primarily about
the logical ordering of your inferences
that's just one way in which we ration
one type of our cognitive resource
but it is not our most fundamental resource
look our behavior is
not ultimately and primarily
driven by our beliefs beliefs
matter they affect our behavior but there's all this
stuff outside or below our beliefs
that is driving our behavior and what
gets most access to that
is not our beliefs but what we find salient
what we find relevant to bring it back
to what I was saying before
yes but
this is why I want to make this
this and like
we're circulating around the same set of ideas
but there's an important point of clarification
here I think
so one of the things that you
probably all know is that the Catholic
church was very skeptical about
rationality right and modern
people are not very happy about that
because they think of that as anti-science
in a sense and the sign of
like a what a degenerate institution
and yeah yeah you can understand that
but they had a reason
and I figured out this reason when I was studying
um
Paradise Lost right and the reason was this
so the book Paradise Lost
came out when
it's the great home by John Milton came out
roughly speaking when the nation states
in Europe were really starting to get going
and political ideologies were really
trying to starting to structure themselves
so they were like secular belief systems
and the way I read Milton is that
so Lucifer, Satan
and Milton's Paradise Lost is
he's Lucifer so he's the highest
spirit in God's heavenly hierarchy
so to speak and he's the bringer of light
right and Satan
like satanic arrogance is a rational
arrogance
so what does that mean exactly
well let's look at the Soviet Union
what happened in the Soviet Union with the communists
was that they set up a system
of axioms such as from each
according to his ability to each according
to his need which sound lovely
axiomatically true right so
their fundamental beliefs
and then they erected a rational system
on the basis of those axiomatic beliefs
that was completely coherent and
closed and then they worshiped
the ability to make that absolutely coherent
and not
to have any necessity of stepping
outside of it in fact if you stepped outside
of it with your own suffering
instead of taking into account the fact
that your suffering meant that the totalitarian
viewpoint was incomplete they just
killed you that I was a lot easier
than fixing the damn thing and so
what Milton intuited was that
the rational spirit which is the intelligence
of human beings the rational
and propositional based intelligence that
wants coherence and rigor
could be stretched to
such a degree that it became a replacement
for appreciation of the transcendent
which would be the thing outside
the known it just replaces that and that's
the satanic appropriation
of the highest heaven
in God's heavenly kingdom
you know and Milton's prediction
about that was that that turned
the rational mind into something that would
inevitably rule over hell
well that's what happened
in the 20th century now
I think I don't think
rationality is the right term exactly
and maybe attention isn't the right
term either although I think it's closer
I think the right term is logos
and logos of course
is the root of logic but it's also
the root of the idea it's a Christian
idea fundamentally although it's expressed
in many other religious beliefs
of the creative capacity
of the investigative
creative spirit right so
it's investigation and it's the
transformation of the consequence of the
investigation into fully articulated
representation and then it's the sharing
of that and so what we're doing
right now this is a logos conversation
because you're not trying
to impose your propositions on me
and I'm not trying to impose my propositions
on you what we're trying to do
is to use the structures that we both have
the propositional structures to dance
with them and out of the dance
to produce something that's
emergent and that's dynamic and that's
living it's the living spirit
actually that's living that's appropriate
it's it's historically
grounded and precisely appropriate
to this time and place
and that's the logos and so
that's why in complex
especially in complex western systems although not
only in them the logos
is the thing that's not only at the top
of the hierarchy of value but it's also
the thing that brings order out
of chaos at the beginning of time
okay I would agree with that you'd be
pleased to know that when I talk about this level
of the brain
and mind in my courses I use the term logos
to label it so
my students can vouch for me on that
and I do agree
but I would also point out
that logos is also the basis
of the word logistical which again is about
the distribution of resources
right right right absolutely
and so what I was proposing to you
is that
that a Socratic
I mean whatever else Socrates
was I mean he was open to the transcendent
in a very important way
but he was also
that's why he knew that
his not knowing was the most important thing he knew
but he did know but see people forget
that although Socrates said he didn't
know in that sense he said he knew
that he did not knew that doesn't mean that he was just ignorant
he meant he had what Nicholas of Cusa
called learned ignorance he had an inside
knowledge of the way in which
an inside awareness of the way in which
he was limited and
and faulted but
Socrates did claim to know some things
he claimed to know Ta Erotica
which didn't mean he was some sort of
sexual master
he meant he knew what to care about
he knew what to find significant
he knew that the
unexamined life was not worth living
and he knew that to such a degree that he was willing to
die for that so there
was a kind of knowing that he talked about
but again it's this
knowing about again what to care about
what to find relevant what
you should what you should direct
towards and he saw argumentation
not as something antithetical
to that process
but as something that could deeply support it
the Socratic process of
Alancas and argumentation was not
antithetical to that
logos the Deo logos but exactly
meant to be constitutive
and enhancement enhancing
of that very transformation of what
we fundamentally care about and what we find
most significant and I think it's been a mistake
again due to the romantics
because most of our mistakes are due to them
don't forget the
postmodernists
fine
but what I
this putting on
one side of argumentation
and then putting on the other
the other side caring and emotion
I mean what's going on in cognitive science
right now is exactly I mean
neuroscientists like Demasio
or Montague were saying
this is a false dichotomy that we have
saddled ourselves with too long
you cannot be a rational being if you're not
also a deeply emotional being
and you can't be an emotional being
if you're not a being that is
in some sense doing relevance realisation
and rationing its resources
they are interdependent
and equally interdefining
and I think that again ultimately goes to the
fact that relevance realisation is not
cold calculation it is ultimately
also deeply right
effective arousing
it's salient and again
this is what we're trying to do
when we talk about the meaning in life
we're trying to find
those ways
of behaving and seeing
and paying attention that are rational
in the socratic sense
of affording that interrelationship
between argumentation
and caring that again
puts us on the horizon
of intelligibility puts us in that place
where wonder and
a flow of insight becomes a primary way
into which we try to adaptively respond
to a world that will always
be beyond our
complete cognitive grasp
put her there
that's good
so that seems
to be a good end to the
debate I think we can
we've got about 10 minutes so
it might be a good idea to
incorporate some of the ideas from the audience
I'd like to say one thing first
I gave
credit to work the idea with Leo Ferraro
I also want to point out that a lot of these
ideas have not worked out in
isolation
my good friend Chris master
right there is a co-author of a book
on a lot of these issues and he's been
a co-author in a true sense
and so I want to give him credit for some
of the arguments and ideas we've often worked
these out together
it seems like both of you
have arrived at the conclusion that
a sort of self-reflective
disposition that
adapts meeting structures
dynamically while you live
is how you generate proper
meeting structures
I would like to offer you something to think about
this is like a leap way the hell up
the abstraction chain
you've all seen Pinocchio I presume yes
how many have seen Pinocchio
you know you're watching like animated
drawings of some puppet
rescuing his father from a whale right
it's like what the hell are you up to by the way
so you might think about that for a minute
you go into the theater and you watch that
and you think oh yeah it's like there's a puppet
and you know he goes to an island and then he dives into the ocean
with a cricket and then he finds his father in a whale
and then a fairy changes him into a boy
that all makes sense
it's like well no actually
it doesn't make any sense at all and what's even
more interesting is that you actually don't care
whether it makes any sense and that you'd be annoyed
at anyone who would point it out
so one of the things I would like to point out is that
the fundamental theme of Pinocchio is that
if you don't rescue
your father which is order
by the way from the bottom of the sea
which is chaos then you can't
become a genuine human being
and you know we show that to
our kids because we know it's true but we're not
smart enough to understand it
so truly we act out
and represent symbolically many things
that we cannot articulate and that's in fact
what art is for but you know
you might walk away from this thinking
well you don't believe this sort of thing
it's like no you might think that you don't believe it
but if you
watch how you act you believe it
and the only thing you should ever do
when you're trying to figure out what someone believes
is watch how they act because what they say
about themselves is a very
pale reflection generally speaking
of the actuality that
they themselves are
you do not comprehend yourself obviously
because we wouldn't even need this discussion
but
well I'll leave it at that
I wanted to point that out because the sorts of things
that we're talking about are being broadcast
at you in many ways all the time
and you know the themes
what 20th and 21st century philosophy
and cognitive science are trying to do
when they're doing the deepest thing they can do
is to raise these
these forms
of knowledge that we've acquired
over God only knows
what length of time up from the depths
and to make them articulate
and to help us become real and to realize
ourselves and like that is the solution
to the problem of life in so far
as there is a solution
and it may well be a sufficient solution
socrates thought it was a sufficient solution
I agree
he felt that his identification
with the logos process
roughly speaking had given his life so much meaning
in depth that when the gods
offered him the chance to shuffle off the mortal coil
he went and had a little colloquy
with his conscience his daemon
which was basically logos
and it said good job old man
maybe it's
luck for you you can drink the hemlock
you say goodbye to all your friends
and all Alzheimer's and the degeneration
of your being
sayonara and that's why socrates
went through the trial and you know
we know that story and we know it for a bloody
reason it's like he's at the base
of our thought structures along with other people
so
socrates means a great deal to me
socrates means a great deal to me
socrates means a great deal to me
socrates means a great deal to me
so there seems to be
at least one solution to try to pursue
life dan dolderman poses an interesting question
which is how can people
overcome their resistance to the crushing
responsibility that comes with confronting
the meeting crisis? Well that's easy
try to comprehend the alternative
you know you're either aiming for heaven or you're
going to end up in hell and it'll happen while
you're alive I don't have any idea what'll
happen afterwards but like you can see
people in hell all the time you just have to
look around and so you're either on
the path and moving forward and upward and
aiming at the right thing or
backsliding backwards into a place
that is properly conceptualized as
eternal and punishing it's like
that's no problem so the way
you motivate yourself partly is by thinking
well do you really want more suffering and misery
in the world or do you want less
you know and that's basically the decision
that we made at the Nuremberg trials right
way back at the end of World War II
is it wrong to inflict pointless
pain and suffering on people for aesthetic
purposes
and the answer was well
yeah okay good we got hell specified
that's good
so you think well the opposite of that
whatever is the opposite of that well we don't know
that's what you're pursuing unless you were
like pretty fond of what happened with the Nazis
you know so
you motivate yourself by
running away from the most awful thing
there is towards the thing that's the best
that could possibly be
and it's up to you to decide what those things
are I mean you're an independent
being with all sorts of ability it's like
solve the problems you can solve
like more power to you
I've got my problems I'm going to solve
them and hopefully jointly
all of us we can make this
place that's fragmented and flawed
and decrepit and trouble and beauty
and all of that into a place that's
as good as we can imagine
anyways and we should adopt
the responsibility to do that because the alternative
you think that
responsibility is miserable
is you try your responsibility
just see what happens
so that's
that's my answer to that problem
can I have the question I'd get please
because I don't I think I have a
I'm not going to challenge what Jordan says
but I think I want to answer a different aspect
of Dan's question
how can people overcome the resistance to the
crushing responsibility that comes with confronting
the means
so I think you can make a moral argument like Jordan has
and I think that's valuable but
part of what he was
part of what's being implied there
is that
the question is more about
how to enable people
and what I would answer
I hope that's a fair thing to say
Dan's nodding so that's a good sign
I
would say there that and this is again
to fall back on to Socrates and Plato
and give me
a moment here because I'm going to say something that might be
a little bit at first
Plato talked about the fact that people
have to be seduced into transcendence
and
that word kind of strikes us off because we don't like
the notion of seduction but what he meant by that
is you it's like you can't it's like
you have to sometimes tell your kids just do
this and then once you've done
it you will know why it was
important to do it you have to go through
the transformation in order to understand
why the transformation is valuable to you
now typically people just
know right and so what you want to do
is you want you want to
give some form of behavior to people
from where
that's inside the box they're in
that they like to do inside the box
but has this little time bomb
in it and Jesus of Nazareth was
a master at these kinds of time bombs
and they were called parables you tell this story like
oh I know what this story is
but it has this little explosive thing in the center
of it that's a snake
okay well whatever
and the point I'm trying to make is
you give people
certain psychotechnologies certain techniques
and you say you know this will
help do this this will help
you do this this will help you know solve
you know some of your own more practical problems
this will make you more insightful
this will make you a little bit more cognitively flexible
but then what you've also
what you've actually done is you've also
prepared them
in two ways you've
prepared them to actually extend that
machinery because it has a momentum in it
and start to ask the question for themselves
and you've also enabled them
to act to respond to the question
in a more challenging form
and then if you can keep doing that
with them in a kind of Socratic dance
you can you can draw
and this is what was meant by the seduction metaphor
you can draw people into
a very deep kind of responsibility
without having them at any point
confront a kind of crushing
clash and I mean in that sense
and I don't mean this in a patronizing sense
it is very much like good parenting
right yourself
yes of yourself whoever you're trying to help
confront
the meaning crisis
without as Dan is saying
sort of just dropping this nightmare on them
so that's how I would try
I want to elaborate on that a little bit
because you know John brought up
this other idea about parables
and so I want to tell you about a meta parable
because the parables that Christ
laid out were embedded
in a meta parable
and the meta parable
what expanded itself
over 2000 years into Christianity
essentially and so although it has its roots
far before Christianity emerged
so John said
you know you throw someone a little box
and you say transform within it
it's like okay fine so I would say the way you do that
is like we said this earlier
pick a problem that bugs you
that's why Jiminy Cricket is an insect by the way
pick a problem that bugs you
that you could solve
and solve it
now what Piaget would say
that in order to do that
you're going to have to take some of the presuppositions
that you're using locally in that box
let them die
that's a kind of sacrifice
and then
generate a little local chaos
and then pop up a new solution
and so that's a small death and rebirth
and so the reason that the parables
are tested inside the story of death and rebirth
is because the idea
is that the way that you get to the kingdom of heaven
so to speak
is to allow yourself to die
and be reborn and so you should have faith
in the part of yourself that can undergo
a disilutive process
in preparation
for a rebirth and that can happen
at multiple levels of analysis
micro levels which is where you should start
man start at the micro levels
fix what's at hand
and then if you get good at that
you can start moving up the abstraction chain
and you know if you get all the way to the top
which you won't because you can't
then the deaths and rebirths are very very
profound and significant
well that's a metaphor in many ways
and I don't know how far it extends
I mean it extends in long ways
but that is part of what
that drama and it is a drama
is trying to teach us about ourselves
we formulated the drama
to tell us who we are
you know and so
I like that
I really like that
you just said about the meta parable
and Christ exemplifying a parable
as a background thing
to ground his spoken parables
that's quite brilliant well done
thank you it only took me like 35 years
to think of it
well better you than me because I benefit from that
I mean that's great
I mean that's really good that's very good
I think
and I think
you're noticing about disillusion
affording you know this is
you know this is dynamical systems theory
it's also what the shaman do
yes of course
and I was also saying
that I think it's prevalent also
in the platonic metaphor
of people who are attracted
in the cave and they've been trapped
so that they're always looking at the shadows
and hearing the echoes and they have to make their way out
and they make their way a little bit
they make their eyes accommodate
and then that allows them to go a little bit farther
and then that blinds them
and then their eyes accommodate
and then that affords them to go a little bit farther
and you do the ascension
you do the anagogy out towards
where you're in the real world
looking at the sun
and I think that's the way you do it with people
well and then once you've looked at the sun
you take the light home and you distribute it
to people who are in the dark
well the problem as Plato said is when you go back down
day two if you go back
I mean Plato said it first way before man for man
you're blinded by the light
but if you go back too soon
they're going to kill you
like they kill Socrates
so then there's just as much
problem
of responsibility
on the teacher
as there is on the people being taught
they can suffer also a kind of catastrophic
event
if they come back down from the sun
I'm not putting myself in that place of enlightenment
but you know what I'm trying to say
I'm pretty much done
that's our time
good work
congratulations
