Megan asks, how much of you are creating content versus making appearances and attending social
things like parties?
Megan, this is a great question.
I often say that money and fame don't change anybody.
They just expose who someone actually is at a bigger scale.
And there's an enormous part of me that believes there's a lot of truth in that in technology
as well, right?
We're not making, you know, people like, I had this funny argument with this guy at
Wine Library the other day where he was like, you know, all these phones, the art of like
talking to each other, he goes, I was in Starbucks, this was great, I was in Starbucks and everybody
was head down.
Nobody was talking to each other.
I was like, where were you?
He's like, New York.
I'm like, all right, let's talk about this for a second.
I'm like, do you think 13 years ago at Starbucks that people were just yapping with each other?
Like, hey brother, great shirt.
That's not how New York rolls, my man.
And so I think that all that technology is doing is making more visible what we actually
were going to do.
I mean, I do believe the far majority of people are introverted at first, at scale, by math.
If you asked me or any, I think, common sense person in society, I think we'd all agree
I'm looking for some reformation here, like, there's way more people that are going to
sit either timid or middle timid or somewhat timid than somebody who's just going to roll
up.
The reason we love and hate the people that just roll up and are loud, you got them?
Really?
On that angle, you get them?
You got Gabe right there?
Like, the reason Gabe, who works at VaynerMedia, is someone that so many people know is because
he's loud as shit, right?
And some people love it, and some people hate it, right?
But that's why he's an extrovert extreme.
He's probably like singing his song right now.
Looks like he's in a meeting.
He's probably just doing some Drake lyrics while he works.
And so I think that it's important for us to understand that, first of all, could you
be having an addiction?
Sure.
I mean, look, I think everybody's addicted to their cellular device.
I fully believe that every single person's addicted to their cell phone, like straight
up.
So, maybe, but I would say this.
I think that it's great for all the introverts or the people that don't like the party and
don't like to go out.
What they were doing before where they were interacting with the television.
I mean, let's call it what it is.
Or with like a very small group of one or two friends who equally were close in location
to them and were like that.
Now people can really communicate at scale with the people that have similar interests,
find new people and all that kind of stuff.
And so, I think that you are fine.
I think your picture is rad.
I think you and I are friends.
