וף
Rollin Bart is one of the most
and influential of the contemporary French cultural critics.
He died in 1980, but before he had finished his final work,
he had broken decisively with the most important traditions
in post-World War II Western European thought.
Particularly, he made a decisive break
with structuralism and with Marxism.
And the result of his investigations,
which are organized around the theme of semiotics,
the theory of science, served to drive
the tendency of contemporary French culture
and perhaps to some degree the tendency of contemporary
high culture throughout the West towards post-structuralism
and post-modernism.
So this is Bart's great achievement,
which is bound up with his critical activities.
And we might be inclined to say that Bart
is, offers us one possible reading of Nietzsche.
In fact, Bart's reading of Nietzsche,
which emphasizes aesthetics, which emphasizes
a critical stance, which emphasizes
the outsider status of the critic,
actually transforms the critic into a creative artist.
And in the process of expanding the domain of the critic,
in expanding the creativity of the critic,
creates a new sort of art form, or if not
a new sort of art form, a new approach to human creativity,
which allows for the questioning of all previously
established verities and allows for the undermining
and interrogation of what post-modernists
call foundational discourses.
Now, because Bart was a French intellectual who
was simultaneously Protestant, homosexual,
and without a terminal degree.
He had become ill when he was supposed
to stand for his final examinations.
He was very much an outsider in the French Academy.
He was everything that most French intellectuals are not.
And for that reason, I think that there
were personal issues which tended
to drive his demythologizing project, which made him more
sensitive to the hidden coercions,
to the hidden hypocrisies in the contemporary state
of French intellectual culture, but also particularly
French mass culture.
Bart is remarkable for his very sensitive and very
intelligent readings of mass culture
and the artifacts of mass culture.
What he does is use semiotics, which I'll explain in a bit,
to try and decode the artifacts of mass culture
to discern what hidden messages are being generated
in these cultural artifacts and who
it is that's generating these messages for what purposes,
usually coercive, of course, because he at least
starts out in the Marxist tradition.
And ultimately, the point, or at least initially,
his point of demythologizing, of finding the hidden meanings
caught within the artifacts of mass culture
was to liberate us from the tyranny of mass-produced
consciousness.
So he wants to free us, to liberate us,
and perhaps individuate us.
He says in a piece called The Lover's Discourse,
which is a lovely book, very half-novelistic and half
essayist, it's quite a lovely piece.
He says that the reason why he wrote the book
is because The Lover's Discourse is a discourse
of profound loneliness.
And in fact, Bart is continuing a theme
that was developed in the middle part of the 20th century
in French culture, the idea of the lonely ego
existentially operating in a void of meaning,
in a void of coherence, deciding arbitrarily
how to arrange and fix the world in a way almost constructing
the world.
So Bart, like many French intellectuals,
is retreating into interiority, is
retreating away from the external world,
and trying to suggest that the external world is constructed
by us, not given to us.
If you can see, this is some ways
a derivation from the Kantian project
of showing that we actively construct the external world.
But it's much more radical than Kant's project,
because what Bart is going to argue
is ultimately that we construct not just the world of signs,
the area of society, the domain of history,
also ultimately nature is a social and linguistic construct.
So in a way, you could see that he's
formulating a sort of Cartesian aesthetics in which
the lonely ego confronts a completely indeterminate world.
And the project is then interesting, creative,
pleasurable world making.
So what Bart is doing is liberating the critic,
liberating the ego, and liberating the self
from preconceived identities, and from arbitrary and spurious
limitations on human activity.
We might want to say that Bart created a poetic protest
against human limitations, and it's
in the form of a demythologizing myth.
We will find, ironically enough, at the end of his project
that Bart goes so far in the process of semiotic demythologizing
that not only does he conclude that he
is able to demythologize the various artifacts
of mass culture around him, but he becomes reflexive and ironic
and undertakes to inquire into structuralism and Marxism
and semiotics itself if it is not also
a myth with a hidden agenda.
And so what we end up with is the demythologizer
ends up demythologizing demythology.
And what you end up with then is a sort of metamith,
an ironic assertion that instead of unmasking reality
so that we can see the true face, the substantial reality
beneath, we are going to unmask reality
and find beneath that it's just another mask.
And then it turns out to be masks all the way down.
There's no face underneath it.
There is no substantial reality.
So what Bart is doing is withdrawing into interiority
to a very carefully and thoroughly cultivated self.
And Bart is, I would say, the great philosophical exponent
of pleasure and the pleasure principle
in contemporary thought.
The sort of person that moves away
from the external world tries to render it dubious, contingent,
arbitrary, and depended upon construction by the self
is the sort of person that feels oppressed
by the external world and would like to remove
all those limitations.
I would be tempted to say that Bart's word in some respects
represents the triumph of the pleasure principle
over the reality principle.
He withdraws into his mind the way the Epicurean does
into withdraw into his pleasure garden.
And that's the reason why one of his finest and latest works
is called The Pleasures of the Text.
What he has done by liberating us from authority
and from the author and from any preconceived, predetermined
meaning within a text is to say that we, as critics,
as careful readers of the text, have completely free play.
Our domain is one of complete power and complete control.
By withdrawing any meaning, by killing off the author
and saying all we have is the text,
it makes the critic like a creative artist.
Now, the best book to start out with,
and if you're going to read Bart, and I personally
have really enjoyed reading Bart because he's such a wit.
He has a very morbid, sarcastic wit,
and he's somewhat like Oscar Wilde in the sense
that it's a kind of exercise in sarcasm
which is very, very arch and carefully drawn.
The strong point of French culture, or high culture,
has always been its powerful connection
between philosophy and poetry.
Well, their philosophical thinkers, for the most part,
are closely allied to poetic expression, poetic considerations,
aesthetic considerations.
And Bart, I think, is one of the extreme examples
of that tendency.
In a book called Mythologies, which he wrote in 57,
what we have here is a combination,
a rather ironic combination, of Marxist culture critique,
something like that which we found in, say, the Frankfurt
School, unmasking the media of mass communications,
things like advertising, showing that they
are a way of exercising social control performed
in the interest of a certain small elite within society.
Well, Bart is doing something like that in his mythologies.
It's a collection of short essays in which he examines
various artifacts from French culture in the 1950s
and demythologizes them.
He says, this is what it appears to mean,
this is what it appears to signify,
and yet there is another hidden second level of meaning
that goes beyond that.
And that's what he's searching for.
He calls this second level of meaning myth.
Now, at the end of it, at least in the English-American
edition, is an essay that Bart wrote 14 years
after he wrote his book Mythologies,
and that's called Myth Today.
And that's where he begins this project
of ironic reconsideration of the demythologizing project,
where he says, you know what, it may have been that I was
unable to pull off what I was trying to pull off,
because it may be masks all the way down.
If there is no substantial reality behind appearance,
then the possibility of demythologizing the world
completely disappears.
It's just one myth after another.
Let me give some examples of his activity,
and this may make it a little bit more sensible.
What he does is semiotics.
And semiotics can be defined as the science of science
or the theory of science, the general science of science
is what Desa-sur calls it.
It's a subset of structural linguistics,
which was founded and organized by Desa-sur
around the turn of the century.
And semiotics views the human domain
as the domain of symbols, as the domain of signs.
And what it does is try and read these symbols,
read these signs, and look for their internal coherence.
Semiotics is concerned primarily with the internal coherence
of relations between signs.
The relation between signs in the world is not memetic,
in the sense that it doesn't represent the world.
Rather, the relationship between signs is semiotic.
In other words, internal coherence of the system of symbols
is what we're talking about, not the correspondence
between the content of the symbols and the world.
It corresponds to a shift in the conception of truth.
Semiotics holds to the idea of a coherence conception
of truth.
If the symbol set is coherent, it's very much similar
to what Rory believes.
If the symbol set is coherent, well,
then there's nothing to judge it by.
We can judge it by whether it reflects the world,
because it is assumed at the outset
that systems of symbols do not mimic the world,
that Mises is impossible.
Rather, their truth is to be found
in the internal coherence of the systems.
Think about something like non-Euclidean geometry.
We look around for an application of it,
and there aren't very many.
Perhaps there are none.
Well, that may mean that non-Euclidean geometry fails
if our standard is correspondence to the world.
But if our understanding of truth is coherence,
well, then it's perfectly satisfactory.
It's just as true as something like Euclidean geometry.
Well, Bard is adopting a set of assumptions roughly like that.
Now, let me give some examples of this,
make it a little more sensible.
Examples of semiotic systems are something
like psychoanalysis or Marxism, linguistic systems,
that are separate and incommensurable.
And in addition, things like clothing, the kind of clothes
you wear, that's a semiotic system.
Mass culture, things like advertising or MTV,
an extremely powerful semiotic system.
Let me give you some examples of how something like this
would work.
And you'll realize that you have been doing
semiotic analysis all your life.
A sailor gets off a ship, comes into port,
two women come up and say, hi sailor.
One of them is wearing a long black dress
and has a crucifix around her neck, and she's a nun.
And she says to the sailor, hello sailor, hi.
And what she's doing is saying hello to the sailor.
Another woman comes out, she's dressed in red satin hot pants
and a see-through blouse says, hi sailor.
Now clearly, that person is a prostitute, not a nun.
And clearly, hi sailor means something very different
in that semiotic system.
The point being that the way she is dressed
is a text that the sailor is reading, which
is what he knows how not to proposition the nun.
Doesn't that make sense?
And we're doing it all the time.
Bart wrote a wonderful book called The System of Fashion,
in which he analyzes ladies' fashion.
And he treats it as a semiotic system.
And he's right, it is a system of science.
It's a remarkable idea.
So one of the utilities of this is
that it can be applied to the entire human domain.
All kinds of communicative activity, or every kind of sign,
can be broken down and analyzed.
We can find its first order meeting,
and then perhaps we can also find a second order meaning.
And that second order meaning, the myth that underlies it,
that hidden meaning, that's Bart's project.
It's a very interesting set of thoughts.
All right, now let me give you some examples of this
and make it a little more sensible.
Bart has a wonderful sense of humor,
and he seems to be attracted to kind of the bizarre and odd
in the world.
He finds things that approach the world
obliquely and ironically.
And it's strange that a highly cultivated, extremely
sensitive French intellectual should write
an essay on professional wrestling, on detergent,
on striptease, on the brain of Einstein.
Remember that Einstein's brain was taken out and put in a jar
and saved?
There's an essay on that as a cultural icon.
In other words, he asks, what does that mean?
Plastic, he reads it.
What does plastic mean?
What's the myth hidden in it?
You wouldn't have thought perhaps there was any myth
hidden in it.
In fact, this is Bart's project to go from surface structure
to deep structure.
After he reconsiders it, 10, 15 years later perhaps,
he realizes there's only surface structure,
and just move from one surface to another.
Let me give you some examples of what he tells us
about wrestling that's worthwhile,
and why I think this guy is really deep.
If not always deep and not always accurate,
always entertaining and very sharp.
He says, wrestling is something that's laughed at
by intellectuals, all us professional smart guys,
the PhDs, we look down upon professional wrestling
and the people that go, and it really doesn't amount
to very much, because it's kind of, well, childish,
it's silly, it's pseudo sport.
In fact, Bart has another reading,
and it's a much deeper reading, he says.
The reason why working class people go to wrestling
is because it's a spectacle, not a sport,
they're not stupid, they know full well
this is entirely rigged, entirely fixed.
So the question arises for Bart,
which wouldn't perhaps arise in the mind
of most intellectuals, what the hell
do they get out of this, what's the point of it?
Why go to see this spectacle?
Well, Bart has a real interesting way of looking at it.
He says, this idea of a community spectacle,
where we already know the outcome,
and what we're cheering really is symbols,
or the personified symbols of various kinds of
cultural trends, for example Hulk Hogan,
or someone like that comes out dressed
as an American hero wearing the flag,
we're all rooting for America,
and he's the personification of that,
which is why we know in advance that he's gotta win.
Well, here's what Bart says about wrestling,
he says, not only is this not what it appears to be,
but in fact, if you look back,
you will find in the spectacle of wrestling
the origin of attic drama.
When tragedy started out, it was not high art,
it was popular art, and everybody knew exactly
what was going on, and the end was foretold,
everybody knew it.
And what was going on in Oedipus?
The same thing is going on with Hulk Hogan in a way.
Oedipus is a symbol, not a person,
and we all know the outcome of the story,
we all know how this has to end,
we're just cheering on because it creates
a sense of social solidarity among us,
you know, he represents us.
So like, it's a real put down or come down,
because it's characteristic of contemporary intellectuals
to think of something like tragedy
as the highest of high art.
What is a greater achievement of attic culture
than Oedipus?
Well, Bart thinks that Oedipus at least started out
and that we've transformed it,
but at least the way it started out
was something like Hulk Hogan.
It was all the people, the average man in the street
or man in the Agora would go in there and cheer away,
no one for well that Oedipus has to get it in the end.
And the point is that it's a spectacle, not a sport,
it is a tale which is foregone,
and it is a system of signs.
She's a very interesting thought,
you didn't think you could read professional wrestling,
in fact, it's a text, very interesting thought.
All right, let me take it a little further.
Detergent, this is a very interesting thing.
And it's very funny because somehow I can't imagine
Bart covering something like,
he was doing something rather journalistic,
the World Congress of Detergents in 1954.
So apparently all the detergent manufacturers
got together in France, in Paris,
which it seems like an unlikely place
to hold a detergent convention.
And they had all kinds of advertisements
for the various kinds of detergents.
And what he did was he actually looked at the advertisements
as a text and read them.
And he said, what is this telling us?
Well, for example, when we find out that Luxe
deep cleans linen, what does that tell us?
Well, first of all, it tells you that linen is deep.
Who would have thought that?
What does it mean for linen to be deep?
Mm, very odd stuff.
And he elaborates the carefully constructed distinctions
that are being created
between roughly equivalent identical products.
One is green, the other is blue.
Chemically, they may be completely identical.
We've changed the food coloring,
completely different advertising campaign
connected to them.
One is appealing to the man of the house,
because it shows a guy lumberjacking
and then washing his hands with the blue stuff.
Blue is masculine.
If you've got pink stuff and a woman is doing dishes,
pink is feminine.
Chemically, it may be completely identical.
But what we are doing here is constructing
a contemporary myth.
And what Bard is saying is that myth has become a commodity
and commodities have become myths.
In a way, it's a change in the old Marxist formula,
CMC, from capital, volume one.
Commodity, money, commodity.
What Bard is saying that we have is consumer goods
and then mythology and then more consumer goods.
And the consumer goods serve the purpose
in this culture that used to be served
by the transcendence of religious objects.
In other words, we fetishize consumer goods,
which is why we bow down and worship
this year's new Cadillac.
And there's a drumroll before we bring it out.
Why? Because it is a new kind of icon
of contemporary life, of ease, of luxury.
I mean, imagine a Cadillac commercial.
What you see is Cadillac style, right?
What this means is Cadillac style.
What is the myth implicit there?
Rich people, happy people, people who have good lives
have Cadillacs.
To have a Cadillac is to have a good life.
Cadillac means good life, right?
There are myths being constructed
and our new mythologizers are not Homer,
are not Shakespeare, they are Admin.
It's a real deep and caustic argument.
Now, he investigates striptease and he finds out,
or he comes, he draws the inference
that the process of striptease desexualizes women.
Why? Because it never goes the entire way.
It never turns into sex.
It's an elaborate ritual in which we get
a sort of catharsis for men's sex drives,
who are the vast majority of the people
who make up the audience.
And it is a sort of ritual, it is entirely stereotyped.
You could almost construct a formula for it.
And what he says is this is just the construction
of the myth of woman and in particular,
the idea that sexuality is incomplete
in this sort of ritual.
He moves to the brain of Einstein,
which is a wonderful little essay.
And what he says is what the myth underlying that is,
that knowledge is a formula.
We have knowledge in a box here.
Einstein's brain, somehow inside that,
knowledge is enclosed within space.
See, we have Einstein's brain.
Someday we're gonna know exactly what makes this knowledge
and exactly what makes us such a great brain,
but for now, we're just keeping it in a box.
Knowledge is in a box.
It's the opposite of a postmodern icon,
Einstein's brain, destroy the brain and break the box.
That's postmodernism.
All right.
And finally, plastic.
Who would have thought you could read plastic?
What a perverse idea.
Well, Bart reads plastic and what he finds underneath
the plastic image is the myth of infinite transformation.
You can turn plastic into anything.
You can change its color.
You can change its shape.
You can make it do all kinds of stuff.
Plastic is the ultimate postmodern substance.
Plastic is infinite freedom, infinite transformation.
Plastic in both its adjectival and noun senses.
Okay.
Now let's think about myth,
and particularly that essay on myth today.
What happens in myth and the reason why myth is misleading
is because myth dissolves the realm of history
by making it appear as nature.
It makes the world appear natural and given.
It disguises the message that is being proposed.
And the most important of Bart's examples of this,
which has been discussed, ad infinitum, ad nauseam,
and the criticism of Bart,
is the picture of the Negro soldier.
Here's the idea.
He's looking at some French magazine,
and what he sees in the mid 50s is the picture
of a Negro soldier saluting the French tricolor.
And apparently he's dressed in a military uniform.
And the idea is that on the first level,
on the first level of a relation between the sign
and the thing signified, let's examine that photograph.
Level one, we have a sign, which is this piece of paper,
which has a film of light and dark spots on it.
That's what a photograph is, in a literal strict sense.
Okay.
What that sign signifies is a picture,
is the saluting Negro soldier.
That's level one.
That's the obvious surface level
of what that photograph means.
But Bart says, you know what that photograph really means?
At level two, in which we transform,
think of it this way.
Think of the photograph relating to the idea
or the image of the Negro soldier
as a sign relating to a thing signified.
So far so good, because semiotics investigate signs
and the relationships to what they signify.
Now, let's take that image of the Negro soldier
and put it back in the first place
and turn that into a sign itself,
and then have that signify some second order thing.
So we're bootstrapping ourselves up
into a new level of meaning.
And what Bart says is obvious about this photo
is that it's an apology for French colonialism.
He's saying, despite the fact
that the French colonial empire is breaking down,
despite the fact that we have considerable move
against colonialism and that there's a considerable racist
element and imperialist element in French political life,
in fact, there's no problem at all.
What us worry?
Look, look at the happy, content, loyal, docile Negro soldier.
That's why he's saluting the tricolor there,
and that's what that message is really all about.
And he says, that's really exact,
in other words, he thinks all the artifacts
of modern culture are like that,
and we are all under influence
by a sort of disguised coercion.
It's a deep argument.
Let me make a different analogy
and make it a little more sensible
and bring it home in contemporary America.
Rambo.
What is Rambo?
Well, on one level, it's a series of dots on a movie screen.
And what it shows is Sylvester Stallone killing 500 people,
being the toughest guy around and being invincible.
He's something like the modern Achilles.
Now, that's the first level.
That's the obvious surface meaning.
What's the second level, the mythological meaning?
The mythological meaning is that America
didn't lose the Vietnam War.
We won the Vietnam War.
It was a strategic retreat,
and we're still strategically retreating from it
by constructing works of art,
which say it wasn't really a problem.
One American could kill 500 of anybody.
We're the toughest people in the world.
We never die.
We never bleed.
We never worry.
We always get the job done.
In other words, the myth of American invincibility
is built into the Rambo movies.
I mean, it's impossible to miss.
It obviously has ideological mythic content to it.
Now, there may turn out to be,
as I'm pretty sure there will turn out to be,
a plurality, perhaps an infinite plurality,
of possible mythic readings.
Remember, once the text becomes completely open,
that means you can do whatever you want with it,
and you can treat it and read it as being whatever you like
because there is no authority behind it.
So Bart, in some ways, gives with one hand
and takes away with the other, right?
Offers us one reading, but then points out
that this reading is not closed,
that there are an infinite number of other possible readings.
We might be tempted to say that
semiotics is what I would call an open system,
rather than a closed system.
In that respect, it's like
vikingshtini and language games, right?
And that means that there are an infinite number
of overlapping games that don't necessarily
conflict with each other.
Consider the proposition, for example,
that we do a Marxist analysis
of the American Civil War, and we find out
that Abraham Lincoln freed the slaves
because of his feelings about authority
towards his father or something,
or we do a Freudian analysis.
We also might want to do a Marxist analysis,
saying that the reason Lincoln freed the slaves
is because he was the agent of advanced capitalism.
The point that is made by Bart is that
semiotics tells us that these systems
are not mutually exclusive, that what you're doing
is just describing the same thing
under the aegis of two different semiotic systems.
In other words, psychoanalysis does not refute
the Marxist interpretation of history.
The Marxist interpretation does not refute psychoanalysis.
They are two incommensurate
and mutually exclusive semiotic systems.
And there is an infinite possible proliferation
of semiotic systems, so we get an infinitude
of criticism and an infinitude of interpretation, right?
In some ways, you might say that Bart's project
is the inverse of that of Godomer.
Godomer says we should strive for clarity of interpretation,
strive to appropriate and renew our connection
to a cultural tradition, because it's a necessity for us,
but also what we should strive for
is the clarity of our interpretation,
transparency of interpretation.
Bart goes exactly the opposite way.
He says there is no clarity of interpretation.
That's one of the most dangerous myths of all.
In fact, once you think that you have clarified
to the one final and only interpretation,
that is the most ideological kind of self-delusion,
self-deception.
So what he's done then with the semiotic breakthrough
is undermine the presuppositions of Marxist
and structuralist culture critique.
Remember that structuralism thinks
that it's discerning the ultimate algebra
inside whatever it investigates.
And Marxism believes that it is truly
unmasking bourgeois ideology to get to the reality
of class conflict and exploitation.
Bart's point is that none of these activities are real,
they're just substituting one myth for another.
You can't get beyond it.
All right, now, let's look at the way he handles myth
and what he does with semiotics
in this final essay, Myth Today.
He calls myth the theft of language
because it depoliticizes language.
You don't see, or at least initially on first observation,
one does not notice that Rambo is an apology
for American interventionism.
It's an apology for American foreign policy,
which has been for the most part a failure,
at least with regard to Vietnam.
Well, his point is that what we want to move to
is politicized speech, where it is obvious
that there is some agenda behind that sort of a construction.
And once we repoliticize it, earlier in this career,
he thought that we could get to the real substantial truth.
Later on, what it turns out is that this mythic
demythologizing is, in fact,
the construction of a left-wing myth.
In fact, the demythologizer turns out
to be the remythologizer.
And that means that the critic is, in fact, the poet.
He's a creative artist.
And the critic relates to the work of art,
the way the artist relates to nature,
in the sense that, think about Plato's example
from the Fidris, Plato's example from the public,
where he says, an artist looks at a bed
and draws a picture of it.
And then a poet will look at that
and take it a little bit further.
We have three levels of reality.
We have the ultimate bed in the sky,
form of the bed, we have the bed down here,
and then we have the artistic reconstruction of it.
Well, Bart wants to add a new level to that.
We have the critical reconstruction of the artist's text.
It can be a painting, it can be a literary work,
it could be anything, but he is just as free
in how he interprets it.
So now we have a new domain for the artist to work in.
Previously, artists had been describing
the physical world, the social world.
Well, now it is possible for a new sort of critical art
to choose as its domain the world
of artistic creation itself.
It's a sort of, the criticism then becomes a meta art.
And then we get the completely free play of the text.
Now, here's the idea behind this.
What he is looking to do is undermine
the authority of the author.
He describes this as the death of the author.
The author has been abolished.
And the reason why he wants to abolish the author
and abolish authority is because that's what gives
the critic completely free play
within the domain of the text.
If, for example, a critic offers a reading
of a poem or a play and the author happens to be around
and he says to the critic, well, that's not what I meant.
Bart and that sort of critic,
this sort of post-structuralist critic,
this semiotic critic will say, so what?
The text is completely free.
What you think it means has nothing to do
with what it means as far as I'm concerned.
And there's no way you can legislate this for me.
The mere historical contingent fact
that you didn't mean that is just not my problem.
I got the text and that's all that matters.
So we eliminate intentionality and authority from the text.
We impose whatever we want on it.
You might want to say that what he's done is liberate
the connection between the signifier
and the thing signified.
He says you could have it signify whatever you want.
You take a text, you take a sign,
and whatever signification you want to attach to it,
that's perfectly satisfactory.
Do not be constrained by any externalities.
Retreat back into your own aesthetic judgment,
to your own aesthetic experience,
and the world is completely yours.
It's completely the domain of pleasure and your own freedom.
Now, what Bart says is something like this,
or the conclusion he ultimately comes to,
is that every limitation on human freedom
is ultimately a myth.
And in fact, clarity, which apparently
makes memesis possible, is one of the most dangerous myths,
because in fact, signs, discourse, communication
is neither clear nor obscure.
Do not create a myth of obscurity either.
That's not going to work, right?
So he doesn't want to go either way.
He says you can't generalize about it.
He doesn't have any satisfactory resolution.
He's caught between a rock and a hard place.
Towards the end of his essay on myth today,
he goes to great length to try and convince us
that right wing politics is more essentially
and closely caught up with myths than left wing politics.
But of course, it's so evidently done in bad faith.
He's so evidently trying to soft pedal
the mythic element of left wing politics
that when you step back and look at it,
what's clearly going on here is the ironic,
critical construction of a new meta myth,
which supports the projects he happens to like.
He has decided to read the domain of mythology
as if it particularly pertained to people
and tendencies that he disapproves of.
Of course, when you go back and read between the lines,
what he is is trashing the entire proposition
that we can demythologize the world.
There is no substantial reality.
He's retreated back into subjectivity.
Can you see why I call this a sort of Cartesian aesthetics?
It's me, me, me.
But instead of trying to find out,
say, the mathematical structure of the world,
he's trying to find out how can I maximize
my feelings of pleasure with regard to the text?
He says this in so many words,
or he comes pretty close to saying it in so many words,
the second to last page of mythology's myth today.
He says, even here in these mythologies,
I have used trickery, finding it painful,
constantly to work on the evaporation of reality.
I have started to make it excessively dense
and to discover in it a surprising compactness
which I savored with delight.
So the justification for this critical activity
is not the fact that it truly represents the world
because you can't truly represent the world.
The justification for it is that
he really savors it with delight.
In other words, this is the triumph
of the pleasure principle over the reality principle.
We can choose two ways to go in this domain
of post-modern, post-structuralist weightlessness.
We can move towards the will to power,
or we can move towards the will to pleasure.
Foucault chooses the first road.
He moves towards the will to power
and towards political activity.
Bart moves away from political power towards pleasure
and in moving towards pleasure,
he withdraws into a sort of aesthetic quietism
in which you could have political activity
as a sort of hobby, but you can't quite take it
with the grim and determined seriousness that Bart does.
He's involved too much in absorbing
the pleasures of the text.
He's become an intellectual aesthetic, all right?
And pleasure is the only justification
for any intellectual activity
because it can't mimic the world.
So all of human life is potentially
the domain of freedom, creativity, which is to say art.
And the transformation of life into art
is one of the most powerful
and worthwhile readings of Nietzsche.
You can see how this is all homage to Nietzsche in a way.
And the idea that there's no distinction
between appearance and reality,
that ultimately all we have is an infinite series of masks
and an infinite series of illusions,
what could be more Nietzschean and perspectival?
What could be more ironic,
and at the same time, gratify one's will to power?
Particularly if the will to power has been transformed
into me, me, me, simple internality,
the will to power becomes the will to pleasure.
It's worth comparing Bart's work
to the work of some of the other structuralists
or Marxists to see the uniqueness of his sort of position,
and also to see how, in some respects,
it all simultaneously expresses a general collective tendency
in particularly French intellectual high culture.
One of his contemporaries, Altausser,
tried to unify Marxism and structuralism.
And that, in some ways, is the last
of the modernist paradigms.
We get these giant deterministic systems,
and then try and show that they both operate simultaneously
and are both part of some larger meta-system.
Well, Bart knew Altausser and his reaction to this
was saying, look, this is the worst thing
you can possibly do.
The reason we are giving up structuralism,
the reason we are giving up Marxism,
is because these large deterministic systems,
first of all, inhibit, and as a matter of fact,
prohibit human freedom, right?
Freedom turns out to be an illusion.
You get these giant deterministic systems,
and in addition to that, they all entail
totalizing discourses, huge meta-narratives,
big picture stories which no one believes in anymore.
No one takes seriously, or at least Bart says,
that the people who are on the cutting edge
of high culture at the time that he is writing
can no longer take seriously the idea
that everything has a secret algebra hidden inside it,
and it's the job of structuralists
to find the secret algebra hidden in mathematics,
hidden in crystals, hidden in biological life forms,
hidden in literary constructs,
and also hidden in anthropology.
He says, no, there's no secret algebra
hidden in everything.
That's a myth that you people made up
so that you could legitimize structuralist discourse.
He says, the party's over for that.
We got so good at being critical.
We got so good at being negative and negating.
We negated the sort of structures
which made this criticism and negation possible.
In some respects, I think it was one of the artists
involved in the data movement who constructed a machine
that the first time you plugged it in, it destroyed itself.
Well, that is very much this conception of culture.
You plug the machine in, it criticizes everything around it,
and then when it gets kind of antsy,
it starts to criticize itself in that process of destruction
that Nietzschean philosophizing with a hammer
becomes a sort of intellectual vandalism.
And nothing is left except the ego,
but there isn't even a complete self
because when we break down the structures of communication,
the structures of knowledge,
and the structures of linguistic interaction
which give us some real hold to the external world,
it ultimately means that we're moving in the direction of solipsism.
Remember why I call this Cartesian aesthetics?
And that means that it's just me and my world
and whatever I might happen to wish to do with it.
The advantage of this is it allows us completely free play
within the domain of our experience
and within the domain of our mental activity.
The disadvantage of it is that it is a hopeless attempt
to avoid the external world.
And the problem is that the external world is still there
whether you like it or not,
as Dr. Johnson said, I refuted thus, there it is.
Bart thinks that this is another ideological construct
and that the external world is socially constructed,
linguistically constructed,
and we could simply unconstruct it if it gets in our way.
It's amazing the degree of egoism and wishful thinking
that you need to engage in
before you can argue a project like this.
It takes one set of presuppositions and radicalizes them,
take them as far as you can possibly go.
The problem is that the snake ultimately ends up
eating its own tail and the whole project disappears.
This is what we get when we get towards the end of Bart's life,
the last seven or eight years.
His work becomes intensely personal
and it's not clear at some times whether he's writing a novel
or whether he's writing a piece of literary criticism
or whether he's writing a series of essays
or whether he's writing one essay
or whether he's writing a book formally like that of Nietzsche
or say the Gay Science,
where it's just a series of vignettes
that don't really hold together.
He completely gives up on the idea of structure or form.
It all begins to break down
and this breakdown of literary structure,
this breakdown of communicative form,
is analogous to the breakdown of external reality.
And when we lose that direct mooring to the external world,
what happens is is that the self begins
to become contingent and dubious and fragmentary.
May I suggest that as Wittgenstein pointed out,
the self, like language, is socially constructed
and that when we try and remove ourselves
from the external world,
the result is that we end up talking to ourselves.
Now, I'm not certain that that's a problem for Bart.
I think that he finds this a sort of, how can I put it?
A sort of transcendence,
a sort of way of getting beyond the mere contingency,
the mere limitations of human life
towards some new external other realm.
In a way, I'd almost be tempted to say
that he's reinventing metaphysics
and instead of putting it somewhere else
outside of space and time,
he's putting it within the domain of his own consciousness
and then he's shooing away the rest of the world,
saying, I'll allow you to exist
if I decide to invent you linguistically,
but else wise, do not interfere with my activity.
I wish to be totally free.
So if Shakespeare were to come to him
and say, I think you're misinterpreting one of my plays,
he would say, well, what does your opinion
have to do with my freedom?
Get away from my face.
I have totally free play and what that amounts to
is the idea that Bart is a sort of anti-deadless.
If you know the deadless myth from Greek mythology,
he's the one who found the way out of the labyrinth.
Bart's reply is, labyrinth, what labyrinth?
I live here.
We're not trying to get out.
There is no out.
This is it.
You happen to be locked in your subjectivity
and the domain of your universe ends with your fingertips
and the idea that there is a way out of this problem
that will allow us to find the way the world really is
as opposed to the way the world is
within the domain of our semiotic system
is just the hopeless platonic dream of metaphysics
from the time of the ancient Greeks
to the time of the moderns, up to, say, Levy Strauss.
So what he's saying is, this is it.
I live here.
Get used to the absolute contingency of subjectivity
and get used to replacing all your other standards,
things like logical coherence or correspondence
to the external world, move away from all that reality
principle stuff just towards pleasure
because that's the only thing that could ever justify
any of your intellectual activity
and even that doesn't justify it.
There is no justification for intellectual activity.
What could we gesture at besides our own semiotic system?
And we're locked into that.
Semiotic systems are incommensurable and untranslatable.
And because they're incommensurable and untranslatable,
there's no necessarily conflict between Freudianism
and Marxism.
It's just there's no privileged position
from which we can decide that Freudianism,
as opposed to Marxism, is the true semiotic system
which discloses ultimate reality.
There's just no such thing.
There's an infinite number of perspectives, right?
And that means that we break down into a world
in which we're all profoundly lonely
and we have whole societies
composed of atomized individuals
speaking their own language, living in their own world.
Can you see how this is going to tend to liberate
the centripetal forces of the mind
and keep us from having any of those centrifugal forces
which hold language and society and culture together?
And can you see then why this is a negative critique
which finds certain tactical uses in asserting
that demythologizing is at least possible
or at least occasionally useful
in advancing left-wing politics?
What we have here then is the artist or critic
as political dilettante.
In other words, Bart likes to pursue politics once in a while
because he finds it pleasurable.
And the sort of politics he likes to pursue
is the politics which increases and extends his own pleasure.
And the reason why he does it,
well, at the fundamental level,
it's because he finds it pleasurable.
Pleasure is the only thing that one can refer to.
But for tactical reasons,
it may be useful not to suggest that.
It may be worthwhile to write a book
suggesting that left-wing myths
are very different from right-wing myths
and they're not nearly so mythological somehow.
And what he's doing is just creating a meta myth,
a new myth.
And that means that we have a new order of poetry
called literary criticism.
We have a new order of critic
who is now the ultimate poet
because where the poets had to accept contingency
and had to accept the simple determination
of the external world,
the critic is not bound by nature.
The critic is trying to undermine nature.
The critic flees from nature into the realm of the text.
And that's why I think it's correct to describe Bart
as anti-deadless,
the guy who says stop asking the question
of how to get out of the labyrinth.
Stop asking the question of how to find substantial reality
independent of your semiotic mythologizing.
In fact, it's masks all the way down.
And for that reason,
he adopts a sort of ironic stance
because what is there left for the critic to do?
Certainly he can't communicate any reality
about a text to anybody else
because it won't be any more real
than whatever they already believe
and whatever they already think.
The only thing he can do is indulge himself,
is gratify his desire for pleasure
by increasing the domain of his freedom
so that it covers all communicative behavior.
So it covers the whole set of signs.
Nature, for example, is one of our signs
for external coercion, the externality of things.
Well, we can treat that as a myth as well.
The whole world then becomes a human domain
constructed by human beings in society
and constructed by human beings in language.
It is Cartesianism raised to a social collective level
based not upon physics but upon aesthetics.
For some reasons that I think are clear,
Descartes such a great thinker,
French culture has never been able to get out
from under the shadow of Descartes.
They all have a problem with either accepting
their own selfhood or demonstrating the reality
of the external world.
It easily slips off into solitism
if you start your philosophical investigations
from the inside.
It's gonna be so hard to make that jump to outside stuff.
It may be there, but then again, it may not.
Summing up then, let's think about what this amounts to.
First of all, it's very clear that the demystifier,
in this case, Bart, is also a remystifier,
that the critic is an artist.
This is a position of extreme solitude,
a sort of epicurean withdrawal into the safety
and sanctity and security of the soul.
And the result is that we have an ironic metamith.
He intends to communicate to us the fact
that there's really nothing to communicate
about these texts, except the fact
that they are totally free and open
and that there's no authority which you can refer to
as coercing or limiting your interpretation.
What I would say goes on here then,
is that in constructing this Cartesian aesthetics,
Bart makes readers little gods
and gives them omnipotence over an infinite domain
called the literary text.
