The
text that I'm going to be discussing today, Nietzsche's Gay Science, was by his own admission
his most personal book, a text that more fully than any other revealed his self-created persona.
And I say self-created persona advisedly. Nietzsche was in personality, nothing like the
character you would have gotten from the previous lecture, which quite aptly describes
genealogy of morals beyond good and evil. And from that you get a sense of a sort of
philosophic Arnold Schwarzenegger. The actual Nietzsche was an incredible nerd, an extremely
sickly frail philology professor, prodigious in his youthful scholarship, but his self-created
persona that most accurately described the way he liked to think of himself was actually
less like Arnold Schwarzenegger than Oscar Wilde. He was very much a dandy, a very dapper
dresser, playful, had a very good sense of humor, at least in his writings. And I want
to try whenever possible to give you a sense of that side of him, because that's what
he tries to communicate in Gay Science. For example, it's a work that's comprised of
a series of aphorisms, poems, riddles, jokes, songs, none of which are more than a few
paragraphs long. The form of the work is Nietzsche's attempt to overcome what he considered
the dreary, systematic nature of traditional philosophy, which he felt was hampered with
a sort of ponderous, heavy-handed seriousness as if we were getting deep and getting to
the bottom of things. Rather than be systematic, Nietzsche endeavors to be edifying, playful,
to offer wisdom rather than a lie called truth. And as we'll see, Nietzsche argued that given
the philosophical conception of truth, there could be no such thing. The text is, I would
urge, a wonderfully beautiful piece of prose. In fact, it's one of the very few pleasurable
reads in all of German philosophy. Not to say that German philosophy is not rewarding,
I mean reading Kant, reading Hegel is intensely rewarding, but it is also very much like having
your teeth drilled without anesthetics. And Nietzsche was critically aware of this and
was in fact revolted by it. So my presentation, well as I've mentioned, whenever possible,
I attempt to capture this quality of playfulness, good-hearted mischievousness, and what I would
call a certain happy-go-lucky skepticism. Now, I must confess, in spite of his best efforts,
Nietzsche was, unfortunately, a systematic thinker. Therefore, I'm afraid, before I
can actually delve into the text, and what I plan to do is actually read you passages
and explicate them, I have to present one of his central doctrines that I believe informs
and underlies everything he writes. And this is a doctrine that's known as perspectivalism,
alternately called perspectivism. In brief, the doctrine holds that all of our concepts,
our language, our culture represent perspectives which we impose on experience. We put a mask
as it were over the realm of experience to create a, quote, world. And since Nietzsche
is systematic in all of his theories and theorems and to relate, I can draw on the last lecture
to give you an example of this. Take morality. Is morality an absolute reflection of the
truth? Or is morality, as Nietzsche says, perspectival? In other words, consider the
master morality that Professor Sugru has so aptly described. It is a morality of not
of what one does, but what one is. From a certain perspective, it has an intuitive sense. The
good man is a man who's good for something, and one can easily picture the situation.
You're going off into battle with spears and swords against people with spears and swords,
and you have a choice. You can have on your side either, well, Lawrence Taylor, or you
can have on your side Mahatma Gandhi. He says, well, this was the master sense of morality.
One of them is good. Lawrence Taylor. Why? Because he's good for something. When you're
in the middle of a battle, you'd rather have Lawrence Taylor by your side. Mahatma Gandhi
is bad because he's useless. He can't do anything for us. In the middle of a battle,
he's going to sit down and start, you know, eating rice or something like that. Perfectly
useless. So that's one perspective. And then there's the slave perspective, right, that
Lawrence Taylor is in fact a bad man because he's violent. He's contemptuous of those
beneath him, and Mahatma Gandhi was a good man because he had universal love. And Nietzsche
says, well, which of these are really true? Neither. There isn't a real truth to this.
There's just those perspectives, and you choose the perspective which works best for you.
Now, this is not a complete innovation. That such perspectives are imposed rather than quote
red off of nature. Kant pointed out, right, with his discussion of the Copernican Revolution
and conceptual schemes. A lot of what we quote, call the world actually arises from our own
a priori categories. Now, Hegel had historicized that. He said, you know, it really doesn't
come from our a priori categories of mind because we find different conceptual schemes
in different parts of the world, and we find conceptual schemes evolve over time. Nonetheless,
philosophers after Hegel, and certainly before, held that what makes a perspective true is
that it in some sense corresponds to the way the world is, right? And we might accept Hegel
by saying, well, each of our following perspectives comes closer and closer to an accurate correspondence
of the world. And this is a doctrine called realism, the notion that the world is just
like the picture represented of it by the beliefs we hold or by our language or common
sense. Nature felt this was a piece of pre-Darwinian nonsense, literally a philosophic antique
piece. Nature says, what if we take Darwin seriously? What possibly can make a perspective
believable except the fact, not that it corresponds to reality, but rather that it empowers us
and allows us to cope with reality more effectively. So the key to evaluating belief as good or
bad is not whether it corresponds to reality, which is a vacuous notion because we never
quite get in touch with reality, but rather whether it fulfills our will to power, right?
Whether it allows us to control nature, to control ourselves, to control our environment,
including other humans. So in short, realism for Nietzsche is dogmatic and unjustifiable.
For the world in itself is nothing like the way we describe it. Now I want to urge that
perspectivalism runs in two disparate directions, one external and one internal. Externally
it takes the form of scientific realism, which is the belief that science accurately
depicts the way the world is. But Nietzsche disagrees, he says science is just another
perspective. It's certainly the perspective he believes in, hence gay science, but not
because it corresponds to the world, but because it's an extremely useful thing to believe.
Right? It actually helps us control nature. Reality itself is actually just chaos and
flux. Nietzsche does occasionally, I must confess, fall into metaphysics. His metaphysics
are thoroughly Heracletian, which is to say they are the metaphysics we found in Heraclitus,
the Presocratic philosopher. Persons for Nietzsche are nothing other than a series of
drives and instincts. And this is a really Darwinian conception, right? What describes
a human is the particular conjury of drives and instincts, and Nietzsche sums that up
with the phrase will to power. So all of nature, not just humans, are various wills to power.
All the animals are wills to power, trying to dominate their environment, replicate their
genetic code as much as they possibly can, and eat other things lower in the food chain.
That's the notion of will to power. So science in common sense are just masks that we throw
on reality so that we can cope with it, so that we can manipulate it. Now Nietzsche accepts
the correspondence theory of truth as the only tenable theory of truth, and it is for
that reason he says there is no truth, right? Because there is no fixed, final, parsed reality
for it to correspond to. So don't be upset when we find out that everything is a lie,
that there is no truth. It doesn't mean that there's nothing to believe in. It simply means
that there is nothing to correspond to our beliefs, that our beliefs simply interact
with the world causally, rather than correspondentially, that they give us a handle on the world.
And as I've suggested, therefore grounds for belief have nothing to do with truth, but
rather are all about power over nature and ourselves. Now, perspectivalism also cuts
internally. It undermines something which we might call the internal realism of the self.
Now we're all aware at some point in our lives, we wear masks, right? We present a persona.
When you meet your boss, and he looks like an old bald, who knows what, you don't say
hi, old bald, who know what, rather you smile and say, oh you look so good, I love that
tie, that's really charming. And we wear these masks when we deal with our children and they
do something silly which is dangerous, we don't laugh and say that's silly, we take
a stern face and say, why not not do that? And we put these masks on, we all do this
all the time. Nonetheless, we have this belief that if we could ever take those masks off,
we would find our real self, the real Professor Staloff as it were. Nietzsche finds this view
embarrassingly dogmatic and stupid. There is no real self, any more than a real world.
That's an incredibly dogmatic myth. We create ourselves. We create ourselves by putting
on masks, masks that we build, perhaps on the basis of models of others, but perhaps on
our own. And in fact, that's the distinction he draws about mask wearing. Some people are
more than satisfied to wear the masks that their culture presupposes. For Nietzsche,
that's dangerous, at least for him. He says that sort of a person has no terror of being
a copy, a replica, one just like any other cut out of a cookie cutter mold. The interesting
person is like an artist who self-consciously and artistically creates his own masks. He
may not even do it in his personal life. He may do it through his works. And that is
exactly what Nietzsche's works represent for him, his own self-created persona, his
own self-projected mask. Now, I want to very briefly to say that there are some would-be
friends of Nietzsche who've claimed that he was not a perspectivalist because that would
be a stupid view. I mean, if it's all just perspective, then one perspective is as good
as another. Well, Nietzsche has a great line. He says, I wish such disciples on my enemies.
He says, that's a cloven-minded thought, the inference limps. And the reason it limps
is because such friends assume that the only thing which could count as truth, as grounds
for belief, is correspondence. When Nietzsche says, not at all. There's plenty of reasons
to decide that physics is more true, say, than the belief that I have wings and can
fly off this podium. In fact, the best example of that would be that if I tried it, I'd break
my leg. He says, so that's the grounds for belief. Perspectivalism isn't undermined
by the critique of relativism. Simply because none of the beliefs are absolutely true doesn't
mean we can't choose between them, which fulfill our purposes better.
Perspectivalism does mean, however, that our views of things are interpretations, not
correspondence readings. And nowhere is this more true than in reading texts. Every reading
of a text is an interpretation of it. And in no text is this more obvious than in Nietzsche's,
which are disparate, often contradictory, confusing. So what I'm going to offer is an
interpretation of the gay science, which will take the form of looking at particular passages
which I find edifying and explicating them. I'll try, of course, because I'm not quite
Nietzsche, to cover all the important topics. But whether I do or not is in no way significant.
Whether I cover two or two hundred aphorisms is important. What is important is that I
try and give you a sense of the style, of the flavor of this text.
Alright, so that brings us to the beginning of the text. What is gay science, after all?
The illusion, I believe, was to the gay sebert of the Provence troubadours, which were chivalric
knights who created the first love songs and love poems and were destroyed during the middle
of a papal crusade, because obviously they weren't very good Christians, they believed
in adultery. And the point for Nietzsche, and other thinkers since him, I mean Joseph
Campbell has thought the same view, is that these were the first people who created individuals,
who said, I will stand against authority, and if the church tells me what I'm doing
is a sin, well, so much for the church. I will fulfill my own path. And I think that's
a fair sense of part of what gay science is about, the creating of individuals, the cherishing
of individuality as opposed to commonality, universality. Nietzsche, however, in his preface
to the work, refers to his gay science as the result of a convalescence. He says, gay
science, that signifies the Saturnalia of a spirit who has patiently resisted a terrible
long pressure, patiently, severely, coldly without submitting, but also without hope.
And it was now all at once attacked by hope, the hope for health, and the intoxication
of convalescence. Is it any wonder that in the process much that is unreasonable and foolish
comes to light, much playful tenderness that is lavished even on problems that have a prickly
hide and are not made to be caressed and enticed? This whole book is nothing but a bit of merry
making after long privation and powerlessness, the rejoicing of strength that is returning
of a reawakened faith in a tomorrow and the day after tomorrow. Well, what is this sickness
or as he calls it, nausea that he's getting better from? The nausea, he says, is the result
of having an over-large dose of a very unhealthy European diet called Romanticism, which fills
us with great aspirations. Problem with such a conviction is, it only lasts as long as
you're scientifically illiterate. If you read Darwin, you realize that there's no purpose
behind our existence. We are, in fact, simply the agents of the big actor behind history,
Mr. DNA, right, who's a sort of viral infection that's infected the planet and where it's
laid a strategy for dominating that infection. But in a sense, don't worry, it'll die off
eventually. So Nietzsche says that's the sort of thing which can induce Veltschmer's
world weariness, a sense of anxiety and dread over it all. And Nietzsche went through this
intense depression, life is meaningless, there's no purpose, there's no goal, and then he
got better. And as he gets better, he takes on a new perspective. He's no longer serious
and somber, what he would call, oh, too, German. Now, he's pricklish, he's gay. Let me be
clear, gay at the time did not have the connotation of homosexuality that it does today. But Walter
Kaufman has quite persuasively, I think, argued that it's no coincidence that homosexuals
would have reached for the same term that Nietzsche used to describe his science, because
it suggests a sort of studied superficiality, a sense of the beauty of mere appearance,
a refusal to take serious things seriously, rather take them trivially, and take trivial
things seriously, which some of you may recognize as the dictum of Oscar Wilde. So this text
is, in a sense, then, at least for Nietzsche, a study of his psychological experience of
world weariness and its philosophical results. And Nietzsche makes an important point. He
says, this is not just me, I'm aware of it. I'm a philosophical psychologist. But every
philosopher, if he really is an interpretation of the body, in a sense, every philosopher
feels some sort of psychological tension or pull and need for meaning or purpose. And in
fact, he says, most of them are misinterpretations of the body. They're a tendency to read one's
psychic organic needs into nature. Given that, Nietzsche says, I will not do that. I will
not treat my own projections as a serious, profound, deep thing that underlies the world.
Rather than being profound and deep, we should be, as he says, like the Greeks. Oh, those
Greeks, they knew how to live. What is required for that is to stop courageously at the surface,
the fold, the skin, to adore appearance, to believe in forms, tones, words, and the whole
Olympus of appearance. Those Greeks were superficial, out of profundity. And this is, and is not
this precisely what we are again coming back to. We dare devils of the spirit who have
climbed the highest and most dangerous peak of present thought and looked down from up
there. We have looked down from there. Are we not precisely in this respect Greeks, adores
of forms, of tones of words, and therefore, artists? And I think that celebration is the
realization that, you know, there are some serious questions that might be raised, which
it's just indecent for any gentleman to raise. And he tells a story of, you know, there's
this anecdote about this woman who, this young girl who once asked her mother, is God everywhere?
She said, of course, God is everywhere. And the child said, well, that's, I think that's
thoroughly indecent. God follows me into the bathroom. I mean, is God aware, is God there
when I'm picking my nose? Oh, that's, that's horrible. And Nietzsche says, well, there
may be something to that. A wise man knows what are the fair questions and what sort
of questions not to ask. Okay, now we turn to the body of the text itself. Nietzsche
added a sort of introduction, which he called joke, cunning, and revenge, which will turn
out to be the strategies of gay science. And the book introduces all of the major themes
that will be discussed in the text. The very first of these little poems is called invitation,
and it is exactly that. It's an invitation to the text. Take a chance and try my affair.
It will grow on you, I swear. Soon it will taste good to you if by then you should want
more. All the things I've done before will inspire things quite new. And the point Nietzsche
is making is if you follow this book and begin to think dangerous thoughts, you won't follow
me. You will create your own. And I think he wonderfully expresses this in his ninth
little poem called My Roses. Yes, my joy wants to amuse. Every joy wants to amuse. Would
you like to pick my roses? You must stoop and stick your noses between thorns and rocky
views and not be afraid of bruises. For my joy enjoys good teases. For my joy enjoys
good roses. Would you like to pick my roses? All of the aphorisms in this book are Nietzsche's
roses. He's beckoning us and saying, look, you're going to find some thorny issues here,
some pricklish issues here. But that is the nature of his joy, of his happiness, of his
happy-go-lucky mischievousness. In his fifth little poem, he introduces his, what I would
call, meta-ethical critique, which is not his ethical doctrine, but his doctrine about
the way we should feel towards ethics. What troubled Nietzsche was how particular parts
of our culture, particularly of our philosophical culture, are claimed to trump the others.
Our moral duties come first. And Nietzsche said, well, morality is fine, of course. But
is it all of life? Must we learn how to morally eat our food? Must we learn what are the morally
correct ways to fold our napkins? Why should our virtues be grave? We like ours nimble-footed.
Even like Homer's verse, they have to come and go. Sometimes virtue and morality should
leave us in peace for a while so we can do something else, like be creative, do art,
do science. Morality is not the measure of all things. And I think perhaps his most wonderful
expression of this is in the text itself, I'm jumping out of place, I know, called dealing
with virtues. In dealing with a virtue, too, one can lack dignity and fawn. And clearly
I think the figure he's responding to here is Kant. Oh yes, we must do our duties. Don't
you think that's rather bad form, Kant? Don't you think it's rather bad form to constantly
fawn before your duties, like they were a sort of surrogate god? It shows a real lack of
taste. Well, he also introduces himself as a problem in the text. He says, in a wonderful
passage called Request, the minds of others I know well, but who I am, I cannot tell.
My eye is much too close to me, I am not what I saw and see. It would be quite a benefit.
If only I could sometimes sit farther away, but my foes are too distant, close friends
still too far, between my friends and me the middle would do my wish, you guess my riddle.
I need you to make a deep point. If there is no real self in there, but only masks, perspectives,
I'm a little too close to my own mask to see who I really am. That's your job, the reader
and my job, the reader, the expositor, to try and figure out Nietzsche and come back to
him and tell him who he is. But, of course, this has a sort of selfish side to it too,
which Nietzsche is quite aware of, as in for your consideration. Double pain is easier
to bear than single pain. Do you accept my dare? Try and think my, quote, dangerous thoughts.
Okay, and then finally one last theme in this introduction, and we can turn to the rest
of the body of the text, and that is his, what I would call, tasteful critique of Christianity.
He says, in a wonderful little poem called, Chusy Taste, if it depended on my choice,
I think it might be great to have a place in paradise, better yet, outside the gate.
And Nietzsche is making a very deep point here. He's saying, look, stop being pious
for a minute and be honest with me. What do you think goes on in heaven? Everyone sits
in beatific vision, genuflecting towards the deity. What a particularly boring person he
must be. Would you really want to spend time there? All the interesting people are in hell.
Well, they may well be suffering, of course. We don't want to be in hell. We might want
to look at paradise to see that wonderful splendor, but it's beneath the dignity of a
gentleman to waste his time in heaven, and that's Chusy Taste. He doesn't want to be
part of that, shall we call it, herd? Nietzsche always does. One more passage about his Chusy
Taste, and then we can leave it behind, and that is his statement against Christianity,
which again is not only sharp and invective, but actually extremely accurate. Against Christianity,
what is now decisive against Christianity is our taste, no longer our reason. That may
seem absurd at first, but go to a college campus and listen to, especially an elite one, and
listen to the young rail against the stupidities of religion, and you'll notice something.
They haven't a good argument among them. Any sophisticated theologian will persistently
best them in argument, and Nietzsche's point is, but the young won't be convinced. It's
not reasons that turn them against Christianity anymore. It's taste. How thoroughly musty
and brown to believe in that sort of heavy-handed, baroque sort of belief. The youth have developed
a higher form of taste, which clearly shows that it's too stolid, too, as it were, beef-headed.
As he says, mystical explanations are thought to be profound. The truth is, they're not
even superficial. Nietzsche is saying, look, stop looking at religion from the scales of
piety, and look at it literally, and it's thoroughly absurd. Okay. We now turn to Book
One, which I would argue constitutes a species of shock therapy. Nietzsche is, in a certain
way, trying to preach what I would call tough love. We've all been brought up in a culture
which has brainwashed us into thinking like, it wants us to think, thinking like members
of a herd. And the only way to break us free from that and liberate us is to shock us,
is to scare us, is to show us the absurdity of these views in a most harsh fashion. So
he begins with his very first aphorism, the teachers of the purpose of existence. He says,
whether I contemplate men with benevolence or with an evil eye, I always find them concerned
with a single task, all of them and every one of them in particular, to do what is good
for the preservation of the species. Not from any feeling of love, but merely because nothing
in them is older, stronger, more inexorable, and unconquerable than this instinct, because
this instinct constitutes the essence of our species, our herd. And this is extremely
Darwinian point he's making, that if you're kind to other people, and if you try to help
the species, it's not because you've thought about it, if you have sentences that describe
why you do it, you added those lies later. You do it because you're genetically programmed
to do that. That's how Mr. DNA uses us to replicate ourselves. He goes on to say, if
you think about it, hatred, mischievousness, evil, are all indispensable for the life of
the species? They bring out characteristics, noble characteristics in us, perhaps virtuous
and kind characteristics, which would otherwise go rotten if they weren't occasionally evil
people and bad things. In fact, if we look at it scientifically, we can prove that it
has, in fact, preserved the species so far. But Nietzsche's fear is that we may have reached
the point where we can no longer even think bad thoughts, even think our way outside of
the herd. For if one could, one could then respond not with a sort of vitriolic anger,
but with laughter, as he says, to laugh at oneself as one would have to laugh in order
to laugh out of the whole truth, to do that, even the best so far lacks sufficient genius.
Even laughter may yet have a future. I mean, when the proposition, the species is everything,
one is always none, has become part of humanity, and this ultimate liberation and irresponsibility
has become accessible to all at all times, perhaps laughter will then have formed an
alliance with wisdom. Perhaps only gay science will then be left. And Nietzsche's referring
to what he thinks is an extremely dangerous development in the late nineteenth century,
which is the growth of humanitarianism, of kindness and gentleness. He's not against
those things in and of themselves, but they're totalitarian. They insist that everything
devolve around them. And he says, you know, there's this weird fruit that's grown on the
tree of the human species in the last few hundred years called the individual, which
doesn't follow the herd. But of course, if we can all become liberals and socialists,
we can stamp that out. It's a sort of happy-go-lucky totalitarianism.
And then he turns to the real issue, what are the meaning of teachers of the purpose
of existence? Heroes who show up on the stage and tell us, life means this, you must go
out and do your duty, you must save humanity, you must be kind to the poor and the oppressed.
There's something profound about the meaning of life. And he says, well, they actually
have a place. They actually have a function. Right? What they do is tell us there's something
in life that can't be laughed at. There's something serious beneath life, behind life,
underneath life. Beware, do not laugh. And he says, well, of course, ultimately all
of these systems get exposed to reason, and the result is always laughter and comedy because
they're all absurd and ridiculous, none of them are provable. But nonetheless, there's
something new that's come out of this. Humans are the only animals that have, how to say,
grown a new need, a need for a purpose. We feel the need to have a reason to go on living.
And he says, this is fascinating. Dogs don't do that. Has your dog ever come up to you
and say, it's a dog's life, alpoh three times a day. I'm just going to go ahead and do
it all. No, I mean, every animal does how to go on, but we have this other need. And
the reason is, because teachers of the purpose of existence offer us cultural narcotics.
They somatize us. They make us, as it were, stoned and happy so that we cannot look at
the suffering that is most of life. And Nietzsche's point then of tough love is, that's the way
you break the addiction. I point out to you that it is all absurd.
Then he turns to the problem of intellectual conscience. I keep having the same experience
and keep resisting it every time. I don't want to believe, although it's palpable, that
the great majority of people lacks an intellectual conscience. Indeed, it has often seemed to
me as if anyone calling for an intellectual conscience were as lonely in the most densely
populated cities as if you were in a desert. Everyone goes right on weighing things in
their scales of good and bad and right and evil. When anyone who cares to take a close
look at that finds that it's absurd, that evil has an indispensable place in the evolution
of the human species. It creates the sort of stormy conditions which make a tree grow
strong and firm. And he says, I can't help feeling that deep down inside every single
person has at least the desire for an intellectual conscience. And he says, this is my type of
injustice, which leads directly to the next aphorism. We were going to find that Nietzsche
is actually a profoundly fair person. This aphorism is called noble and common. And he
says there's a certain confusion. You find that there are people called, quote, normal,
or noble, who are incredibly unreasonable. They somehow throw their life on the rocks
of art, or science, or philosophy, squandering their lives for some higher ideal. He says
the common person looks at that. And the first thing they think is, how's he getting over?
Right? How's he going to turn that into money? I know that's what he's doing. He's going
to turn it into money. Everyone does it, turns it into money. And then after a certain point,
when he realizes this guy's not making any money, he says, well, he's an idiot. He's
a dope. And he says, and that's the injustice of the common person. He can't imagine someone
who doesn't have his own straightforward proclivities. He says, on the other hand, there is the noble
person who aspires to higher things. But he too is unjust, because he turns to the common
person and says, well, you too have these aspirations. Why is history so stupid? People
live subveno lives. And Nietzsche says, that is the injustice of the noble. They assume
that everyone is just like them. And so they don't judge them by the proper standards.
So when you find common people and say, why don't you aspire to higher things? He just
says, that's an unfair criticism. They're not capable of that. You must judge them by
their own standards, by their own rationality. And in fact, he says the ultimate noble mindedness
is for those who are noble to want to be the exception and not the rule. For the bulk of
humanity must be sympathetically understood as common. And that's not a bad thing. That's
just the way they are. They're not to be rebuked for that any more than the noble are for being
profound. Finally, I want to turn to, in this shock treatment, his fifth aphorism, unconditional
duties. All those who feel the need, feel they need the strongest words and sounds, the most
eloquent gestures and postures, in order to be effective at all, such as revolutionary
politicians, socialists, preachers of repentance, with or without Christianity, all of whom
cannot tolerate semi-success, talk of duties and always of duties that are supposed to
be unconditional. And this clearly is a jive, it can't. This point is, oh yes, we have some
moral conviction I want to give you, which I can't prove to you. So all I do is I dress
it up in big words, oh, it's an unconditional duty. It's a categorical imperative. It's the
purpose of human existence. It says, well, you find that because there are certain people,
like, say, Kant, who are too noble, perhaps from their birth, perhaps from an experience
of their education, to be willing to serve as the function of a political party or to
be someone's personal servant. But they still feel the need to be a function of something.
So they come up with these pompous principles, unconditional duties. And as he states, refined
servility clings to the categorical imperative and is the mortal enemy of those who wish
to deprive duty of its unconditional character. That is what decency demands of them and not
only decency. And I think this is a deep point. He's not being an anti-moralist. He's saying,
look, morality has its place. But why can't you tolerate semi-success? Why can't you tolerate
saying, you know, kindness is better than cruelty? Not because I'm certain about it, but it
seems that way to me. He says, no problem with that. But no, you have to say, no, I
can prove to you that kindness is better than cruelty. He says, well, that's pathological.
I now want to turn to the discussion of the doctrine of feeling of power, one of the most
misunderstood doctrines in all of Nietzsche's writings. As we know, he believes that we're
all full of a will to power. And many people believe that means that he favored inflection
of cruelty and suffering. Nietzsche points out, no, no, no, no. Look, inflicting suffering
and cruelty on people is a form of showing your will to power. But it's the will to power
of a weak man. How much more easy is it to make someone suffer than to benefit them?
In other words, if you want to see who's the real megalomaniac, the one who's really full
of power, look at someone who's kind. What are they showing? I'm so overflowing with
life and power that I have some extra I can give you. And you'll be beholden to me. That
is the real warrior ideal of Nietzsche, not a cruel man, but a kind man. And a kind man
is kind for pathological reasons, because it fulfills his feeling of empowerment to
help people. That is, as he would say, a profound sense of empowerment. But he points out, never
will such a man be kind out of pity. Pity is the most agreeable feeling among those
who have little pride and no prospects of great conquests. Rather, he'll be kind out
of a sense of overflowing greatness. Another issue which Nietzsche has been incredibly
misunderstood about, because he's dialectical and he does say some ugly things on the subject,
is women. But as we'll find out, Nietzsche is a dialectical thinker. He sees two sides
of every issue. For all of his misogyny, he has this wonderful little passage called
Diverse Disatisfaction, which he says, you know, the weak and feminine type. What they
do when they see a problem or suffering is they make it more beautiful, more profound.
Whereas the masculine and strong type, it makes things better. It actually improves them.
Right, and here we see a little, sounds like it's going to be a great piece of misogyny.
But Nietzsche responds by saying, if this type, the feminine, had not been superabundant
in Europe since the Middle Ages, the celebrated European capacity for constant change might
never have come into existence. China, for example, is a country in which large-scale
dissatisfaction and the capacity for change have become extinct centuries ago, and the
socialists would like to bring that to Europe. But fortunately, Nietzsche is not masculine.
Nietzsche is feminine. Don't make it better. That just makes us stupid like a herd. The
feminine is the superior. We should make it beautiful. We should make it profound. That's
what enables change and dynamism in life. Okay, finally, I want to turn to the last
part of book one, from which we'll go right to the end of the text after that, called
The Craving for Suffering, which is a wonderfully liberating text for anyone who spent much
time on a college campus, where you will be surrounded by students who protest injustice
and suffering and cruelty in the world. And Nietzsche is not against protesting suffering
and cruelty. He thinks that's barbaric. He doesn't want barbarians. But he wants to be
honest about why they do it. He says, what you really find is, what young people want
is suffering to come to them in the form of a big dragon. There's evil thing out there
that's objective, so that they can dress up in armor and be heroes in chivalrous nights
and go kill the dragon. So they need suffering. They want suffering, and more and more suffering
and suffering with others. Let's save the whales. Let's save the amoebas. Let's save
the plankton. Oh, yes. And he says, and the reason is, of course, because they're bored
with themselves, as well as they should be. They don't have the ability to create their
own authentic suffering and then transcend it with art. So they look to paint suffering
on the wall like a big dragon. And he says, they do not know what to do with themselves
and therefore paint the distress of others on the wall. They always need others and continually
other others. Pardon me, my friends, I have ventured to paint my happiness on the wall.
Why must we be obsessed with suffering? It's not going to go out of the world. The Buddha
was right. Life is suffering. So why dwell on it, young people? Think of the joys of
life. Paint your happiness on the wall. Okay, finally now, I wish to take you to the end
of the text. To two important, I think extremely important, aphorisms, one number 340, the
dying Socrates, in which he quite rightly points out that when Socrates is about to take hemlock,
he says, oh, Crito, one of the students, I owe Asclepius a rooster. Asclepius is the
god of medicine. And the rooster is obviously a sacrifice to him. And Nietzsche says, what
does this really mean? You give Asclepius a rooster when he's cured of disease. What's
the disease Nietzsche is being cured of? Life. Nietzsche experienced life as, excuse me,
Socrates experienced life as a weight. And he says, and this is a terrifying thought.
Because Nietzsche, Socrates, the good soldier who always wore a chipper and stoical domain
on his face in his last dying breath with a sort of vicious vengeance said, really life
is a disease and I've been cured at last. So he says, therefore we must overcome the
Greeks. Now that's a very perspectival point. You needn't read it that way. You could read
it as saying, I've overcome the fear of death, therefore give Asclepius a rooster. But it
is, in its own way, a perfect example of perspectivalism. I now want to turn to the last and most
important aphorism called the greatest weight. The greatest weight is Nietzsche's doctrine
of eternal return, eternal recurrence, which is, I think originally a Hindu notion, which
is that we have cyclical time. Everything that happens will happen again. Ten thousand
years from now, we'll all be sitting here all over again and I'll be saying the same
words to you. And as we know, what, when the Hindus thought of that as any sane man would,
not the first thing that occurred to them is what a nightmare. Ninety percent of my
life quit fantasizing. Ninety percent of each of our lives is embarrassment, humiliation
and stupidity. Who wants to relive their bedwetting? Right? Who wants to relive all the wrong answers
they gave in high school algebra? And all the times they got laughed at. And all the
times they said stupid, dopey things and felt bad about it later. Most of your life is embarrassing
and banal. So the Hindus said, well we want to get off the life death wheel of karma. We
want to achieve nirvana, which is basically cosmic death. We don't want to be reborn.
And Nietzsche said that that was one of the biggest dangers facing Europe at the time.
And it got a wonderful expression in Schopenhauer's work, who said, we will all have real freedom
when all of humanity gets together on one day and drinks Jim Jane Jones Kool-Aid, Kimitz
Collective Suicide. He really thought this was liberation. And it was considered a very
profound thought. And Nietzsche responds by saying, no, eternal return is an excellent
test of whether you have the possibility of being a quote, ubermensch, which is not a
superman, which is not a tyrant, which is an overman, which is the next stage of man,
the man who can see the truth of perspectivalism, the truth of groundlessness, the truth of
purposelessness, the truth of the fact that he might have to live this whole stupid life
over again and still say, yes, I'll take it anyways. Life is not a problem for me. It's
full of delightful possibilities. I can self create myself an art. I can overcome myself
an art. In fact, it is art that makes perspectival truth bearable by making it beautiful. So
eternal return then becomes a litmus test. If, if when you think to yourself, do I have
to live my life all over again exactly as I have, if you can say yes to that and say
with all its stupidity, with all my bedwetting, with all my wrong answers, I want it all over
again just as it is. Nietzsche says, then you are a philosophic soul. You've overcome
that narcotic need for a purpose to your life, and you are the next stage of human
cultural development. And let me be clear about one thing before I finish here. Very
often that is depicted as a sort of Aryan blonde beast in our old Schwarzenegger type.
Nietzsche thought, you can never go back to that. That's just barbarism. The higher
formed, the ubermensch would in fact be like Nietzsche, a very sensitive soul who for all
his quote anti-Semitism was really an anti-anti-Semite. He had the very obnoxious habit of saying
things like, you know, because by the way I should point out that Germany was intensely
anti-Semitic at this point in something called Christian anti-Semitism. So what he would
do is point that and say, you know, the Old Testament is actually a great book. The sick
part is the New Testament. To read the Old Testament, it's better than Homer. People kill,
they rape, they murder. Those were real men. It's the Nazarene that's distorted. And one
last point on that subject. He said the only people more despicable than the Christians
are of course the Germans who were afflicted with, he called it racial scabies of the heart,
who said, have you ever noticed a German musician? The moment he creates something beautiful,
he blushes, right? He has to always have his opera surrounded, and he is clearly referring
to Wagner, his ex-friend, has to have his opera surrounded with great, huge sets and
theories. He says, no, no, no, look at the Italian operas. Those are people who know
how to live. Those are Ubermench. Why? Because they'd be just as happy to have their, their
sopranos go up there and go, la, la, la, la, la, for three hours without a single word
in it. Because they're not trying to be profound, they're trying to be beautiful. They don't
feel uncomfortable when they say something nice, or when they say something beautiful,
a beautiful phrase. So only a German does that. And his perfect contrast is Beethoven
and Goethe. One day they were walking together supposedly, and along came a member of the
royal family, and Beethoven locked arms with Goethe and said, we shall walk through, and
they'll have to give way. And Goethe broke his arm. He said, what a barbarian, please
not a man for you. That is the Ubermench. Not some sadistic tyrant, but a cultivated,
refined, refined person who sees laughter in everything, and joyfulness in the truth,
who doesn't need a spiritual narcotic to get through life, who is compassionate out of
strength, not out of weakness and pity, and who judges the weak not as inferior, but as
common by their own standard, not by his.
Okay, I've given you a taste of Nietzsche. I think the only better way to cash in this
lecture is to turn to the text yourselves, and I think you'll find it richly rewarding.
