Welcome to lecture 2, the second of the two introductory lectures.
In this one I want to talk about physics language or rather physics languages, the languages
of physics because there are two languages I want to talk about.
Now I've taught introductory physics for decades and I've taught a lot of students and students
commonly come into physics thinking what's challenging about physics is that it's mathematical.
I think often they have a lot more trouble with the verbal language, the meaning of words,
the meaning of concepts and then they also have trouble converting physics concepts
into math.
That is a big issue that involves both English language or whatever language you're speaking
and math but really understanding the words and the concepts used in physics and understanding
them precisely is really important.
And one of the reasons there are problems here is because we use words slightly differently
in science and in physics in particular.
We may have meanings that are related to the everyday meanings but they're more precise.
Let me give you some examples.
So here are some words that we, you've all seen these words, you've seen, or you've
seen all these words, you know what these words mean in everyday language and they mean
something similar but not exactly the same in physics.
Work and energy, two closely related concepts.
Work is a very specifically defined thing.
It's not quite the same as going to work and yet it's related.
Acceleration, that's one that we're going to talk about again and again and again and
I'm going to remind you over and over that acceleration means more than just speeding
up and getting that it means more than just speeding up is the key to understanding things
as disparate as why a car goes around a corner without skidding off or why a satellite doesn't
fall down.
Energy and power, two concepts that are confused every day in the media.
They're very closely related, they're different though.
Inertia, we talk about someone who has inertia because they can't get themselves going.
Well that is a good metaphor for the physics concept of inertia which is more precise.
Space and time, two really important ideas, we all have intuitive understandings of them
that we developed from when we were young children.
We'll find out when we get to relativity that they aren't quite what we think they
are.
Potential.
The person has great potential, well potential again has a very specific meaning in physics.
Heat, heat is not quite what you think it is, it's got a precise meaning that is related
to what you think of as heat but isn't quite the same thing.
Exponential.
I'm always hearing people talking about something is happening exponentially as if exponential
just means something that happens quickly.
Nope, it's got a very precise mathematical meaning and there are many processes in physics
that occur exponentially.
Vector is kind of an interesting one because I teach not only physics but environmental
studies and when in teaching environmental studies I'm sometimes talking about vectors
as disease carriers and the people who get most confused by that are my physics students
for whom a vector is a very specific kind of mathematical object.
Collisions we all know about collisions, collisions in physics again have a very precise meaning.
The last two words on here, uncertainty and theory are words that I'm going to go into
in more detail so I'll spare you more about them until I talk further about them.
Let's look at theory and uncertainty.
Very frequently you'll hear someone say that's just a theory.
What do they mean by that?
Well the everyday meaning of it's just a theory is it's a guess, it's a hypothesis,
might or might not be correct, it's just a theory.
We don't have to take too much stock in it.
And we dismiss the thing that is deemed to be just a theory.
In science theory has quite a different meaning.
A theory is an overarching coherent framework that explains and relates a whole body of
scientific knowledge.
It's been verified by lots of experiments and observations, it's self consistent, there
are no internal contradictions in it and it hasn't been contradicted by any experiment
or observation.
If it ever is contradicted by an experiment or observation you can be sure scientists
are going to look very, very closely at that experiment, those observations, they're going
to repeat them over and over and over again and if the contradiction with the theory keeps
showing up then the theory has to go because reality is our gold standard for what is true.
And if we have a theory and we've developed this theory on the basis of a relatively
few observations and experiments as time goes on the theory begins to subsume more and more
phenomena under its umbrella and we have more and more verifying experiments and more and
more verifying observations and confidence in that theory grows over time.
Let me give you some examples of theories in science.
In the other sciences besides physics, which is what we're talking about here, the theory
of evolution is a very, very firmly established theory in biology, doesn't mean that we know
every single step in the process of every single species evolution but we do know the
big picture and we're confident that that big picture explains the origin of the species
we see on earth today.
Plate tectonics, a relative newcomer to the scientific theories really only became firmly
established in the second half of the 20th century.
Plate tectonics is the theory that the continents move about.
It explains a host of things about planet earth that before seemed to be disparate ideas
that didn't have anything in common.
Physics, the theory of relativity, I put that one in because it's the one that's got the
name theory.
It's not just a guess or idea, it's a firmly established basis of our understanding of
physical reality.
Quantum electrodynamics, a name you may not have heard of, Richard Feynman is a name you
may have heard of and he's one of the originators of quantum electrodynamics, QED, is really
one of our most precise, most precisely verified theories of physical reality.
It's actually a combination of the theory of relativity and Maxwell's electromagnetic
theory, two other big theories that are pillars of physics.
Newton's theory of gravity is another theory we often see referred to especially when someone
disparages the idea of theory then you say, well what about gravity?
I put Newton's theory in quotes because Newton's theory has been superseded by Einstein's
general relativity, but Newton's theory is still very relevant in a wide range of everyday
situations.
So there are some examples of theories in science.
Theory was one of those words.
The other word is uncertainty.
So let's take a look at uncertainty.
The public has a very hard time with uncertainty and so scientists have a hard time communicating
through the public sometimes because we don't want to say we're certain of anything.
I've actually been a witness in a court case where I was asked as a scientific expert
to quantify something and I said, well I know this to within this many meters or that many
meters was the pedestrian in the crosswalk or weren't they, well I give you this statistical
distribution and I am 95% confident and the lawyer says, well you don't know anything.
Well nobody in science ever knows anything precisely and neither does anybody in any
other area of human knowledge.
We have uncertainty in science and there are really three reasons for the uncertainty,
but basically it's that nothing is 100% certain.
Theories themselves, we think they're right, they might not be.
Scientific revolutions that actually overthrow theories are rare.
More common is kind of a gradual evolution in our knowledge and refining the ideas until
we get more close to an accurate description of physical reality so we're converging on
a true and accurate description as our theories evolve slightly.
Once in a while there is a true revolution that overthrows established theories.
Then there's uncertainty in numbers and numerical uncertainty takes several forms.
It's the uncertainty in measurements, our measuring instruments are simply not perfect
and so we can't get precise values of the things we measure.
In projections of future events, for example we know that global warming is occurring and
we know that human beings are the predominant cause, but we can't tell exactly what the
temperature is going to be 50 years from now, partly because we don't know how human
beings are going to behave, but partly because there is uncertainty in our models and our
projections and our knowledge of every single physical and biological and chemical event
is just not 100% certain.
So there's numerical uncertainty in measurements, there's uncertainty in projections and then
as we'll see late in the course when we get to quantum physics, there is a fundamental
uncertainty described by something called the Heisenberg uncertainty principle which
makes uncertainty one of the fundamental properties of nature at the quantum scale,
at the most fundamental scale.
So get used to uncertainty, I won't be talking a lot about uncertainty in this course, it
will be implicit sometimes in numbers I state without very many decimal places because I
just don't know much more about the accuracy or precision of those numbers.
But uncertainty in science is a big deal and it's important and there is uncertainty and
we need to know how to quantify the uncertainty, but the fact that there's uncertainty does
not mean in any way that science is wrong.
Now as we're talking about uncertainty in numbers that leads me into the second great
language of physics and that's the language of mathematics.
And I want to begin talking about mathematics philosophically, I want to raise a philosophical
question which I'm not going to answer and the question is this, is math a science?
Is it about reality or is it just kind of some kind of human construct?
And I want to give you two quotes from two very famous individuals who have thought a
great deal about this question.
Mathematics is that a science or a human construct.
So here's what Bertrand Russell says back in 1902, mathematics takes us into the region
of absolute necessity to which not only the actual world but every possible world must
conform.
So Bertrand Russell is seeing science, this is in his essay, the study of mathematics,
he's seeing mathematics as something which is sort of a meta-science.
It constrains not only the science of our world but every possible world you could imagine.
And if you think that's a bit fanciful, wait for lecture 60 when I'm going to introduce
the idea that we may possibly live in a multiverse of different disconnected universes each of
which may have its own laws of physics.
If that picture is true and if Bertrand Russell is right, nevertheless the rules of mathematics
have to reign in each of those individual universes even though the rules of physics
may be different.
Wow.
So Bertrand Russell's idea is mathematics is really sort of at the foundation of physical
reality more so even than physics.
On the other hand, Albert Einstein here is a little bit puzzled in 1922 in his little
publication, Side Lights on Relativity.
How can it be that mathematics, being after all a product of human thought, so he thinks
it's a product of human thought, which is independent of experience, is so admirably
appropriate to the objects of reality.
So Einstein is wondering, he thinks we've sort of made up mathematics and yet somehow
it does such a beautiful job of describing physical reality.
Well, I'm not going to answer this difficult philosophical question, but I am going to say
that Einstein certainly is correct and Russell may be right, Einstein is correct in that
mathematics is a beautiful language and a concise, efficient language for describing
physical reality.
And you'll see that again and again in this course and sort of elegance with which we
can state important big concepts and relationships mathematically.
So mathematics really does have a special place in physics.
And when you think mathematics, the first thing you probably think is numbers.
And though numbers are important, we're going to spend most of the rest of this lecture
on numbers.
But before we do, I want to say that mathematics is also much, much more than numbers.
It expresses concisely profound and universal relations and interactions.
And I'll give you one example of this.
It's going to be pulled back from lecture 13 a little later in this lecture to see how
that goes.
So don't think about mathematics as just being about numbers.
On the other hand, when we're going to do mathematics and do quantitative science, we
need numerical answers.
We need to know how big something is.
We need to know when some event will happen.
We need to know how fast a spaceship has to go to get it into a circular orbit with a
period of 24 hours, so it will serve as a communication satellite.
Or we need to know what to do to get a satellite up there to run the GPS navigation system.
We need to know how fast it's going to be going.
We need to answer quantitative questions.
So we need to use numbers.
Let's talk about numbers in physics then.
First of all, they express the sizes of physical quantities.
And they have to be accurate if they're going to be useful.
How accurate?
Well, that depends.
I could tell you that I'm in my car going 50 miles per hour plus minus 1 mile per hour
because I really can't read my speedometer to better than about a mile per hour.
That's a question of accuracy.
I'm going 50 miles an hour, but I don't know that.
I'm uncertain by about plus or minus 1 mile per hour.
So that's the question of accuracy.
There's a related but distinct concept of precision.
How finally can I tell the number?
I can tell you in one car with a digital speedometer that the speedometer reads 49.78 miles per
hour.
That's precise.
I can distinguish whether it reads 49.78 or 49.79.
That tells me I've got four digits of precision.
What it does not tell me is how accurate that might be.
That speedometer might still be off by plus or minus 1 mile per hour.
So if I say it reads 49.78, it might really be somewhere between 50.78 and 48.78.
It would be kind of stupid to have a speedometer that was that precise and yet that inaccurate.
I'm currently doing battle with a company from which I have a nice digital thermometer,
one of these ones that has a little outdoor sensor and radios the temperature back, and
it reads to a tenth of a degree.
So it will say it's 54.7 degrees out.
I said to the company, can I really believe that?
I said, no, it's only accurate to plus or minus 2 degrees.
It makes no sense for them to give me three digits of precision if the thing is only accurate
to 2 degrees.
That's what they chose to do because I think it looks more scientific.
You want to get precision and accuracy kind of correlated.
It makes no sense to be precise if you're not very accurate.
So accuracy and precision are two important features of numbers that are expressing actual
quantities in physical reality.
We also need to cover a very wide range of values.
And we do that with scientific notation.
For example, here's a big number, 650,000,000, got to think about that, 650 million watts.
That happens to be the power output of my local nuclear power plant in Vermont, the Vermont
Yankee nuclear power plant, 650 million watts.
But I can write that more easily as 6.5 times 10 to the 8 watts, W there is the symbol for
watts.
Or I can write it with so-called prefixes that tell you what multiplication to make.
And so 650,000,000,650 million watts can also be written as 650 megawatts.
And I will use both scientific notation and these prefixes throughout the course.
We're going to be using almost exclusively, not entirely, but almost exclusively the so-called
international system of units.
I'll say more about that in a moment.
And in the international system, a whole bunch of these prefixes have been defined.
And most of them involve every three powers of 10.
And you're familiar with some of them.
You know kilo stands for 1,000, a kilogram is 1,000 grams, a kilometer is 1,000 meters.
You probably have heard of giga because your computer probably runs at about 3 gigahertz,
3 billion clock cycles inside the computer, 3 billion simplest things it can do every
second.
Giga means a billion.
A gigawatt is typically the power output of a large power plant, a billion watts.
You may or may not have heard of a terawatt.
Humanity uses energy at the rate of 15 terawatts.
Some of these others you haven't heard of at all, but they're used in a variety of sciences.
For example, ecologists studying the global flows of carbon in the world's ecosystem will
talk about quantities in pedograms, peta being 10 to the 15.
So a pedogram is 10 to the 15 grams.
On the other hand, we go down to small things.
We're familiar with milli, lowercase m, for thousands, micro, Greek symbol mu for 10 to
the minus 6 or millionth, nano we've already talked about in lecture one for a billionth.
And some of these are less familiar, and I will use them throughout this course.
And when I use one that's either unfamiliar or that I haven't used before, I'll try to
remember to say what it is, but you have this table, and you can find this table lots of
other places.
You've never come across a prefix that you don't know.
Look it up.
And you will notice something else here.
Most but not quite all of the prefixes for quantities that are multipliers bigger than
one are given capital letters and quantities that represent divisions.
That is smaller than one.
Typically are given lowercase letters, although there are a few exceptions.
So those are the SI prefixes.
Now in physics, we're dealing with physical quantities, and most physical quantities
have units.
And I want to emphasize that the systems of units we use are, in fact, human artifacts.
Three of the most important physical quantities, the fundamental quantities certainly in mechanics,
are length exemplified by this meter stick, mass exemplified by this massive bowling ball,
time exemplified by the clock.
We have units for all these.
The meter happens to be the unit of length.
The kilogram is the unit of mass.
The second is the standard system, international system unit of time.
We have a number of other units that are important, and here's a table that talks about length,
time, mass, meter, second kilogram, the ones I just mentioned.
But there are other units in other systems.
The foot, the yard, and the mile are measures of length, the hour, the day, and the year
are measures of time.
The ton, the English ton, the ton with two ends, the metric ton, and the slug are units
of mass.
The slug, not the pound, is the English unit of mass.
Weight and velocity, we'll measure in meters per second, but you often measure them in
miles per hour, or kilometers per hour, or whatever.
Force is measured in newtons, it's pounds in the English system, that's what a pound
is the unit of.
Energy in joules, power in watts, and lots of other units for energy, calories, kilowatt
hours, BTU, Erg's, electron volts we'll use later on.
Power in horsepower, temperature, the official unit is the Kelvin, we'll sometimes talk about
degrees Celsius, less often about degrees Fahrenheit, the everyday unit in the United
States, and almost never about degrees Rankine, we'll look at electric current, electric potential
difference, the volt, and a lot of other units.
It's important when you're doing a calculation or expressing result to have the unit there.
If I tell you how far is it from your city to the next city and you say it's 50, I have
no idea what you're talking about.
You gotta tell me, it's 50 kilometers, 50 miles, whatever.
The unit is crucial.
I take off on my student's exams if the unit is not there in the answer, even if they did
everything else correctly.
Our standards of units, how do we determine what a meter actually is?
I mean, here's a meter stick.
We bought that from a company that makes wooden meter sticks, but how do they know it's right?
Well, each of these units has a standard, and these standards have evolved over time,
and what we're trying to evolve toward is a situation in which the standard of any one
of these units is something any scientist anywhere could create or recreate in a laboratory.
Now in the old days, all the standards were specific objects.
There was a prototype meter, and that defined the meter, a particular real object.
There is still a prototype kilogram that's held in a vault in Paris, very constant temperature
and everything, and that defines the kilogram, and that is an unfortunate measurement because
I can't go into my laboratory and determine what the kilogram is.
I have to use standards that are traceable back to that standard kilogram in Paris.
The history of this particular unit I'm going to describe, the meter, the meter stick,
the history of the meter is an example of how these units evolve.
So the meter was first defined in 1791, and it was defined as one ten millionth of the
distance from the equator to the north pole on a meridian, a line of longitude, that went
through Paris.
So you start at the equator, you're headed toward Paris, going north, and you went all
the way to the pole, you measure that distance carefully, and that distance, take one ten
millionth of it, that defined the meter.
And by the way, the surveyors who were sent out to do that messed up a few times and they
almost got guillotined, but they gave us ultimately this definition of the meter.
In 1889, there was a prototype meter, a bar made of special material that has very little
thermal expansion, its length doesn't change much with temperature, and nevertheless, the
length of the meter was defined to be at zero degrees Celsius, the freezing point or melting
point of ice, the freezing point of water, melting point of ice.
And in 1889, and for a long time since, the length of the meter was defined as the length
of that particular piece of metal.
So there's an example of a prototype meter.
In 1960, we redefined the meter, the international community agreed, it was going to be one million
six hundred and fifty thousand seven hundred and sixty three point seventy three wavelengths
of light emitted by the isotope Krypton 86, more on that in our nuclear physics lectures,
in the two P ten to five D five transition, wow, that's an atomic transition, we'll learn
about that when we talk about atoms as we describe them in quantum physics, many lectures
hence, but there it was.
That was a definition of the meter that anyone could reproduce, because anyone could get
Krypton 86, put it in their laboratory, measure the wavelength of the light coming out from
this transition, and away they went.
Well, that wasn't good enough either, there's an example of a laser system you might use
for that.
In 1983, the meter was redefined, and this is the definition that stands today, and this
is a really good definition, it probably won't change, the meter is the distance traveled
by light in vacuum in one over two nine nine seven nine two four five eight of a second.
Now that's an interesting definition, because what it does is, it suddenly defines the speed
of light, people have been measuring the speed of light more and more accurately, and the
measurement finally got so accurate, that we turned things around and said, instead of
talking about the speed of light in terms of meters and seconds, let's talk about the
meter in terms of the speed of light, and so the speed of light is now by definition
two nine nine seven nine two four five eight meters per second, it's nothing anyone will
ever measure again.
What they will measure if they attempt to measure the speed of light is how big a meter
actually is, because a meter is by definition the distance light travels in this tiny fraction
of a second.
By the way, that distance is just about a billion feet, I know that because a convenient
approximation for the speed of light is it's about one foot per nanosecond, one foot per
billionth of a second, so in one second it's going to go about a billion feet.
That's another, you could think of that as a way of defining the foot, if you wanted.
Now this is just one of the units, the meter, the second is similarly defined by a reproducible
standard involving atomic transitions and wavelengths and timing, and that's what atomic
clocks are all about, so we have a good definition of the second, we do not have a good definition
of the kilogram, as I mentioned the kilogram is still defined in terms of that international
prototype kilogram.
I don't think that's going to last much longer.
Look for a change in the definition of the kilogram, it could come anytime, scientists
are working on making balls of silicon, perfectly spherical balls, perfectly made of silicon,
and literally counting the number of atoms in those balls and scaling a definition of
the kilogram based on the mass of the individual atoms.
So I think we will see very soon a reproducible standard for the kilogram and then the three
fundamental units, the kilogram, the meter, and the second will all be defined by reproducible
standards that could be done anywhere in anybody's laboratory and we won't need that international
prototype kilogram sitting in a vault in Paris.
So there's a history of a unit and all the other units have equally fascinating histories.
Well a little bit more on math.
We've talked about numbers, how you measure numbers, their accuracy, their precision and
so on, I've indicated that it's not just about numbers, it's also about expressions of important
physical relations and their interactions and that's what equations do for us.
Equations yes, say left side is equal to right side and left side ultimately when you're
using the equation has a numerical value and that value is equal to the right hand side
if it's an equation and if it is indeed satisfied.
But equations more importantly express fundamental and sometimes really crucial physical relations
and when a very important equation comes up in this course I'm going to show that equation
with what I call its anatomy.
We're going to sort of take the equation apart and see how it works and let me do that now
for one important equation.
I don't expect you to understand the equation here, this is an equation as I said I'm pulling
it back from lecture 13.
So it's an equation we'll get to in lecture 13, it's the equation that expresses Newton's
law of gravity.
So the equation is called universal gravitation, often the equation will have a picture with
it to try to figure out what it means and here in this particular case I'm showing the
earth on the left, the moon on the right, I'm showing the forces that each body exerts
on the other with those orange arrows.
By the way I'll have a lot of conventions in this course, orange arrows are going to
stand for force, blue arrows will stand for velocity, different color arrows will stand
for different kinds of physical quantities and it's useful to sort of, you don't have
to memorize that but just keep it in mind and your diagrams will become clearer.
And the distance between the earth and the moon here is this distance r and here's the
equation of universal gravitation and the way I'm going to do the anatomy of an equation
is to tell you what the individual terms mean.
F is the force between two masses, M1 and M2, there are the two masses, there are values
in kilograms M1 and M2, there's the square of the distance between those masses down
in the denominator.
This is where the English and the math come together, you can't understand that equation
with just math and you can't understand gravity thoroughly, completely with just English,
you need them both and this is where we connect the math and the English and finally that's
a constant which is value by the way Newton did not know, it was discovered somewhat later,
decades after Newton's time, that's the constant of universal gravitation.
So there's the anatomy of an equation and look for anatomies of equations throughout
this course.
Okay, well let me say a little bit more about math and what I expect from you by way of
mathematics.
You could go through this whole course without math and you would still get quite a bit out
of it but you will get more out of it if you follow the math and in cases where following
the math means looking at fairly sophisticated derivations of new results or occasionally
looking at examples that illustrate a particular physical concept mathematically, we're going
to use our big monitor over here and I'm going to use it like a blackboard and I'll
often go through derivations of equations or expositions of theoretical results or numerical
examples and today I'm going to use it simply to show you my expectations for your knowledge
of mathematics which are basically high school algebra and trigonometry, if you know calculus
so much the better but there is going to be no calculus in this particular course although
I occasionally make reference to calculus ideas but this is a course that's based on
high school algebra and trigonometry, so high school algebra.
I would expect that you'd know how to solve simple equations.
For example, if 2x equals 6, what's x?
Take a minute and think about it.
You got it, x is 3, what did you do?
You divided both sides by 2, 2x divided by 2 is just x, 6 divided by 2 is 3, simple.
I expect you'd be able to do the same thing symbolically.
So here's an equation, ax equals b, what's x?
You got it, x is b over a, what did I do?
I divided both sides of the equation by a to get x alone and b over a is the right
hand side, x is b over a.
Trigonometry is about these functions, sine, cosine and tangent functions of angles, they're
based on right triangles.
We have a right triangle with some angle theta there, theta, the Greek symbol theta
is commonly used for angles, so get used to that.
Don't tune out when you see a Greek symbol, I think that makes harder math, that just
means an angle and that's the symbol we'll use universally for angle.
So we've got a side adjacent to the angle, we've got a side opposite the angle and we've
got this hypotenuse of the right triangle and the sine is defined as the opposite divided
by the hypotenuse.
The cosine is the adjacent over the hypotenuse and the tangent is the opposite over the adjacent
or equivalently the sine over the cosine and that's all you need to know about trigonometry
but you do need to remember that much trigonometry and I'll ease you into it gently when we start
using it.
You need to know how to read graphs, what's that graph tell you?
You need to know what the axes are meaning, that's time, that's distance, that's some
objects motion and you should be able to tell from looking at that graph that not only is
the object moving but its speed is increasing with time.
So that's the kind of expectations I have for mathematics.
Now one last thing, some of the lectures, not all of them, but many of them will end
with a problem, a challenge problem for you to take on.
These are entirely optional, you will get almost as much out of the course, 99.9% as
much out of the course if you don't do the challenges but if you like a little mathematical
challenge and they will be mathematically based problems, try them.
So that's what's going to happen right now, I'm going to give you a challenge for this
particular lecture, this is not going to be a very challenging challenge, some of them
will be more challenging and I will also give you a solution after each challenge.
So this is actually a multi-part challenge, solve some equations, solve for x, 4x plus
2 equals 6x minus 8, that's a little more complicated than the equations we just did,
a symbolic version of the same, a triangle, I'm telling you the angle, I'm telling you
the hypotenuse, I ask you what's the height h on the right, and finally analyzing a graph,
how far has this object gone after two seconds, is it speeding up or slowing down, well I'll
let you figure those things out.
Here are the answers, x equals 5 for the first one, you got it, x equals b plus d over c
minus a, the triangle, the height is 10 inches times the sign of 30 degrees, and so it's
5 inches, what's the graph telling us, the graph is telling us that the object has gone
about 1.4 meters after two seconds and that in fact it's slowing down, well enjoy the
challenges, I think you'll like them and they'll help develop your confidence in doing mathematics
applied to physics.
