Welcome to lecture three. This is the first lecture in section one. You'll recall from
earlier lectures that I divided the course into six major sections based on those realms
of physics. This first realm I'm calling moving thoughts, Newtonian mechanics. So we'll
be looking at the mechanical system that Newton put in place hundreds of years ago that still
describes much of what happens in the world. My topic for lecture three is how we describe
motion. Now students beginning introductory physics are not always as thrilled by this
topic as they might be. So I want you to contemplate motion for a little bit. Think about things
that move and think about what would happen in the universe if things didn't move, cars
move, electrons move around the nuclei and atoms, air moves to make the wind, the ocean
currents flow, the rivers move, the stars move around the galaxy. All these things move,
you move, your body moves, animals move. If there were no motion, everything would just
be frozen. It would be as if you'd put your video in permanent pause. Motion is what makes
everything happen. That's why we're excited about motion. That's why motion is important
to study. We want to understand motion because if we understand motion, motion is what makes
everything happen, then we can predict what's going to happen in the future. We can engineer
structures that will move in the ways we want them to. We can handle motion. We can understand
motion. That's why we begin by describing motion. And in this lecture, we'll be describing
motion without asking why motion occurs. Later, we'll get into the question, the why of motion,
and we'll in fact find that that isn't quite the right question, but that's something
for the future. For now, we're simply going to talk about how we describe motion, both
in words and in mathematics. Now, I want to emphasize that motion involves two important
concepts. It involves the concepts of space and time. Consequently, the unit system we're
going to be using when we describe motion will be the SI unit system. I talked about
in lecture two, but only two of the units will be important to us, the unit of time,
second, and the unit of space, the meter. So those will be the units we'll be working
with in this particular lecture. We will also see that those units become later on the key
to understanding relativity, because relativity when we get to the modern physics section
is about space and time and how our visions of those have changed. But for now, we're
just going to talk about space and time measured in meters and seconds. And furthermore, in
this lecture and the next one, we're going to start simple, because we're going to restrict
motion to motion along a single line. That is, I might walk forward along a straight
line. I might walk back. I might change my direction. That is, by going forward or back,
I might walk at different speeds. But I'm going to restrict myself to motion that is
along a single straight line. That's called one-dimensional motion. That greatly simplifies
the description of motion, and it means a lot of the difficulties, a lot of the misconceptions
that arise in understanding motion aren't going to plague us here. So we're going to
start simple and restrict ourselves to one-dimensional motion. Let me begin with a story. The story
I want to talk about is a story about going out to get some ice cream. So here's the story.
You start out at your house, and you stroll to an ice cream stand that's 1.2 kilometers
from your house. And you walk at a steady speed, and you arrive in 20 minutes. It takes
you five minutes to eat your ice cream, and then you head back at the same steady speed
that you went out with. But halfway home, you come across a construction project, and
you pause for five minutes to watch. And you arrive home 50 minutes after you left. So
there's a story, a lot of words. It's also got some quantitative information. I told
you how far you went. I told you how long you paused to eat your ice cream, how long
you stopped to look at the construction project, and so on. So let's talk about that story
in more detail because that story contains the seeds of all the concepts we need to
understand motion. So here's some questions about the ice cream story. How far did you
walk? How fast did you walk? What was your average speed for the entire trip? How fast
and in what direction were you going when you were heading toward the ice cream stand?
And what overall change in your position occurred on the entire trip? So those are some questions.
Each of these questions talks to or speaks to another concept of motion. Let's look at
those motion concepts. How far did you walk? That's a question about distance. How fast
did you walk? Well, that's a question about speed. You could have answered those pretty
obviously. What was your average speed for the entire trip? Well, that is going to introduce
the concept of average speed. How fast and in what direction were you going? That's
a little more subtle question because it's really asking two things. It's asking how
fast were you going, and it's asking in what direction were you going. The concept of velocity
contains both those ideas, namely speed and direction. So velocity is a slightly more
subtle physics concept. And then the question is, what's the overall change in your position
that occurred over the entire trip? Well, there's two concepts involved in that question.
One is the concept of position, where you are, and the other is a more subtle concept
of displacement. And we'll spend part of this lecture developing these concepts in
more detail. So let's get a little bit quantitative with these concepts. So we'll take a look
here on the big screen. Let's do some numbers on that ice cream story. So the question, how
far did you walk? Well, you went 1.2 kilometers out, 1.2 kilometers back, that's a total of
2.4 kilometers. That's how far you walked. How fast did you walk? Well, on the way out,
you went 1,200 meters, 1.2 kilometers, took you 20 minutes, that's 1,200 seconds, speed
is distance per time, 1,200 meters per 1,200 seconds, that's a speed of 1 meter per second.
What was your average speed for the entire trip? Well, that's a question we got to be
a little more subtle about. You went 2,400 meters, that's the total distance you walked,
and you did it in 50 minutes. 50 minutes is 3,000 seconds, a minute is 60 seconds, 50
times 60 is 3,000. That gives you an average speed of 0.8 meters per second. Why is the
average speed less than the speed you were walking at? Because some of the time you were
stopped. Let's do some more numbers. How fast and in what direction were you going on the
way to the ice cream stand? Well, you were going at 1 meter per second, we already worked
that out, that was your speed, but this is a question about velocity, speed and direction,
and your direction was toward the ice cream stand. Maybe it was north, maybe it was south,
maybe it was the x direction, maybe it was the y direction, but I know for sure it was
toward the ice cream stand, and that specifies the answer to that question. What overall
change in your position occurred during the entire trip? This is an important one to get
right. And the answer is you ended up back where you started. There was no change whatsoever.
Your displacement for the entire trip, therefore, is zero. Your position did not change. It
doesn't matter that you walked to the ice cream stand and walked back and stopped at
8 ice cream and did these other things. The important answer to that question is, what
was the overall change in your position? There was no overall change in your position because
you ended up right back where you started from. Here's a graph of position versus time,
position in kilometers from .2468, 1 kilometer, 1.2, 1.4, and here's the time up to the 50
minute time of the entire trip. What happens on this ice cream trip? Well, first of all,
we go out to the ice cream stand, 1.2 kilometers from home, and it takes 20 minutes. I've got
a straight line showing position increasing at a steady rate during that 20 minutes. Then
we're at the ice cream stand for five minutes eating our ice cream. So there we are. Our
position isn't changing. We're still 1.2 kilometers from home. Then we begin to head back toward
home. We're going at the same speed that we walked out with at 1 meter per second, and
that's reflected by the fact that this line, which is now sloping downward, indicating
my position is decreasing again and getting closer to home. We're going downward. The
position is decreasing. That slope is the same as this slope, except it's in the opposite
direction. It's downward instead of upward. Then we reach that construction site. We pause
for another five minutes. We observe the construction. Again, our position isn't changing. Finally,
back we go to home, and there we are 50 minutes later, right back where we started from at
position zero. No displacement, and yet we've gone on this entire ice cream trip. Quite a bit
has happened here, and this graph nicely displays in one pictorial way what happened to us on
this ice cream trip. So let's use these results now to develop some concepts about motion.
One concept we want is position, and we're going to use position in this lecture. We're
going to use the variable x, the symbol x for position. x is going to mean stand for
a number which describes where I am relative to some origin, to some place I describe as
position zero, and that's completely arbitrary. I want to emphasize that right off the bat
because throughout physics students often get confused about the origin. They think it's
something special or important. It's just a human construct. The way we designate where
we are is always in relation to some starting point, and we call that starting point the
origin, and we designate it in this case of simple one-dimensional motion as x equals
zero. Again, I emphasize that choice of where that origin is is completely arbitrary. In
the case of motion in one dimension along a single line, positions can be thought of
as lying along a number line, and position could be either positive depending on whether
I go one way from the origin or negative depending on if I go the other way from the origin,
but the only way we can designate direction relative to the origin in one dimension is
with positive or negative numbers to indicate which side of the origin we're on. So here's
a number line that represents position, and I put position zero in the middle, that's
the origin, and to the right are positive positions, one meter, two meter, three meter,
four meter, five meters to the right of the origin, minus one meter is one meter to the
left of the origin, minus two is two meters to the left, and so on. Displacement, this
new physics concept, a more precise concept that's related to but not the same as distance.
I'm going to designate it by delta x. Delta throughout physics means a change in something.
So delta x means a change in x, x stands for position, so delta x, that's the capital
Greek letter delta, stands for change in position. You start at some position x1, you
end up at some position x2, in that case your delta x is x2 minus x1. The delta x is simply
a shorthand way of writing x2 minus x1, where x is my ending up position, x2 and x1 is my
starting position. So let's look on this number line at some displacements. So here is a displacement
that starts out at x equals one and ends up at x equals four. x2 is four, x1 is one,
four minus one is three, that's a displacement of positive three, positive because I'm ending
up further to the right of the origin than I started out, and its size is three, four
minus one is three, that's a displacement of three meters, positive three meters. Here's
another situation in which I go from x equals minus three meters to x equals zero meters.
Now that's also a displacement in the positive direction, zero is bigger than minus three,
zero minus a minus three is three, so that's also a displacement of positive three. Those
two displacements are identical, at least in terms of specifying delta x as a displacement.
If you want to describe the detailed trip involved in going from minus three to zero,
well yes, that's different than going from one to four, but displacement just captures
the change in position and that change is the same in both, it's positive three meters.
On the other hand, what if I start at two meters and I go to the left toward minus one
meters? Well, if I do that, I've also gone three meters, but I've gone three meters in
the opposite direction, so that's a change delta x of minus three meters. That's the
concept of change in position, delta x, and from that we're going to build the concept
of velocity as the rate of change of position, but before we do we want to look at the relationship
in a little more detail of this displacement concept, this change in position to the more
familiar concept of distance. So I want to look at some everyday words and some physics
words, just like we talked about way back in lecture two when we were beginning to introduce
the idea that physics words sometimes had to be more precise than everyday words. So
here's the question, distance and displacement, what do those things mean, what are they like,
what are they, how are they different? Distance is about how much ground you've covered, how
far have you actually moved? That's what distance is about. It's always a positive
quantity, its direction is irrelevant, it doesn't matter whether I walk to the ice cream stand
and then walk back, all that adds up to distance. It's what an odometer would read, or if you
had a pedometer when you were walking, it's what they would read, they don't care which
direction you were going, they just give the overall on the ground traveled. Displacement
as we just defined it is a change in position. The end points are all that matter, it matters
where you started, it matters where you ended and the displacement is simply the difference
in that case. The details of the motion between those end points are completely irrelevant,
all that matters is the starting point and the ending point, that's enough to define your
change in position delta x. It can be positive or it can be negative as we just saw in the
example on that number line. And if we look at the ice cream trip, little graph of the
ice cream trip again that we developed before, the distance we went was 2.4 kilometers. We
went out to the ice cream stand 1.2 kilometers from home, we came back another 1.2 kilometers,
the distance we traversed was 2.4 kilometers, but the displacement delta x for that case
was zero. So understanding the difference between those two words, the more everyday
word distance and the more physics word displacement is really important because we're going to
use the displacement word delta x, the change in position to calculate velocities. So let's
look again now at two concepts that are also fairly similar, speed and velocity. But again,
one is a physics concept and one is a more everyday concept. Speed is distance per time,
it's always a positive quantity, the direction of motion is irrelevant, you look at your
speedometer in your car and it says I'm going 65 miles an hour, but it doesn't tell you
whether you're going northeast, south or west, speed is just about how fast you're going.
It may vary depending on time interval. Now I'm stuck in traffic and I'm only going 25
miles an hour, so the speed may vary depending on what time interval I'm interested in talking
about. Speed is distance divided by time. Velocity is displacement per time and it might
sound like that's the same, but it isn't because as we just saw, displacement is a different
idea that depends only on your starting point and your ending point. So if I wanted to write
velocity mathematically, it would be v is delta x, the change in position divided by
delta t, the time interval involved in making that change in position. All that matters
are the displacement delta x and the time interval delta t. The details of the motion
again are irrelevant, it doesn't matter what happened between the starting time and the
ending time, between the starting position and the ending position, all that matters
is what the overall displacement is and the time involved in undergoing that overall
displacement. It can be positive or it can be negative. As we saw before, we had positive
displacements and negative displacements along that number line and if the displacement
is negative, then the velocity will also be negative and that's telling you the direction
of the velocity and in this case of one dimensional motion that we're dealing with in this lecture,
that's either positive or negative. We'll get much richer when we get to two and three
dimensional motion. Again, the velocity may vary depending on what time interval I choose
to deal with. I want to look at a one hour interval, I look at where I was at the start
of that hour and where I was at the end of the hour. If I look at a ten minute interval,
I look at where I was at the start of that interval, where I was at the end, the velocity
may come out differently in those cases depending on exactly the details of my motion. If we
look at the ice cream trip now, here again is our small graph of the ice cream trip
that we developed, things get a little more complicated. On the way out from zero to twenty
minutes, that's one time interval delta t, the speed was one meter per second and the
velocity was plus one meter per second because my displacement was in the positive direction.
Twenty-five minutes to thirty-five minutes, that time I started walking toward home and
then ended up at the construction site, that interval of ten minutes, I was going at one
meter per second, that was my speed, but I was going back toward the origin, my position
was getting less as measured from that origin which was my home and so my velocity was minus
one meter per second. What about the whole first thirty-five minutes of the trip? Well
that's a little more subtle. How far did I go? Well I walked one point two kilometers
to the ice cream stand, then I rested at the ice cream stand eating my ice cream and then
I walked halfway back home before I came to the construction site, that was another six
hundred meters or point six kilometers and so I went a total of eighteen hundred meters,
one point eight kilometers in thirty-five minutes, thirty-five times sixty seconds, that's
twenty-one hundred seconds, that gives me a speed of point eighty-six meters per second
during that part of the trip. So my speed for that part of the trip, actually it's my
average speed, was point eighty-six meters per second. On the other hand, because I walked
six hundred meters back toward home, my displacement was only six hundred meters. I ended up six
hundred meters from home, I started out at home, the whole thing took twenty-one hundred
seconds, six hundred meters divided by twenty-one hundred seconds is point two nine meters per
second. So my velocity and my speed are quite different, my average speed is eighty point
eighty-six meters per second, my average velocity is only point two nine meters per second.
So those two concepts are quite different. So let's look at a little more detail about
this distinction between velocity and speed, this distinction between average and what
I'm going to call instantaneous values of these quantities. So here I have a graph which
shows position of some object as a function of time t, and you'll notice the graph is
kind of curvy, it isn't a nice straight line, and that indicates that the position is changing
at different rates, and therefore there are probably different speeds and velocities involved.
I've marked two times t one and t two, and I've marked the time interval delta t near
the graph itself, and I've marked the corresponding change in position, that is the corresponding
displacement delta x, and over that time interval dividing delta x by delta t would
give me the velocity, and I'm going to call that now the average velocity over that time
interval. But you might want to ask a more detailed question, you might want to say well
how fast was I moving right near the beginning of the interval, and if you look at the graph
it's a little steeper then, and that suggests maybe I was moving a little faster. How fast
was I moving in the middle of the interval? How fast was I moving near the end? And I
can answer those questions by making those two times t one and t two at the ends of my
time interval by bringing them closer and closer and closer and closer together. I eventually
bracket just a single instant of time, and at that point the value I'm calculating for
the velocity is what I call the instantaneous velocity. So the average speed over a time
interval delta t is the total distance divided by the time, the average velocity is the displacement
divided by the time delta x over delta t, the instantaneous velocity is the result of
taking that limit as delta t gets arbitrarily small. How small, well do you just make it
as small as you possibly can? You could work that out computationally if you want to do
an actual measurement over some very small time, a second, a hundredth of a second, whatever
it needs to be. If you get into the mathematics called calculus, calculus deals with those
limits and how you get precisely to that limit of arbitrarily essentially zero size time
intervals, and what we get at that point is the instantaneous velocity, and it's defined
at every instant of time, so I can then talk about velocity as a function of time, it may
vary continuously with time, and it ends up being the slope of the position versus time
graph. That's because velocity is the rate of change of position. Instantaneous speed,
then, what's that? Well that's simply defined as the magnitude of the instantaneous velocity,
the plus and minus are irrelevant. I want to move on to the last of the motion concepts
which is acceleration, and acceleration is analogous to velocity. It's the rate of, analogous
to velocity in the way that velocity is to position. Acceleration is the rate of change
of velocity. So let's talk about acceleration. It's the rate of change of velocity. Mathematically,
the average acceleration is delta v, the change in velocity, v2, my final velocity, minus v1,
my initial velocity, divided by the time interval delta t. Any change in velocity, and I want
to emphasize that, this is a point of big misconceptions among physics students, any
change in velocity implies there's an acceleration. I could increase in speed, I could decrease
in speed, that's also an acceleration. You might use the word deceleration, but I just
prefer to call that an acceleration. It's just an acceleration in a different direction.
And finally, a change in direction, and this is the key one. We're not going to deal with
this one when we're talking one dimensional motion, but when we get to two dimensions
and three dimensions, a change in direction, even if the speed isn't changing, is also
a change in velocity and implies an acceleration. And then we can define instantaneous acceleration
in the same way we defined instantaneous velocity by taking the limit of arbitrarily small times
delta t, and then the acceleration becomes the slope of the velocity versus time graph.
What are the units of acceleration? Well, it's velocity per time, change in velocity
per time, so it's meters per second in the SI system per second. And that can be written
as meters per second squared, as I'll show you in a moment. It can also be written as
miles per hour per second. When you say a car goes 0 to 60 in 10 seconds, you're talking
about its capability of accelerating at a certain rate. Let's take a look at these units
of acceleration. Acceleration is the rate of change of velocity. The units are velocity
per time, that's meters per second per second, and I'm going to abbreviate that, meters
per second squared. Where does that come from? Second squared? Well, what's 8 divided
by 2, for instance, divided by 2? Well, that's 8 divided by 2. It's 4 divided by 2, and that's
2. But I can also write that as 8 divided by 4, or 8 divided by 2 times 2, or 8 divided
as 2 by 2 squared. And this is the same way with the units. Meters per second per second
comes out to meters per second squared. So those are the units of acceleration. Meters
per second squared. Meters divided by seconds times seconds, meters per second squared.
Okay, let's take a graphical look now at these motion concepts that we've been developing.
Position, velocity, acceleration. Velocity, the rate of change of position. Acceleration,
the rate of change of velocity. And again, the values of these quantities aren't directly
related. They're related as rates of change. If I'm going 60 miles an hour, that doesn't
tell you anything about where I am or whether I'm speeding up or slowing down or going
at a constant speed. The values aren't related. It's the rates of change that relate these
three quantities. And they all may change continually with time. So here's a graph on
which I'm going to graph position versus time, another graph where I'm going to graph velocity
versus time, and a third one where I'm going to graph acceleration versus time. So here's
a graph of the motion of some particular object. This tells a little story. It says the object
started out at position zero. It got further and further away, sometime between five and
ten meters from where it started is the biggest position it got to, the greatest displacement
from its original position. And then it started heading back and a little past four seconds,
it got to its original position again. So that's a story about its position as a function
of time. On this part of the trip, somewhere around between one and two seconds, the slope
of the curve is designated by that orange line, and that's representative of the velocity
at that point. And it's probably the largest velocity the object has, at least on this
first part of the trip until it gets going steeply downward that way. A little while later,
it's at its maximum position the farthest it is away, and at that point, the velocity
is zero. That's the point at which the velocity curve, if we plot a curve of velocity which
started out at zero and then rose up and came back down, that's the point at which the velocity
is zero. That's when the rate of change of position is zero. There's a place where the
velocity is a maximum. At that point, the velocity instantaneously is at its peak value,
and it's going to start down again. And so at that point, the velocity is instantaneously
not changing, and the acceleration is therefore zero. So this particular case, the object
starts out with a fairly big acceleration, and the acceleration goes steadily downward.
Position, velocity, and acceleration. Now let's take a look at these things as they
work in the real world by doing an experiment. So here we are with a real world experiment
which will illustrate the concepts of position and velocity. What I have here is a motion
sensor. It's similar to the thing in your camera that tells how far away subjects are
that you want to focus on. It sends out an ultrasound beam, bounces it back, determines
the time it took that beam to travel, and on the basis of that, calculates position.
And after it calculates position, it can then figure out using the process of delta x and
delta t. It can also figure out the velocity, and the results of the experiment are going
to show on the screen here on the graph you see. So I'm going to place the motion sensor
in front of this chair, which will be our object that's going to tell a little story
about its motion. And I'm going to ask Kat from the teaching company to come forward,
and she's going to take this chair on a little trip, just like the trips we talked about
to the ice cream stand or the trips we saw in those graphs. And the graph of position
versus time will tell a story of how this thing moved, and then we'll look also at
the velocity graph. So go ahead. Beautiful. Okay, so let's look at what we've got. So
the red curve is position as a function of time. I set the device to start registering
when the chair got one meter from the motion sensor. So here these red numbers are the
vertical scale. They're the position. So it started out at one meter. The chair moved
away from the motion sensor at a pretty steady rate. You can tell because the slope is pretty
constant. Then Kat paused when she got the greatest distance away. She basically was
at rest. The slope is horizontal. The velocity was zero at that point. The position wasn't
changing. And you can see that on the velocity curve. Here's the zero mark of velocity right
there where my finger is. So right across there is zero velocity. And indeed, right
when the chair was the furthest distance away, when Kat paused, the velocity was zero. Earlier
the velocity was fairly steady. That's on this rising, almost constant slope. Then it
started to decline as the curve bent around. It got to zero. And then it went negative
as the chair began moving backwards. And on her way back, Kat paused. Again, the position
wasn't changing with time. And at that point, the velocity again went to zero. It was negative
beforehand. It was still going backwards. It went to zero. And then as she rushed the
chair back to the end, it went rapidly negative again as the position went back toward where
it had started out. So this is a beautiful example of the story of the position and velocity
as functions of time in that experiment. Well, thank you, Kat. I appreciate your efforts.
And let's just wrap up by pointing out that we've learned three important concepts of
motion. Position, its rate of change velocity, and velocity's rate of change acceleration.
And they're related in that the slopes of the graphs give you the next quantity down
in that line. They are not related in terms of their actual values. We'll be using these
concepts again and again in our study of Newtonian mechanics.
