Welcome to lecture six, which deals exclusively and completely with circular motion. Circular
motion is one of the most important types of motion throughout the universe in technological
devices, in nature, in atomic size systems, in planetary systems, in galactic systems
throughout the entire universe, circular motion is ubiquitous. So I want to spend the entire
lecture on circular motion. And the first thing I want to say about circular motion
is that it is accelerated motion. It's accelerated motion because even if circular motion occurs
at a constant speed, a situation called uniform circular motion, the motion is nevertheless
accelerated because it's motion whose direction is continually changing. So never forget,
circular motion is accelerated motion. Anytime you see something moving in a circle, you
know immediately that it's accelerated. My tennis ball here is moving in a circular path
in the vertical plane. I could equally well whirl it in a circular path in the horizontal
plane or somewhere in between. These are both examples of circular motion. And if the speed
is the same all the time, it's uniform circular motion. If there were a little speedometer
attached to that ball, it would read a constant value, it would read a constant speed, but
that would not mean the motion was not accelerated. The motion is accelerated because the direction
of the motion is continually changing. Circular motion is accelerated motion. Let's take a
look at some other examples of circular motion. Circular motion, as I've indicated, is ubiquitous.
So here are some examples. You see a car and you see its wheel turning, it's heading around
a curve in a road. Two things are actually happening here. The wheel is turning, there's
circular motion of the wheel itself, and the entire car is turning as it rounds that bend.
Two circular motions happening here as the car turns the corner. It is accelerating, the
wheel is accelerated because of its spinning motion, the entire car is accelerated because
its motion is not in a straight line. And even if the driver is holding the speed constant
at 55 miles an hour or whatever it is, it's still accelerated motion. We've got an airplane.
It's undergoing what's called a bank turn. We'll see later why airplanes have to bank
in order to turn. The frame is fixed on the airplane, so watch the ground to see that
this airplane is undergoing a turn. That's circular motion. You see an old-fashioned
analog clock. Its hands are undergoing circular motion. The tip of the minute hand is undergoing
a circular motion with a certain constant speed. The tip of the hour hand is undergoing
circular motion with a different constant speed. That depends in part on how long the
hand is and how long it takes to go around, 12 hours versus one hour. The second hand is
also undergoing circular motion. These are all uniform circular motions if it's a good
clock because they're happening at a steady rate. We see a simulation of an electron circling
around the nucleus in an atom. Now much later when we start talking quantum physics, we'll
see that's not really a very good picture of an atom, but it's still a useful picture.
In this atom model, uniform circular motion is occurring and our understanding of that
atom will be enhanced by our understanding how that circular motion works. In the middle
we see a simulation of the Earth going around the Sun. The Earth's orbit is almost a perfect
circle. It's about 3% off. It's slightly elliptical, but it's close enough that we can consider
this basically a case of uniform circular motion. Finally, here's an everyday thing,
a bicycle. The bicycle is going in this case in a straight line, but the wheels and the
pedals are undergoing circular motion. Pick a point on the wheel, pick the valve stem
where you insert air and that's going in a circular path. Look at one of the feet on
the pedal and it's undergoing circular motion. Circular motion is ubiquitous and circular
motion is accelerated motion. Circular motion is occurring. Whether or not we're going
in a complete circle, we're just part of a circle. You're driving down a straight road
and you come to a big 90 degree bend. While you're in that bend, you are undergoing circular
motion and if you're in that bend and driving at constant speed, you're undergoing what
I'm calling uniform circular motion. The first half of this lecture or so will be concentrated
on uniform circular motion and then we'll look at a slightly more general case and slightly
more complicated case of non-uniform circular motion. For now I'm talking about uniform
circular motion, motion in a circular path, fixed radius to that path, a real circle at
constant speed. It doesn't have to be a complete circle though as long as it's a circular path.
Circular motion is ubiquitous. Now I've said over and over already that circular motion
is accelerated motion. In previous lectures we've seen the definitions of velocity and
acceleration and how we carefully built up those definitions by talking about velocity
as the rate of change of position and acceleration as the rate of change of velocity. We first
did it in one dimension and then we did it in multiple dimensions as vectors. Now we
want to understand circular motion, first uniform circular motion in that same context.
So when I say circular motion is accelerated motion, you might think, well how am I going
to measure that accelerated motion? What are the units of acceleration? They're rate of
change of velocity over time. They are rate of change delta v over, rate over time interval
involved delta t. What are the units? Meters per second per second or meters per second
squared. And that may sound a little bit odd when we're talking about circular motion,
but nevertheless we want to quantify the acceleration in circular motion and we want to say this
velocity is changing at the rate of so many meters per second per second, so many meters
per second squared. Even, even if the number of meters per second, the speed is itself
not changing. We can still characterize the acceleration, which remember is not defined
as the rate of change of speed, but the rate of change of velocity, of vector quantity.
We're going to characterize acceleration in circular motion in terms of how many meters
per second per second, the velocity, not the speed, but the velocity is changing. And so
we're going to spend a good part of this lecture at our big screen doing the math to describe
uniform circular motion rigorously and mathematically. So let's go there. First of all, just one
other example of uniform circular motion. Here it goes. Got a ball going around in a circular
path. How do I characterize that motion? Well, I need to know the radius of the path and I
need to know the speed of the ball. Again, speed is different from velocity. So let's
take a little bit of a closer look at this situation. Here goes the ball around and around.
So I'm going to attach a velocity vector to it. That describes its velocity and instantaneously
when the ball is at the top of that path, it is moving to the right. And so the velocity
vector is instantaneously pointing to the right. As the ball goes around, you will see
that the velocity vector changes direction. It's always, in fact, tangent to that circular
path and around and around it goes tangent to the circular path. There it is. The velocity
vector is attached to the moving object and the velocity vector is tangent to the circle.
So the object's direction of motion is always changing. The direction of its velocity vector
is changing and any change in velocity, whether in direction or magnitude or both, is by definition
an acceleration. So this is accelerated motion and you can see it vividly right there when
we've attached the velocity vector because you can see that the direction of the velocity
is continually changing. And I want to describe that change in terms of meters per second
per second of change not in speed because the speed is constant but in velocity. So
how are we going to do that? Well, let's take a closer look. Here's a picture of the
same situation we just saw and what I'm showing you is the position of the ball when it started
out and the position of the ball a little while later. A couple things you'll notice.
First of all, the two velocity vectors have exactly the same length. They represent the
same speed. They are different velocities because they're pointing in different directions
but they represent motion with the same speed. The ball has moved a little bit from its initial
position and I'm going to describe the change in its position by this angle designated by
the Greek theta which we will commonly use throughout this course for angles. And because
this is uniform circular motion in a perfectly circular path, the distance from the center
of that path is the same for both positions of the ball and I'm designating that by that
lower case r. That's the radius of the circular path. So that characterizes everything I need
to know. The velocity and its speed or magnitude v, the radial distance r and the angle theta
through which the ball has moved in the time I'm considering. So this again is a snapshot
at two different times as this ball continues in the circular motion we saw before with
the velocity vector going along with it and the velocity vector notice is always tangent
to the circle and that means it's at right angles to this radius from the center to the
point where the ball is. So the velocity vector is at right angles to the radius. That's going
to be important in the geometry we're doing here. So let's work on this geometrically.
This is the first velocity vector. I'll call it v1. It's a vector. It's got an arrow over
it. That's why it's a vector. That's how I can tell it's a vector. There's the velocity
v2. Now remember about vectors. A vector cares what its magnitude is and it cares what its
direction is and that's all it cares about. You can slide a vector around, you can move
a vector any way you want, put its tail anywhere you want, provided you don't change its length
or its orientation, that is its direction, but you can move it in space. So I'm allowed
to take v1 and put it up here and I'm allowed to take v2 and put it tail to tail with v1
and I haven't changed either of those vectors because all a vector cares about is its magnitude
and direction. Now if I started with v1 and I wanted to make it into v2, I would have
to add this little bit of a vector here or put it another way if I subtracted vector
v1 from vector v2. This would be the change between the two of them. I call that change
delta v. Delta v is the final velocity minus the initial velocity or equivalently it's
what I have to add to the initial velocity v1 to get the final velocity v2. So there's
delta v. So I now have a new vector introduced. That's the change in the velocity between
when the ball was at this position and when it was at this position and that is the clearest
indication that we're dealing with accelerated motion because if there were unaccelerated
motion, if we had no acceleration, those two velocity vectors would sit right on top of
each other and they'd be the same. This is accelerated motion. Circular motion is accelerated
motion. There's the clue. We have a delta v. As time goes on, the velocities are not
the same and there is a measurable change between them and we want to measure that change
because we need to know that change and we need to divide that change by time in order
to figure out exactly what the acceleration is. That's the name of the game here. We want
an acceleration in meters per second per second for this situation. Okay, now let's look at
this little piece of the geometry here involving those two radii in that angle. So let's pull
them out. Here are the two radii. They're of equal length because it's a perfect circle.
There's some angle theta between them and what I want to point out is that because the
two velocity vectors are at right angles to the two radius vectors, the angle between
velocity vector v1 and v2 is the same angle theta. That's because the angle between this
blue velocity vector and this radius is the same as the angle between this blue velocity
vector and this radius and so that angle is the same as that angle. In fact, in the limit
of very small theta, very small times, both of those would go to zero. If we got around
to 90 degrees, you can see the two vectors would also be 90 degrees apart. So those two
angles are the same. So let's now look at these two almost triangles. Let's make that
one a triangle also. So now I have two triangles and I'm going to claim that the length, the
little short side of this triangle has a length approximately, not exactly v, the speed at
which this ball is going around in its circle times delta t, where delta t is the time interval
between when the ball was here and when it was here. Why do I say approximately? Because
the ball is really moving on a circular arc and the length of that circular arc is in
fact exactly v delta t because that's the path it's actually taking. But look at this
little segment here. That's almost the same and you might say, well, almost isn't good
enough. Well, it is good enough if I imagine this angle shrinking ever smaller. That's
the process that calculus would use and I'm actually skirting around calculus here without
actually getting into calculus. But calculus would make the argument that in the limit
that that angle gets very small, these two things become indistinguishable and ultimately
in the limit that that angle goes towards zero, they become the same. So I'm going to
say that this segment is approximately v delta t and then in the very end of this whole process
I'm going to argue that if I make delta t very small, so the angle becomes carous done
in this ball, that has become an exact result. So we'll carry that result through and we'll
make that argument a little later on. So we'll take that circle away and we'll notice now
that we have two triangles and those two triangles have, they're isosceles triangles, they have
equal sides, equal sides. I've still labeled these v1 and v2. By the way, notice that I've
taken the vector signs off because I'm now going to talk about the lengths of the sides
of triangles, not about vectors. So I really could have taken off the ones and twos also
but I want to remind you we're dealing with lengths of two different velocity vectors
or magnitudes of two different velocity vectors or speeds associated with two different velocity
vectors but those two speeds are the same. So I could have just called it v and I'll
soon do that. v. v is the same as v1 or v2 without the vector sign because all that matters
then is speed, not direction. Now look at these two triangles, they're isosceles triangles
and they have the same angle and that means they're similar triangles like you learned
about in 10th grade geometry. And if we have similar triangles, we know that the ratio
of the short side of this blue triangle to the length of either of its other sides they're
equal and they're equal to v, the speed, is the same as the ratio of the short side of
this white triangle to either of its sides of length r. So delta v over v is, and I've
used approximately equal because of that funny business about the circular arc not being
quite equal to the line. So there's an almost equality there and it's going to become a
perfect equality when we let that angle get very small. So what's the acceleration? The
acceleration is delta v over delta t. Acceleration is defined as the rate of change of velocity.
Here's the change in velocity that occurred during the time interval delta t when the
ball moved from this position to this position and we found that that's approximately given
by v squared, the square of the speed divided by the radius of the circular path. Almost
approximately. In the limit that that theta gets very small, that will become exactly
true and that will be the instantaneous value of the acceleration and you can calculate
that given the speed and the radius and that number has the units of meters per second
meters per second squared even though the number of meters per second isn't changing.
This is about the rate at which the velocity is changing and it's changing entirely in
direction and not at all in speed. So there is our acceleration formula. Let's look in
a little bit more detail now. There's our blue triangle. There it is blown up so we
can look at it big v1 v2 and delta v. And now let's make that angle very small. I've
already argued that as the angle becomes very small in our white triangle, that little
short side became equal to that segment or that curved arc and the approximate equality
becomes exactly equal. I want to point out something else that happens as this angle
becomes very small. As that angle becomes tiny, remember the angles of a triangle add
up to 180 degrees. As that gets almost to zero, these two angles which are equal because
it's an isosceles triangle both go nearer and nearer and nearer to 90 degrees. And that
means that delta v becomes essentially at right angles to v itself. And in fact that's
what happens any time you have a change in direction but no change in speed. In that
case the change in velocity and therefore the acceleration is at right angles to the
motion itself. And that's what we're seeing happens here. So the acceleration in circular
motion ends up being at right angles to the motion itself. Let's just take another look
at that. Here's the picture now. We've concluded that the acceleration is given by v squared
over r, square of the speed over the radius. I'll show you in a minute why that has to
be. That's a measurable quantity in meters per second squared. And we know something
else about the acceleration. We know its direction is toward the center of the circle and for
that reason it's called centripetal acceleration. Not centrifugal. That word is band. But centripetal,
which is also a word that can cause confusion but I'm at least going to use it, it means
toward the center. The acceleration points toward the center of the circle and as the
ball goes around in its circular path, there it goes, its velocity vector is always tangent
to the circle and its acceleration vector is always at right angles to the velocity
vector and directed toward the center of the circle. So we know everything about this
acceleration. We know its magnitude and we know its direction. Its magnitude is v squared
over r, its direction is toward the center of the circle. And I can't emphasize how important
this is. We're going to analyze the orbits of planets using this. We're going to analyze
the hydrogen atom using this. We're going to analyze mundane situations like loop-to-loop
roller coasters using this. This is a really crucial formula, a very simple one in physics.
It describes the acceleration when we are in circular motion. So there's the centripetal
acceleration. Now, let's just take a look at a picture that makes this a little bit more
real. Here's a picture of a truck on what's obviously a curved path. The truck is going
around the curved path. The driver may see 35 miles an hour on the speedometer and 35
miles an hour the whole time but as I've argued this is accelerated motion and there's the
direction of the acceleration vector. It's toward the center of the circle. As we'll
see later when we talk about forces there better be something to push it in that direction
and that something is going to be the friction between the tires and the road. This is a
centripetal acceleration toward the center of the circle. It's the acceleration of an
object in a circular path. And let's just take another look at that equation and see
if we can understand why it has the structure it does. So here are two circular paths on
which two different objects are moving with equal and constant speeds so they're both
in uniform circular motions but one of those paths is bigger. Now, a while later on the
short on the smaller circle the object will be moving straight downward. There will be
a certain change in its velocity, the difference between those two vectors. A while later on
the big circle and a longer time than it took for the small circle because the speeds are
the same in both these cases but the big circle is bigger there will be a downward motion
of the object on the bigger circle and the difference between those two velocities is
the same in both cases because there are two velocities of equal magnitude at right angles.
But for the bigger circle it took longer and that tells us that the rate of change of velocity
is less and therefore the acceleration should be less for a bigger circle. Not surprising.
That's why the 1 over r appears in the denominator of that equation. On the other hand if we look
at two equal sized circles with different speeds we can also understand why this formula
has the structure it does in particular why it's got v squared upstairs. So now the upper
circle has a certain speed, a smallish speed and there is a delta v which is the vector
difference between those two vectors the one going horizontal and the one at right angles
and if you work it out you'll see that's the block vector you have to add to the top one
to get the downward pointing one. On the other hand on the lower circle which is the same
sized circle delta v is bigger because v itself is bigger. So we expect that the acceleration
will be bigger if the speed is bigger. But why v squared? The reason for the v squared
is there's something else happening on the lower circle. The lower circle remember v
is bigger. The speed is bigger and so it's going to take less time for the particle to
move from when it's going to the right to when it's going downward. So those two effects
a bigger delta v and a smaller delta t combine to give an acceleration that's proportional
not to v itself but to v times v to v squared. So there's a motivation of why we're dealing
with an acceleration which is v squared over r. Well let's talk briefly about what happens
if the motion is non-uniform. We could have a situation where the speed of an object is
changing even as it undergoes circular motion. Well in fact it's convenient in that case
to think of two components of the acceleration. There is a radial component pointing toward
the center of the circle and that's associated in this picture of a car going around a turn
with changing only the direction of the motion. And then there is a tangential component,
a component that's along the direction of the circle and that's changing only the speed.
And as you can see here the net acceleration which is pointing sort of down and to the
right is the sum of those two vectors. And you can also see in this case because the
tangential acceleration the one that's parallel to the local direction of the tangent to that
path is pointing opposite the velocity. This car is in fact breaking. It's slowing down
even as it goes around the turn and the brakes are providing the slowing down acceleration,
the tangential acceleration and the tires are ultimately providing that and the tires
are also providing the acceleration that changes the direction. So we can have non-uniform
circular motion in the sense that speed is changing as well as direction but we can still
analyze it using what we understand of a straight line acceleration and b acceleration in a
circular path. The acceleration that we now know has magnitude v squared over r. We could
also be moving as this car is in a situation where the curvature of our path may be changing.
As non-uniform circular motion due to a changing path curvature it's also due possibly to
changing speed. The driver could be driving along here at different speeds. And at each
point on that curve path we can define something called an oscillating circle. It sort of means
the curve and the circle are kissing. They are exactly matched right at that point if
you want to get really profound about it mathematically if you've had calculus not only are their
derivatives equal there but their second derivatives are equal there and so they are very closely
matched and that defines a radius, a local radius of curvature of that path and that's
what you use for r in v squared over r and locally at the instant the car is at a certain
point on the path it's got some speed v and that's what you use for v. So the acceleration
may be changing in magnitude as you go around. By the way one thing I should also point out
about acceleration in circular motion and you saw it in the diagram here where the acceleration
vector was going around although the acceleration has the same magnitude v squared over r when
the motion is uniform and circular it is not a case of constant acceleration. It is not
constant acceleration because the direction of the acceleration vector is changing just
like it's not constant velocity because the direction of the velocity vector is changing.
Circular motion is never motion with constant acceleration. It may be motion with constant
speed but it's never motion with constant velocity. So there's non-uniform circular
motion. Let's do an example on our big screen of what we can do with this fact of circular
motion and acceleration equal to v squared over r. So I'd like to consider a situation
that often people who are suggesting we build space stations that astronauts would stay in
for very long times we could make a kind of artificial gravity equal to the gravity at
Earth's surface. That is not the case with the International Space Station but a space
station that was built in the shape of a ring like this could be set spinning and at what
rate would it have to spin so that somebody walking around the rim like you see these
people doing would experience the gravity equivalent to that at Earth's surface. Why
do they experience any gravity at all? Because if they're standing still in that rim they
are in uniform circular motion and they're being accelerated toward the center and if
that acceleration has the right magnitude it will feel exactly like they do here on
Earth. So we want v squared over r to be g the acceleration of gravity at Earth's surface.
We solve that for v. v is the square root of rg. Nothing in here about mass by the way
which is good because it will work for everybody. The time t for one revolution of this thing
is 2 pi r over v. I'm just going to work this out and get an answer in terms of how
many spins it must do every second or minute or whatever. I'm going to substitute for v.
v is square root of rg so that v downstairs becomes root rg and the r upstairs not in
a root divided by the r downstairs in a root gives me an r upstairs in a root so there's
basically the answer for t. Do the numbers. r is 225 meters that's half the diameter
I've shown there 450 meters. g is 9.8 meters per second squared at the surface of the Earth
and I get t equals 30 seconds. So this thing needs to spin it twice per minute and it will
produce artificial gravity. It's not gravity but it simulates the effect of gravity and
way on in this course when we get to general relativity that's going to come back to haunt
us this sort of ability of acceleration to mimic gravity but there it is that space station
walking around the outside of it the astronauts in that space station would feel just as they
do here on Earth and if they jumped up they would accelerate downward at least locally
with acceleration 9.8 meters per second squared and if they stood on a scale they would apparently
weigh exactly what they do here on Earth. So there's a simple example using that fact
of acceleration being v squared over r. Well let's wrap up. Circular motion we've seen
is ubiquitous. It occurs on atomic to galactic scales and everywhere in between including
lots of cases in the everyday world like airplanes and cars and bicycles and watches
and you name it. Circular motion is accelerated motion. The magnitude of the acceleration
is v squared over r. The direction is toward the center of the circle. It is not motion
with constant acceleration. It's motion if it's uniform circular motion with constant
magnitude of its acceleration but the direction is always changing. So never use one of those
constant acceleration formulas to describe circular motion because it isn't constant
acceleration. It's got constant magnitude but not constant direction. And finally we
looked at non-uniform circular motion in which we have changing speeds as well as changing
curvature. So we know quite a bit about circular motion. In fact we know basically everything
we need to know to do a lot of physics with it. Now you can stop there if you want but
let me give you a challenge in case you'd like to do a little more math. So here's
my challenge. I've got a jet plane. It's diving vertically downward at a high speed
of 1200 kilometers per hour. The pilot can withstand a maximum acceleration of five times
the acceleration of gravity, five G's before blanking out. And that happens because the
acceleration affects the blood flow to the brain and you black out. And it's going to
be dangerous if you're flying a plane especially at 1200 kilometers an hour. So you want to
avoid that. So here's the question. Zooming straight down. What's the minimum height above
the ground at which the plane can begin to pull out of that dive and execute a quarter
turn so it's going horizontally and maybe then back up again without the pilot blacking
out? What's the answer? Important to know if you were that pilot. Okay, here we are. As
you can see in the diagram what's going to happen is I'm going to start that turn. I'm
going to undertake a quarter turn and the radius of that quarter turn is the distance
above the ground at which I have to start making the turn. Let me call that distance
h. So the height h is the radius of the quarter turn. That's the answer I'm looking for. We
know what the acceleration is. It's v squared over r. So that's v squared over h because
the radius is h. And we want that to be equal to 5g because that's the maximum we can have.
Of course, we're going to have to back off from the final answer just a little bit to
give a margin of safety. But there we are. We want it to be 5g. So let's solve for h.
H comes out v squared over 5g. I'll let you do the conversion. You've got to work in
si here. Convert v from kilometers per hour to meters per second and do the numbers. And
you will find out that h had better be 2.3 kilometers. So you better start that turn
at least 2.3 kilometers above the ground. If you don't start it that high, you're going
to be too close to the ground. You're going to have to speed up and make an even tighter
turn and then you are going to be blacking out. So you don't want that to happen. So
start at least 2.3 kilometers above the ground.
