Welcome to lecture 8, which I'm going to be discussing Newton's laws as we apply them
in one dimension, just like we did with motion itself.
We first began with the one dimensional case, then we moved on to the more complicated case
of two and three dimensions.
We'll do that here also.
I want to make a point before I begin, though, about Newton's laws.
Newton's laws are valid only for experimenters or observers, those who are trying to find
out how physical reality works or engineer structures or whatever, who are in uniform
motion, who are not accelerating.
Those frames of reference of such observers are called inertial reference frames because
in them the law of inertial holds.
If an object is not subject to any forces, its motion doesn't change.
And that's a way of testing whether you're in an inertial reference frame or not.
Applying Newton's laws in situations where you are accelerating is a source of great
confusion and misconceptions.
For example, if you're sitting on a rotating merry-go-round, or if you're in an airplane
when it's going through turbulent skies, the peanuts don't stay on your tray top table,
seat back table, even though you don't think there's any forces acting on them.
Newton's laws don't apply in these non-inertial situations.
Some people try to sort of force them to apply by inventing artificial forces that aren't
really there, things like centrifugal force.
These are words I'd like you to banish from your vocabulary because they make it extremely
difficult to understand Newton's law.
Newton's laws apply only in inertial reference frames.
They still apply to what's going on in that turbulent airplane, but the person who's applying
them has to apply them from a point of view of an unaccelerated reference frame.
We're going to take the point of view that Earth, the place where we're doing experiments
here, is an inertial reference frame.
It isn't quite because Earth is rotating, it's in circular motion.
Any point on Earth is in circular motion, and therefore it's accelerating, but Earth
is rotating slowly enough that except in a few special circumstances, particularly oceanographers
and meteorologists who are worried about large-scale ocean or atmospheric circulation patterns,
except for them, the Earth is a pretty good approximation to an inertial reference frame.
By the way, I should mention that this whole idea of inertial reference frames is one of
the ideas that leads Einstein to the theory of relativity, and we'll talk much more about
that later in the course.
So I want to get more practical now and describe in this lecture how we use Newton's second
law to talk about motion, to understand motion, or for other purposes.
And one of the simplest purposes is simply to measure mass.
Newton's law says F equals MA, so if we know the force that's acting on an object and we
know its acceleration or can measure its acceleration, we can then calculate its mass.
And here's a picture which shows an astronaut, Tamara Jernigan, in fact.
She is measuring her mass on the space lab, early space station, and she's in a chair
which is mounted on springs and undergoes known accelerations, subject to known forces
by springs, and on that basis she calculates her mass because in space it's impossible
to, quote, weigh yourself in the standard way, although we'll see a lot more about that
in the course of this lecture.
Now I just talked about mass and F equals MA.
What is mass?
Well, one definition, and it's a definition you might have learned in a science course,
is it's the amount of matter in something.
And there is some truth to that definition, but I'm not really wild about it because especially
when you get into the theory of relativity, what exactly is mass in terms of amount of
matter gets kind of blurry.
A better way to think of mass in the context of Newton's law is it is a measure of inertia.
That is, it's a measure of resistance to change in motion.
Inertia is another one of those physics words that you have a common sense notion of.
Somebody's got a lot of inertia, it's hard to get them out of their easy chair.
Somebody's got a lot of inertia, it's hard to change their path, hard to change what
they're doing.
Well, that's what it means in physics also, it's resistance in particular to change in
motion.
That's what Newton's law is talking about because f equals ma says for a given force,
you'll get less acceleration with a bigger mass, more inertia, more resistance to change
in motion.
Another important concept in physics is weight, and weight and mass are very often confused.
And I want to spend some time getting them sorted out.
Weight by definition is the force that gravity exerts on an object.
It's often confused with mass, but it's different.
And it's different because they have different units.
Mass in the SI system is in kilograms, force is in Newtons.
In the English system, force is in pounds, as I said in the last lecture, you probably
don't know the English unit for mass, it's the slug, very rarely used.
And we're further confused because when you weigh yourself, particularly you weigh yourself
in a doctor's office, they'll often give you your weight in kilograms.
Well, kilogram is not a unit of weight, it's a unit of mass.
So we tend to confuse these, but they're two different words and they mean two very different
things.
The force of gravity on an object and mass is a more fundamental thing that the object
owns by virtue of its inertia, its resistance to change in motion, and it's sort of related
to how much matter there is in the object.
The reason that mass and weight get confused, one reason that mass and weight get confused
is because of a remarkable fact.
And that is at a given point in space, on Earth, surface or wherever, weight and mass
are directly proportional.
Something that weighs twice as much as something else also has twice as much mass.
And the proportionality between weight and mass is the acceleration of gravity, G, that
I introduced back in lecture four.
Gravity has acceleration 9.8 meters per second squared near Earth's surface, but you could
also express that as 9.8 Newtons per kilogram.
And if you work out what a Newton is, a kilogram meter per second squared, divide that by kilograms,
you get meters per second squared.
So a Newton per kilogram or a meter per second squared are the same thing.
And when we talk about weight, we can say that every kilogram near the Earth's surface
has a weight of 9.8 Newtons.
So if you have a half a kilogram, it's got a weight of 4.9 Newtons and so on.
Weight is MG.
And let's take a look at that and do a little quick, simple calculation involving mass and
weight.
So, weight is the force that gravity exerts on an object.
I write that mathematically as W, weight, with a vector sign over it because it is a
force, it has a direction, it's downward, is mass times the gravitational acceleration.
Near Earth, gravity has the acceleration 9.8 meters per second squared or 9.8 Newtons
per kilogram and per kg.
And that means if your mass is 70 kilograms, you're going to weigh just under 700 Newtons
because G is about 10 Newtons per kilogram a little bit under that.
Your mass is 70 kilograms and even if you go to Mars, your mass is still 70 kilograms,
but G on Mars is only 3.7 Newtons per kilogram.
So on Mars, your weight would be your mass, 70 kilograms M times the strength of gravity,
the Newtons per kilogram or the meters per second squared on Mars and that's 3.7 and
that comes out about only 259 Newtons.
So your weight is something that depends on where you are because it depends on the strength
of gravity at the point where you are, but your mass is something which is inherent to
you and doesn't change.
Now the remarkable fact, as I pointed out, is that mass and weight are proportional and
that has a remarkable consequence for what happens here on Earth because it means that
all objects fall with the same acceleration.
This was something Galileo purportedly found by dropping things off the Tower of Pisa.
He made some interesting arguments about why that should be.
We don't know whether that's a myth or reality, but it's certainly the case that all objects
experience the same acceleration when gravity is the only force acting and that further
confuses mass and weight.
So let's look at how that occurs.
Weight is the force of gravity on an object, W equals mg.
Here I've written it without the vector signs because I just want to compare the magnitudes.
Newton's second law says F equals ma and you'll remember when we did the anatomy of Newton's
second law, F was the physical forces acting on an object and the right hand side ma was
simply the product of the object's mass with its acceleration.
So if I put in the physical force of gravity, the weight of the object on the left hand side
when the object is subject only to gravity, then I have mg equals ma and the m's cancel
from both sides of that equation and therefore a equals g, mass doesn't matter.
All objects fall with the same acceleration g and there's a proof of why that is and it's
because of this remarkable fact that weight and mass are directly proportional.
We will find in many cases when we do examples involving gravity that the mass won't matter.
It drops out and it drops out because of this fact that weight and mass are directly proportional.
So let's do just a couple examples of this.
Let me take a big mass of object and a much less mass of object, a tennis ball and a bowling
ball and drop them and if in fact they undergo the same acceleration, we'll see them hit
the ground at the same time.
Now this slight effect of air resistance on the lighter tennis ball but they're going
to hit the ground pretty much the same time.
This bowling ball must weigh 50 times what this tennis ball does and yet they hit the
ground at the same time.
Do another experiment in which I take a little chunk of styrofoam in the old days it would
have been a feather and a coin, a penny and they're in this tube and I'm going to turn
the tube upright and they're both going to fall and right now the tube has air in it
and the effect of air on the styrofoam is much greater than the effect of air on the
coin or the relative effect.
That's because the coin has a much greater weight and has a much greater force of gravity
on it whereas they both have approximately the same force of air resistance but the force
of gravity on the styrofoam is much less so air resistance affects it much more.
So as I turn this tube vertical, you see the two things fall and the styrofoam takes a
lot longer to reach the bottom, I'll do it again.
There it goes.
Now I'm going to pump the air out of this tube and again that effect of air resistance
is one of the reasons we sometimes forget some of these simple ideas in physics namely
that all things really do fall with the same acceleration.
So I've got a little syringe here which is simply going to keep pumping air out and there's
a check valve that allows the air to escape when I push one way but it doesn't let air
back in and I've got to pump on this a while.
By the way it's getting hot which is an example of thermodynamics which we will get to in
section three of the course.
I'm doing work on that on the gases in this system.
Okay, let's see if I've pumped it enough and you see they fall much closer to the same
acceleration.
Not perfect but the styrofoam is falling much more like the coin.
So the effect of air resistance sometimes confuses us and prevents us from understanding
that the effect of gravity on all objects is basically the same that they're all falling
with essentially the same acceleration.
Here are a couple of video clips of examples of this.
In one case we've got a simulation of Galileo's famous experiment dropping two different objects
of different masses off the tower of Pisa.
In the other one we've got a poor clip because it was taken with television cameras and broadcast
down from the moon.
It's an actual experiment done by astronaut David Scott on the surface of the moon.
Well in my left hand I have a feather in my right hand a hammer and I guess one of the
reasons we got here today was because of a gentleman named Galileo a long time ago who
made a rather significant discovery about falling objects in gravity fields and we thought
that where would be a better place to confirm his findings on the moon and so we thought
we'd try it here for you and I'll drop the two of them here and hopefully they'll hit
the ground at the same time.
How about that?
Mr. Galileo was correct in his findings.
So confirmations that all objects undergo the same acceleration when they're influenced
by gravity alone.
What about weightlessness?
You hear about astronauts in space being weightless.
Are they weightless?
I've defined weight as the force of gravity on an object.
So are astronauts in the International Space Station, for example, weightless?
Well no.
The space station and the astronauts in it are in a circular orbit around the Earth.
If they're in a circular orbit their motion is changing because it's not straight line
motion at constant speed.
It's not straight line motion because it's circular.
So there must be a force on them and that force is gravity.
If there were to force on them they'd be going in a straight line and bye-bye astronauts
and bye-bye space station.
That force is gravity and up where the space station is it's only slightly weaker than
it is here at Earth.
What those astronauts are is apparently weightless.
They're apparently weightless because they and everything around them are accelerating
with the same acceleration.
If you were in a freely falling elevator someone cut the cable and you took things out of your
pocket they would fall right beside you and they'd look weightless compared to you.
The same is true in an orbiting spacecraft and here we see some astronauts floating around
in the cabin of a spacecraft.
It's not because there's no gravity.
It's because there is the same gravitational acceleration acting on all objects in that
environment.
Okay, well let's move on and begin to talk about how we actually use Newton's second
law to solve problems involving motion.
Let me start with a qualitative example and then we'll get quantitative about it.
So here's an elevator and I want to imagine the elevator has some total mass m, the elevator
plus its passengers.
It happens to be moving upward.
That's what the velocity arrow on the right says and it happens also to be accelerating
upward which would be the case say when the elevator was first starting up from the ground.
And I want to know what the cable tension is.
Well if the elevator were not accelerating the cable tension would be exactly equal to
its weight because the cable is what's supporting it against the force of gravity and if it
weren't moving it would have no net force on it.
If it's accelerating upward it must have a net force upward and the cable tension must
therefore be greater than its weight.
If it's accelerating downward as happens when it's slowing to a stop at the top of its
path or when it's starting going downward then the acceleration is downward, the force
must be downward, the net force must be downward and the cable tension must therefore be less
than the weight of the elevator.
What if the velocity is the other direction?
Absolutely irrelevant.
And that goes back to my fundamental Newtonian point versus Aristotelian.
Newtonian physics is about changes in motion not about motion itself.
The motion of the elevator is irrelevant to the forces.
What's relevant is the acceleration.
So it doesn't matter what relationship there is between velocity and acceleration.
All that matters is the acceleration.
So that's a qualitative look at the elevator.
How do we actually use Newton's law to solve problems like that problem of the elevator?
So let me run you through a little example.
First thing you do is write Newton's law.
Here it is.
F equals ma with the vector signs, although in this one dimensional case we don't really
need those.
We're going to draw our situation, we're going to identify all the forces acting on
the object because Newton's law is about forces.
We're going to rewrite Newton's laws, Newton's second law in particular, with those forces
explicitly identified.
Then we have to establish a coordinate system in one dimension.
That's just which way is positive, which way is negative, in two dimensions it's more complicated.
And we're going to rewrite Newton's second law in our chosen coordinate system.
And then we're going to solve the mathematics that arises from doing that.
So let's do an example of how that works in the case of the elevator and we'll really
work through it in some detail.
So let's figure out what's going on in the elevator.
So what's the cable tension?
The question we just asked, here's the elevator, it's got mass m, it's being accelerated, I'm
assuming upward, although our results will work even if it's downward.
And we want to find out what the cable tension has to be, that's a practical question.
How strong does the cable have to be?
It has to be stronger than it would need to be just to support the weight of the elevator
because it's going to have to exert greater forces when the elevator is accelerating.
So I'll begin by writing Newton's second law, f equals ma, for that case.
I will identify the physical forces acting on the elevator and they are the cable tension
which is pulling upward and gravity which is pulling downward.
I've designated the cable tension with capital T for tension.
I've designated the gravitational force as mg because we understand that the weight of
an object is its mass times the gravitational acceleration g.
I've drawn the picture with the tension force greater than the gravitational force, it doesn't
have to be that way but that's how I've drawn it because I'm making the assumption that
the elevator is accelerating upward and as we argued a minute ago, that means that the
tension force has to be greater.
So I've identified the two forces and I've drawn a diagram and I've put them on the diagram.
Now I'm going to rewrite Newton's second law with those two forces explicitly on the
left side.
Remember, f on the left side is the net force, it's the sum, the vector sum of all the physical
forces acting and the right hand side is just the product of the mass and the acceleration.
I'm going to write T plus mg equals ma and you might say, whoa, don't they need a minus
sign or something, one of them's up, one of them's down.
What's the beauty of vectors?
Vectors don't have minus signs or positive signs, they're much richer than that.
They can point in any one of a number of directions.
So when I write this as a vector equation, I don't worry about minus signs or which way
the vectors are going, this tells me I'm talking about the vector T, it happens to point up
but that's what T does.
This vector happens to point down but I don't need to know that.
All I know is the sum of those two vectors adds to the mass times the acceleration.
Then I have to choose a coordinate system and in this one dimensional case, I'm just
going to say let's call up positive and down negative and then I rewrite Newton's law in
my coordinate system.
In this case, T is upward so it's going to come in positive but mg, the gravitational
force is downward so it comes in negative so that's where I put the minus sign in and
that's equal to ma and in writing ma with a positive, I'm adopting the convention that
if a is upward, if we're accelerating upward then that's the positive direction.
So now I've got Newton's law rewritten in this form and all I need to do is solve it.
Little algebra, just put the mg to the other side, the tension force is the sum of the
mass times the acceleration plus the weight, the mass times the gravitational acceleration.
Let's see if this makes sense.
So here's our result, T is ma plus mg, convention is that up is positive, down is negative,
let's look at some special cases.
What if a is zero?
Now I drew a picture as if a wasn't zero but the math doesn't know that, the math takes
in every possible case.
If a is zero, that term is going to go away and T is going to be equal to mg.
Now that makes perfect sense because if the elevator isn't accelerating, the tension on
the cable is exactly equal to its weight.
All it's doing is supporting the weight of the elevator.
Now that will certainly be the case if the elevator is at rest.
What if the elevator is moving up between floors at a steady speed?
Makes absolutely no difference.
If you're thinking it should make a difference, you're being Aristotelian.
If you're a Newtonian, you'll recognize that in that case, the elevator is moving with constant
velocity.
There is no net force on it.
The upward tension force must equal the downward gravitational force.
So a equals zero could apply to the elevator sitting at rest on the floor, sitting at rest
at the bottom of the building, sitting at rest at the top.
You could also refer to the case where the elevator is moving upward or downward at a
steady speed, not accelerating.
T would be equal to mg.
If a is greater than zero by our convention, that means it's accelerating upward.
This says that T is greater than mg.
The tension is greater than the weight.
As we argued before, it needs to be to provide the extra force that accelerates the elevator.
If a is less than zero, T is less than mg, and the elevator is going to be accelerating
downward.
There is going to be less tension force than there is gravitational force, and so the net
force is downward, and the elevator is accelerating downward.
And finally, let's look at one last interesting special case.
What if a were minus g?
Now remember, my convention is positive numbers correspond with upward direction.
So when I say what if a is minus g, I'm saying what if the acceleration is downward and has
magnitude g the same as the gravitational acceleration?
Well then, in here goes minus g.
I have minus mg plus mg, that's zero, and there's no cable tension.
And of course, that's the case of free fall.
Free fall is what happens when there's no force acting but gravity.
The cable tension is zero, and the elevator is in fact accelerating downward at acceleration
g.
You would not want to be in that situation.
That's what would occur if the cable were to break and the elevator were to fall freely.
Of course, modern elevators are equipped with all kinds of safety systems, particularly
brakes that prevent that from happening.
But if they weren't there, down you would go and your acceleration would be minus g
because there would be no tension in the cable.
So there's a complete analysis of the elevator situation.
That is a beautiful example of understanding how Newton's law applies.
Now you might have been able to almost guess this answer because this is a fairly simple
problem.
But going through that whole process really gets you to understand how Newton's law works,
how what you do with Newton's law is put in for the F, the vector sum of all the forces
that are acting on the object, and that has to be equal to the mass times the acceleration.
And there we are, and we've checked these special cases to see that our result made
some sense.
In this problem I just worked, I was talking about a cable supporting weight, because supporting
the weight of the elevator or maybe providing more force to accelerate the elevator.
It's also the case that your weight as measured by a scale in an elevator will vary.
Let me talk a little bit about that.
When you stand on a scale and you're at rest in your bathroom standing on your scale, what's
happening is because you're at rest, the net force on you must be zero, gravity is exerting
a force downward, that's your weight, the scales, something must be exerting a force
upward on you and what's doing that is the scale.
The scale actually has a spring or an electronic sensor in it and that thing is being stressed
by your weight and it's pushing back up with an equal force equal to your weight and that's
why the scale tells your weight, that is the force gravity exerts on you.
But if we put you standing on that scale in an elevator, then that scale force may be
different from your actual weight and you will appear to weigh different, your apparent
weight will be different.
Let's take a look at how that might work.
So here you are in an elevator, when you're accelerating upward, then you along with the
elevator are being accelerated upward and there must be a net upward force on you.
Where can that net upward force come from?
Well there are two forces acting on you, there's the upward force of the scale pushing up on
your feet and there's the downward force of gravity pulling down on you.
They cannot add up to zero in this case because you are accelerating upward, in fact the scale
force has to be bigger and since the scale reads that force that it's providing, it will
read a weight that's higher than your normal weight.
On the other hand, if you're moving at constant speed or at rest, it doesn't matter again,
there's no acceleration, the force of the scale will exactly balance the force of gravity,
the net force will be zero, you won't be accelerating and the scale will read your normal weight.
Finally, what if you're accelerating downward?
As when the elevator starts heading downward or as when it stops on its way up, well then
there must be a net downward force on you, the force of gravity doesn't change, that's
always equal to your weight and therefore the force of the scale must be less so that
the net force will be downward and your scale reading will be lower.
So if you want to lose weight, jump into an elevator and do it when the elevator is accelerating
downward and you will in fact weigh less.
Well, physics is an experimental science, so don't take my word for this, let's in fact
step into an elevator and do that experiment.
So here we are in the elevator ready to test the validity of what Newton's second law says
about apparent weight in accelerating frames of reference.
We have with us the lovely Maureen, our volunteer, and we've chosen her for a special reason
because she weighs exactly a hundred pounds.
So Maureen, I'd like you to step on the scales and let's just verify that you indeed
weigh a hundred pounds.
So Maureen is on the scale, we're on the first floor, we're at rest and now let's take a
ride up to the fourth floor and watch that scale reading.
Here we go, whoop.
Okay look at the sequence we saw, we were at a hundred pounds, we went momentarily up
to a hundred and ten pounds, we went back to a hundred pounds as the elevator rode toward
the fourth floor, we then dropped to about ninety pounds as the elevator came to a halt
and finally when it was stopped on the fourth floor we were again at a hundred pounds.
Let's explore that sequence in a little more detail with some more technology now.
So we're going to take a ride back down to the first floor and while we do that I'll
be explaining what I have here.
Here I have the force sensor that measures the forces and transmits them to my laptop
computer.
Hanging from the force sensor is our subject, in this case it's a can of soda, full can
of soda.
And what we're going to see on here as a function of time is a plot of the force measured by
the force sensor that is the apparent weight of the soda can, the force exerted by the
force sensor.
So here we are back on the first floor, I'm going to get ready to start and I'm going
to start the sequence and then we will head toward the fourth floor.
Okay let's take a look at what we've got.
We start out with a reading of about 4.8 Newtons, that's why the elevator was at rest on the
first floor.
Then as it started accelerating upward the force jumped to about 0.5 Newtons, jumped
up by about half a Newton and it stayed there while the elevator was accelerating.
Eventually the elevator reached its maximum speed, it then trundled upward toward the
fourth floor at constant speed and during that interval the force dropped down to 4.8
Newtons.
Then the elevator approached the fourth floor and it began to slow down, in other words
it was accelerating in the downward direction and when that happened the force dropped
down to something less than the normal weight by about half a Newton.
During the time the elevator was slowing down it remained low and then the elevator finally
came to a complete stop at the fourth floor and we got back to the normal weight.
We saw the same thing with Maureen, her weight went up at first as the elevator began accelerating,
it went up by about 10 pounds, then it was constant back at her normal weight while the
elevator was moving at constant speed upward and then it dropped as the elevator slowed.
From both the measurements on Maureen and the measurements here I can tell that the
elevator's acceleration both on the way up and as it is decelerating is about a tenth
that of gravity, about a tenth of G, about 1 meter per second squared.
The way I can tell that is because Maureen's weight changed by about 10 pounds or apparent
weight and that told me that that was about a tenth of her weight of 100 pounds.
Here the apparent weight of the soda can changed by about half a Newton, the soda can's weight
was 5 Newtons roughly and so again we have about a tenth the acceleration of gravity
for the acceleration of this elevator.
So we've confirmed what Newton's second law says that the sum of the net forces on
an object is equal to the mass times the acceleration in the case when the acceleration is zero
either when the elevators at rest on the first floor or the fourth floor or when it's moving
at constant speed up or down between its acceleration and deceleration the net force is zero and
so the weight as measured by the force sensor or the scale is equal to the actual weight
but when we're accelerating upward or downward the weight is different so that the net force
becomes appropriate to whatever the acceleration is of the elevator at that time.
So we've confirmed Newton's second law.
Okay here we are back in our inertial reference frame no more accelerations up and down my
weight would be perfectly normal here because I'm not accelerated and let me just summarize
what we've learned here.
We've learned how to use Newton's second law to relate force, mass and acceleration.
In particular we can use it to predict accelerations given the forces that act on objects and
as a result of that we can predict motion.
So we're back to that clockwork universe idea of Newtonian physics.
If we know all the forces acting on an object and we know the laws of motion in particular
Newton's second law then we have this wonderful predictive ability to tell what the future
is going to bring what the motion is going to be in the future.
Now if you enjoyed the mathematics in this lecture I'm going to ask you to stay a little
bit longer if you are perfectly content and finished you may stop here but I have a challenge
for those of you who enjoyed the mathematics we did in working what was going on with the
elevator.
Let me pose this challenge to you.
So here's the challenge.
You're standing on the floor of an elevator when it starts accelerating downward at what's
an unrealistically large acceleration 15 meters per second squared and that's downward.
That is unrealistic.
That's greater than the acceleration of gravity and so here's my question.
Where do you end up and if your mass is 70 kilograms which is a typical mass for an
adult person what's your apparent weight?
Pause a moment, work this out and then come back and I'll give you the answer.
Here's the solution to this challenge.
The elevator's downward acceleration is actually greater than the gravitational acceleration
G so the elevator is accelerating downward at a greater rate than you would naturally
do and therefore you end up on the ceiling.
In fact if you turned upside down and stuck your feet against the ceiling you would find
yourself stuck to the ceiling and if you work out the details you once you're stuck to
the ceiling you've got the same downward acceleration A and it's provided by the normal
force acting on the ceiling between you and the elevator ceiling that has to provide the
extra force because gravity isn't big enough to give you that downward acceleration and
if you apply Newton's second law N plus mg equals ma that normal force on you from the
elevator ceiling you will find in a coordinate system with the positive direction downward
which is convenient in this case that you have a mass a weight of about 350 Newton's.
So that's about half your normal weight but the unusual thing about it is it's upward
so that's a very unusual interesting situation.
We'll revisit situations like that when we talk about loop-to-loop roller coasters in
lecture number 10.
