Welcome to lecture nine, which deals primarily with Newton's third law. I've chosen to devote
most of our entire lecture to the third law because it's one of the most commonly misunderstood
aspects of Newtonian physics. Why is it misunderstood? I think it's because of the language that
we tend to use in describing it. For every action there is an equal and opposite reaction.
Certainly everyone's heard that phrase and they've applied it to a lot of areas that
aren't necessarily about physics. I think that language is a little bit archaic and
a little bit misleading. Let me begin by looking at the third law language as Newton wrote
it. Well, he wrote it in Latin because, of course, Newton wrote in Latin in his book,
The Principia Mathematica, but translating commonly to every action there is always
opposed and equal reaction. That's the language that most people think of when they think
of Newton's third law. I'd like to argue that that language is rather confusing. Let me
begin with an unfortunate event here. Here we have an unfortunate accident. Here's a
large massive truck coming along and colliding with a stationary car. I'd like to ask some
questions about that collision. Let you think about it a little bit. Here are some possibilities.
Maybe the truck exerted a greater force on the car than the car did on the truck. After
all, the truck came in and caused the collision. Maybe the car exerted a greater force on the
truck than the truck did on the car because after all, the car is the thing that was stopped
and got hit. Maybe the car exerted a force on the truck that was equal to that which
the truck exerted on the car. How could that be given the truck was so massive and it was
coming barreling in and the car was just sitting there? Maybe the car didn't exert any force.
It just happened to be in the way. Now pause a minute and think about which of those answers
you would use to describe what happened in that collision. Okay, let's talk about that.
If you really believe in Newton's third law, the answer is the third one. The car exerted
a force on the truck equal to that which the truck exerted in the car. That's the essence
of the third law. Equal and opposite. Equal and opposite forces. I much prefer the word
forces to the word action and reaction. The reason I don't like the word action and reaction
is because it suggests somebody is the active object and somebody is passive and they're
very different. In this case, the truck was active in the sense that it caused the collision.
The car was just sort of sitting there passively and people tend to think, well, the thing
that's sitting there passively isn't doing anything. It isn't exerting any kind of force.
So let's move on and look at the full statement of the third law and a modern version of it.
So spelling out the third law language in the translation of Newton's Principia, to
every action there was always opposed an equal reaction. And then it goes on. Or the mutual
actions of two bodies upon each other are always equal and directed to contrary parts.
And it's that second phrase, the mutual actions of two bodies upon each other are always equal
and directed to contrary parts that I like much better. Notice the mutuality. It's two
objects, they're interacting and the interactions are always equal and they're directed to contrary
parts in opposite directions. My translation of that or my paraphrasing of it is, if object
A exerts a force on object B, then B exerts a force of equal magnitude but opposite direction
on A. Period. There's no mention of who's the active agent, who's colliding and who's
sitting at rest. None of that matters. If two objects interact, one exerts a force on
the other and the other exerts a force of equal magnitude but opposite direction back
on the first. Let me give you another example of that. Here I have a styrofoam ball and
a large piece of flat surface cutting board. I'm going to place the cutting board on the
ball and I'm going to bang on it as hard as I can. I'm going to be the active agent.
I'm going to exert a force on the cutting board and the cutting board in turn is going
to exert a force on the ball. The ball got flattened at the top. No longer rolls. The
ball also got equally flattened at the bottom. It no longer rolls. The table exerted an equal
force upward to the force that I exerted downward. Even though I was the active agent
in this experiment, that agency meant nothing in terms of Newton's third law. Newton's
third law is about equal and opposite forces exerted by two objects that are interacting.
The interaction between the cutting board and the ball, the interaction between the
ball and the table, they were similar identical interactions. The fact of my agency in pushing
down from above had nothing to do with it. Now Newton's third law is also not just an
additional extra law to learn about physics. It is required for a coherent consistent description
of motion. It's also, by the way, deeper than just classical physics. Newton's third
law is the basis of a very important conservation law that we'll get to in lecture 14, conservation
of momentum, and that's a law that carries over way beyond Newtonian physics into the
quantum realm and the realm of relativity. We'll get to those things later. This is a
very deep, profound statement about physics. I want to take a few minutes and do a simple
calculation that shows you why Newton's third law is not just an addendum to Newton's laws
of motion, but really is necessary to make a consistent description of motion. Let's
look on the big screen here where we do our mathematics at a situation. This is an example
and involves both Newton's first law and Newton's second law and Newton's third law.
I've got a one kilogram block and a two kilogram block, and they're sitting and they're touching
on a frictionless surface. You're going to push on the one kilogram block with a six
Newton force, getting quantitative here. I'm going to ask, what force does the two kilogram
block exert back on the one kilogram block? Here's a picture of our situation. One kilogram
block, two kilogram block, six Newton force that you're applying to the one kilogram block.
We want to know in detail what's going to happen. Watch how the mathematics goes. It's
not difficult, but it involves application of Newton's second law, F equals MA, to find
F or A, depending on which stage we are at in this process. Let's go through this.
The total mass of this system is one kilogram plus two kilograms. That's three kilograms.
We're applying a force of six Newtons, so Newton's second law, Newton two, which reads
F equals MA, then we solve that. Let's see, F is six, M is three, that's going to give
us A equals two. Three kilograms times two meters per second squared gives me six Newtons.
The answer to the first question of what is the acceleration of the whole system is A
equals two meters per second squared. That's the acceleration of the pair. That's not the
answer to our question, but that's one step in getting there. There it is, A equals two
meters per second squared. The entire system, both blocks, is accelerating to the right
at two meters per second, gaining two meters per second of speed every second. Since the
two kilogram block, let's focus on the two kilogram block alone, it's accelerating at
two meters per second squared. We just found that out. The whole system is accelerating
at two meters per second squared. Now let's apply Newton two just to the two kilogram
block. Newton two says F equals MA. F remember is the net force on the object in question.
So solving that, M is two kilograms, we found the acceleration, it's two meters per second
squared, two times two is four, so the force, the net force that is on the two kilogram
block must be four Newtons. It's to the right. Now, what's the only force acting on the two
kilogram block? Well, I've neglected things like gravity and normal force from the table.
They're in the vertical direction, they don't matter. I'm just talking about the horizontal
forces here, and the surface is frictionless. So the only force acting on the two kilogram
block in the horizontal direction is the force of the one kilogram block pushing on it. That's
the only thing in contact with it. So we know that the force on the two kilogram block must
be four Newtons, so that must be the force. I'm going to call it F12, the force the one
kilogram block is exerting on the two kilogram block. We found that out. Notice we first
applied Newton's law to get the acceleration of the whole system. Once we knew that, we
could apply Newton's law to get the force, the net force on the two kilogram block. That's
still not the answer to our question, because our question is, what force does the two kilogram
block exert on the one kilogram block? But now we use Newton's third law. Newton's third
law says the two kilogram block therefore exerts a leftward force of the same magnitude
but opposite direction, F21 on the one kilogram block. And we found that there was a four Newton
force from the one kilogram block on the two kilogram block. Therefore, there's a four
Newton force back from the two kilogram block on the one kilogram block. And we've answered
our question, what force does the two kilogram block exert on the one kilogram block? And
let's check this for consistency. Let's ask what the net force is on the one kilogram
block. Well, there's six Newtons coming in from the left pointing to the right. There's
four Newtons, there's F21 going the other way. That's a net force to the right of six
Newtons, four Newtons, two Newtons. What's the acceleration of the one kilogram block?
Well, the whole system is going at two meters per second squared. The one kilogram block
is going at two meters per second squared. F equals ma says if that's the case and it
has a mass of one kilogram, there better be a force of two Newtons on it, and that is
entirely consistent. Notice that if we hadn't said that there was a backward pointing force
from the two kilogram on the one kilogram, this wouldn't have been true, and Newton's
second law couldn't have been correct. So Newton's third law, again, is not just some
addendum. It's an essential part of the workings of motion in the Newtonian scheme. It's essential
to make a consistent description of motion. Newton's second law wouldn't hold for the
one kilogram block if we didn't have the third law ensuring that the two blocks are exerting
equal but opposite forces on each other. The content of Newton's third law is baffling
to people because this business about equal and opposite forces, well, how can anything
ever then move? How can we get things moving? Well, one common example of that is the horse
and cart dilemma, and in the horse and cart dilemma, you have a horse and a cart. The
horse is pulling the cart and exerting a force on the cart. The cart is pulling back on the
horse and exerting an equal but opposite force on the horse. So how does the system ever
get moving? Well, the answer to that dilemma is that the forces, the paired forces associated
with Newton's third law are never acting on the same object. The horse is exerting a force
on the cart. The cart is exerting a force back on the horse, but neither of those forces,
those forces don't sum up to zero because they aren't acting on the same object. To find
out how objects are moving, you have to ask, what's the net force on each of these objects?
Well, the net force on the cart, if there's no friction to be worried about, is in fact
just the force from the horse. But the horse is exerting a force on the ground with its
feet, and the ground by Newton's third law is exerting a force back on the horse, and
if that force is bigger than the force the cart is exerting on the horse pulling backwards,
then the net force on the horse cart system is a force to the right and the thing moves.
Notice why you're likely to get confused. You say equal and opposite forces, they add
up to zero. But again, those forces are not on the same objects, and Newton expressed
that subtly in his more cumbersome language when he talked about the mutual interactions
of these two objects. The horse and cart system can move because you have to ask the question,
what's the net force on the system? And the force, the horse is exerting on the road,
and the force, the road is exerting on the horse. Those are Newton's law pair, but they're
not the same Newton's law pair as the pair of forces associated with the horse on the
cart and the cart back on the horse. Let's pause and do some real world demonstrations
that illustrate this same idea and help us get away from this confusion.
So here I have a couple of volunteers. In the green is Jen, in the blue is Laura, and
they're each holding identical brand new bathroom scales. So what I'm going to ask them to do
to begin with is to put their scales against each other and start pushing. Yep, let's
keep doing that. Okay, Jen, what does your scale read?
15.
Jen's scale reads 15. Laura, what does your scale read?
15.
15. Now, Laura is a lot smaller. Maybe she's pushing harder because she's stronger. It's
not pushing harder. They're each pushing with a force of 15. In this case, we're in
the English system, 15 pounds. Jen, why don't you push this a little harder? What does it
read?
20.
20. What does it read, Laura? 20. It still reads 20. Newton's third law says when object
A, Jen, exerts a force on object B, Laura, then object B, Laura, exerts an equal but
oppositely directed force back on Jen. Okay, let's reconfigure and do a slightly different
experiment. If you ladies would move that way just a little bit, I will put this chair
here and Laura, you can sit in the chair facing Jen. Now, this time, Laura is in a chair with
wheels on it and she's free to move. And so I'm going to ask Jen to push hard enough to
move Laura and let's get the scales vertical and tell me what the scale reads.
25.
25. What does yours read?
25.
25. Now, you might think, well, Jen's scale is reading more because she's pushing Laura.
She's even, at the beginning, accelerating Laura. And yet, both those scales read exactly
the same thing. That's the content of Newton's third law. If object A, Jen, exerts a force
on object B, then object B, Laura, exerts an equal force, the equal magnitude, opposite
direction, back on object A. It says nothing about if the objects aren't moving, then this
will be true. Or if they aren't accelerating, it will be true. It is simply always true.
When two objects interact, they do so by exerting forces on each other and those forces are
equal in magnitude and opposite in direction, no matter what.
Well, the real reason that Jen and Green and Laura and Blue were recruited for this lecture
is because they are both expert rollerbladers. So I have them up here again. They're standing
on their rollerblades and they're going to have a tug of war. And this exercise will
help convince you further that Newton's third law is true and will also shed some more light,
I think, on the horse and cart dilemma. So what I would like to ask you to do now is
pull and see which one of you can pull the other across the floor. Keep pulling. Harder,
harder. Keep pulling. Keep pulling. Well, what's wrong? What's wrong is this? Laura
is exerting a force on the rope. The rope is exerting a force back on Laura. The rope
is exerting a force on Jen. Jen is exerting a force back on the rope. We can sort of shorten
that to say that Laura is exerting a force on Jen, and Jen is exerting an equal and opposite
force back on Laura. And now if we consider the system of Jen and Laura together, that
system has no net force on it from outside. It has indeed, internally, the force that
Laura is exerting on Jen, the force that Jen is exerting on Laura, but there is no other
net force, at least in the horizontal direction, coming onto this system. And so pull as hard
as they may. The system does not accelerate and nobody is going anywhere. So they can
pull as hard as they want. Nobody is going to win this tug of war. That's like the horse
and cart. If the horse and cart were sitting on a frictionless surface, say on ice, then
the horse could not get the cart going because there couldn't be any other force acting on
the system because of the frictionless nature of it. Well, in this case, the frictionlessness
is coming from the nice frictionless ball bearing wheels on their roller blades. Let's
take a pause and configure them into a different situation that's more like the real horse
and cart. Okay, here we are once again with Jen and Laura and the only difference is that
Jen is still in her roller blades, but Laura is not. She's in her shoes and they aren't
frictionless and they can exert forces on the outside world and the outside world by
Newton's third law. Can therefore exert forces back on her and consequently we're now capable
of exerting a force on this entire system. So let's do the tug of war again. You're going
to pull on each other and let's see what happens. And there she goes. Laura is able
to pull Jen. Why? Because she's able to exert a force on the floor and so despite the fact
that Laura is exerting a force on Jen and Jen is exerting an equal force of opposite
magnitude back on Laura, the whole system is able to move. The horse and cart are able
to get going. The fact that those two forces are equal and opposite does not prevent there
being other forces that are acting on the system and getting it to move. By the way,
you might ask whether Jen had to try to be in the tug of war. Even if she didn't try
to be in the tug of war, she would have been exerting an equal and opposite force on the
rope to the force that Laura exerted on her. Newton's third law is true. It's true in all
circumstances. It doesn't matter whether things are moving, whether things are at rest, whether
there are other forces acting. The two forces between a pair of objects are the two equal
and opposite forces that object A exerts on object B and object B exerts back on object
A. Thank you very much ladies for your participation. Throughout this lecture and in fact in some
of the earlier lectures, I've made allusions to friction, that invisible force that makes
us claws at Aristotelians because we don't notice it's acting and so we think we have
to push things to make them move. What is friction? Well friction is a rather subtle
thing. It's a force that acts between any two surfaces that are in contact and what
it does is to oppose their relative motion. It arises ultimately from electrical forces
between atoms in the surfaces that are interacting and it turns out to a very good approximation
to be proportional to the normal force between the surfaces. Again that normal force is the
force that's exerted when I put myself on the floor or a block on a table and the table
pushes back up against the block. It's normal, it's perpendicular to the surface and we
write that mathematically by saying the force of friction is equal to some constant number
which is a property of those two surfaces times the normal force between the two surfaces.
That constant number is called mu, the coefficient of friction. There's a little picture here
that suggests what is causing friction. It's really surface irregularities in the two surfaces
that are in contact and they tend to bind together and the electrical forces between
the atoms make it hard to move the surfaces against each other and the little diagram
at the top shows the normal force between the surfaces and then the frictional force
opposing any other force that might be acting on the, in this case a block sitting on a table.
So the friction is proportional to the normal force between the surfaces. The frictional
force is mu times the normal force, mu being this coefficient of friction. There are values
of mu that range all over the place typically from around zero to over one, waxed ski on
snow for example where you don't want there to be a lot of friction can be as close about
0.04. The rubber on dry concrete, important for driving or in prickly for stopping a car
can be up close to one about 0.8. The synovial fluid in your knee joint by the way is one
of the least frictional situations has coefficient of friction of about a thousandth. There are
two types of friction. There's kinetic friction also called sliding friction as the name kinetic
implies it's associated with motion. It's the friction that occurs when something's
actually moving relative to something else when two surfaces are in motion. There's
also static friction which occurs when the two surfaces are not in motion they're at
rest with respect to each other and static friction is actually larger because when the
two objects are at rest with respect to each other those bonds have a time, those bonds
between the atoms and the surfaces have a chance to solidify a bit and so static friction
is actually bigger and I'll show you a demonstration in a minute that looks at that difference but
before I do that let's look at some other aspects of friction. So here I have a simple
block of wood it's a surface and here I have the top of this table and we happen to have
on this table a non-slip kind of rubbery surface so it's actually quite hard to push
this block along the table. I have to apply a significant force just to move the block
at constant speed. Now I am moving it at constant speed so there's no net force on it so I'm
applying a force there must be an equal and opposite force the other way and that's the
frictional force. It gets even harder if I push down on the block while I'm trying to
push it sideways it's really hard to do. Why is it hard to do? Because I've increased the
normal force by pushing down the normal force the table is exerting pushing up has increased
and consequently the frictional force, the coefficient of friction times the normal force
has increased. Now again that coefficient of friction depends on the two surfaces so
here's the cutting board I used earlier to smash that nerf ball this has a lot less
friction it's made of a smooth plastic and here I can slide the block along quite easily
and even if I push down on it with a lot of weight it's still pretty easy to slide. The
coefficient of friction is lower in that case. Well that's all well and good but that's
pretty much a qualitative description of friction. Let's get quantitative about it because this
is after all a quantitative physics course we're using mathematics to understand these
things in more detail. So let me do a demonstration that speaks to that. So over here on the big
screen I have the output from my laptop computer and that's connected to another one of these
sensors like I used in earlier experiments where I was using a motion sensor this is
now a force sensor it's measuring forces in newtons and it's putting an output which
comes into my laptop computer and I can record the force as a function of time and I've got
this force sensor right here hooked up to a large block like the one I was just talking
about only this block has sandpaper on one side and a smoother on the other side and
the block is sitting on this non-slip rubber surface and before I do anything else I just
want to weigh the block. So here I have a scale which is just a spring with a needle
attached to it it's calibrated in newtons. Okay so the block weighs about 12 newtons.
Let's remember that. That's the weight of the block the force gravity exerts on it and
because that's the weight of the block when I set the block on a horizontal surface like
this tabletop that is also the normal force that the block is exerting down on the table
and the normal force that's exerted up on the block from the table and so that's the
normal force that's involved in figuring out how much friction there is. The frictional
force is the coefficient of friction times that 12 newton normal force. So here's what
I'm going to do in my experiment I'm going to pull slowly on this force sensor and that's
going to pull on the block and you'll watch what happens to the force on the graph that's
going to appear on the big screen. So let me get started. Climbing climbing climbing
climbing nothing's happening yet though climbing climbing climbing higher and higher and finally
the block starts to move. Let's take a look at what happened. So I started out with zero
force applied the block was sitting at rest on the table I picked up the force sensor
and began to pull on it it was connected by a string to the block and the force went up
and up and up one newton two newtons three newtons four newtons five newtons as time
went on I pulled harder and harder and harder there was a little glitch here as I maybe didn't
pull quite as hard I pulled harder and harder hard still the block wasn't moving was just
sitting there and then there came a maximum amount of force it was just about nine newtons
and then the block began to move and as soon as it began to move you'll notice the force
went down a little bit the force that I needed to exert now the block once it started moving
was moving with constant speed so the net force on it was zero initially it wasn't moving
well the net force on it was also zero and so the force that the force sensor is measuring
must have been equal to the force that friction was providing because there was no net force
on the block it wasn't except for a brief instant at the start here accelerating so this
is a measure of the frictional force the frictional force rose and rose and rose and rose and
the block never moved at rose and rose and rose and the block wasn't moving and then
suddenly the block started to move and at that point the force went down why did it
go down because once the block is sliding those bonds between the two surfaces don't
have time to form and the friction goes down static friction the friction that occurred
at the beginning when the block wasn't moving is greater than kinetic friction the friction
associated with that sliding and you can see that very clearly here in the fact that
we peaked and then the force went down once the block started to move so keep that in
mind as we talk about some different examples and applications of friction friction is sometimes
a nuisance it slows things down it makes machinery inefficient that's why we use lubricating
oils but it also helps us to do things for example we walk because of friction and we
drive because of friction how do we walk well here is a picture of somebody walking along
the ground what happens is when I'm walking the foot that is in contact with the ground
is actually pushing against backwards against the ground the ground is pushing the other
direction forward and that is ultimately the force that propels me that's a newton's third
law force associated with my pushing back on the ground if there weren't friction I would
just keep moving in place if as if I were an ice for example and I couldn't walk notice
that I'm leaning forward and it's that forward lean that is transmitting forces through my
muscles to the rest of my body to help me move driving is similar how do you drive when
you start up the wheels the drive wheels the front wheels on most cars are exerting a force
backwards on the road and the road is exerting a corresponding force by newton's third law
forward on the car and that's what makes the car get started how does the car stop you
put the brakes on in that case the slowing wheel exerts a force forward on the road
and the road exerts a corresponding newton's third law force backward on the car and that's
ultimately what stops the car the brakes only stop the wheels it's the contact between
the wheels and the road that stops the car let's look at a little more detail at that
rolling motion that we need to stop the car when a wheel is rolling the bottom of the
wheel remarkably is instantaneously at rest and the friction in that case by the way is
static friction which you'll recall from our graph is actually larger than kinetic friction
on the other hand if the wheel is slipping the bottom of the wheel is moving and we're
dealing with kinetic friction which is a lesser amount of friction so the frictional force
is less if the wheel is slipping or spinning while it's speeding up if it's slipping the
other way while you're breaking that is if you slam on the brakes and you don't have
anti-lock brakes and you go into a skid the bottom of the slipping wheel is moving forward
and so again we're dealing with kinetic friction sliding friction where the frictional force
is less and if you're in a complete full skid where the wheels are locked you're just sliding
along and it's very strongly kinetic friction and that as our graph showed offers less frictional
force and so your stopping distance is going to become longer in that case that is why one
of the reasons why we use anti-lock brakes the anti-lock brake advantage there are several
advantages to anti-lock brakes but one advantage is when you slam on your brakes and you have
an anti-lock brake system what happens is there are sensors that detect whether the wheels
are slipping by comparing the rotational speeds of the different wheels and they automatically
apply the brakes which is why you get that chattering noise if you slam on brakes and
the anti-lock braking system engages and that keeps the wheels just at the point where they're
rolling so the bottoms of the wheels are in contact with the ground and are instantaneously
at rest and then you get the maximum friction the kinetic friction and you see here on this
graph examples of the effects of conventional brakes and ABS brakes in terms of stopping
distance on dry asphalt on packed snow and on ice and you get better stopping distances
in all cases with anti-lock brakes the other in fact more important advantage of anti-lock
brakes is they keep one wheel from locking up and causing the car to skid off the road
in that direction so anti-lock brakes are a good thing and they exploit this distinction
between kinetic friction and static friction well let's end with a quick look at what we've
done here we've looked in two big ideas we've looked at Newton's third law that forces always
come in pairs that forces always involve a mutual interaction between two objects if
object A exerts a force on B B exerts a force back on A of equal magnitude but opposite
directions always in all situations one of the important forces that comes up especially
with Newton's third law is friction it's a force that acts between can contacting surfaces
and it tries to oppose their relative motion two kinds of it kinetic friction friction
associated with objects that are actually moving relative to each other is less than
the force of static friction when the objects are at rest relative to each other friction
can be a nuisance but as I've just showed it's also essential in walking and driving
and many other activities.
