Welcome to lecture 13, whose subject is gravity, one of the fundamental forces of nature.
I've chosen to put gravity at this point in the course, and I put it at this point in
my textbooks and my college courses also, because I want to build on the ideas of energy
we've been developing in the lectures preceding this one.
Let me begin talking about gravity though with a brief history, and I'm going to make
it very brief because there's plenty of history of science in others of the great courses.
So let's be quick, we'll run through this quickly.
The early views of gravity weren't really about gravity at all, they were about the
structure of the universe, and views by Aristotle, for example, and Ptolemy in the years before
the common era, those views dominated for thousands of years and gave us this picture
of a geocentric universe, a universe in which the Earth was at the center.
So here's a picture of the universe according to Aristotle and Ptolemy, the Earth is at
the center, the Sun is going around the Earth, so are all the other planets.
The problem is the planetary orbits are such that that isn't a really accurate description
of what goes on, and so the ancient Greeks modified their picture by adding these little
circles upon circles.
Circles were the perfect kind of motion, so circles are what had to happen up there in
the heavens, and so there were circles upon circles that were called epicycles, and they
made for a more complicated picture, but it was still basically geocentric, Earth-centered.
Now along came Copernicus, name you all know in 14, he was born in 1473, lived till 1543,
by the way the newest element, Copernicium 112, the newest named element is named after
Copernicus, and Copernicus of course introduced the idea of the heliocentric universe.
He circulated his ideas before the 1543 publication of his work, but he didn't dare publish it
at that point.
He still persisted in the idea that all orbits had to be circular, because the heavens were
perfect and that's where the heavenly bodies were, and they had to move in perfect paths,
but he put the Sun at the center, the Earth is one of the planets going around the Sun,
and other planets are going around the Sun also, and he could get away with smaller deviations
from this perfect circularness, and he did that by adding small circles upon circles
also, so there's the universe according to Copernicus in his publication of 1543.
When we move right along, Tycho Brie, an astronomer and his student, or his assistant Kepler,
who carried on after Tycho's death, he used Tycho's very accurate measurements, particularly
of the orbit of the planet Mars, to figure out that the Kepler determined that the orbits
of the planets were in fact not circles.
They were ellipses, and this picture is highly exaggerated because the planetary orbits are
very nearly, but not exactly circular, and an ellipse is a special curve with two points
called foci.
They're like the centers of a circle, but they've been spread out into two points, and
the Sun is at one focus, and Kepler studied these orbits and came up with a number of
laws that described not only the fact that they were elliptical, and the Sun was at one
focus, but he talked about how fast the planets moved.
They moved more rapidly near the Sun, more slowly, when they were further out, and he
developed relationships between the period and the size of the orbit.
He developed what were called Kepler's laws that described the planetary orbits quite
accurately, but didn't explain why they were that way.
So this is Kepler in about 1610.
One comes Galileo, who was born in 1564, and he was the first to train a telescope on the
heavens and really report observations, and he made a number of observations that supported
both the Copernican and Keplerian view that the Earth was not at the center of the universe.
For example, Galileo observed the moons of Jupiter, the four brightest moons of Jupiter,
now called the Galilean satellites.
You can see them with binoculars, and they constituted kind of miniature planetary system,
Galileo realized, just like what Copernicus said our solar system was like.
In this one you can see the moons going around from night to night, their positions are different
in the sky.
Galileo noted that Venus has phases.
It goes through a crescent phase where it is relatively large, and you just see a thin
sliver of it, and it has a bright full phase where it's much smaller, and he realized
that was easily explained by the fact that Venus was going around the Sun, and so was
the Earth, and so we see phases of Venus in much the same way we see phases of the moon.
And finally, Galileo noticed that the Sun was an imperfect body, it had sunspots on
it, maybe it wasn't so heavenly and perfect as all that, and so I've titled this slide
Bringing the Heavens to Earth, because Galileo has come close to realizing that what's going
on here on Earth and what's going on up in the heavens is not a different realm of physical
reality, it's all the same thing, and similar considerations apply.
So that's a quick history he's gotten us through, Galileo, and then of course we move
on to the towering genius of that period, Isaac Newton.
In 1665, Newton got his Cambridge degree, he didn't get honors by the way, right after
that the university was shut down for two years because of the plague, and Newton returned
to his home in Woolsthorpe where he laid the foundations for calculus and his study of
optics and gravity.
Now I want to point out, before I talk about Newton's quote discovery of gravity, that
it didn't take Newton's genius to discover gravity, our cave ancestors had to understand
gravity or they wouldn't have survived, they would have fallen out of the trees, they would
have sat under their cave and a rock would have clumped them on the head, and then they
would have woken up to be, gee, there is gravity, they knew about gravity.
What was different about Newton was the extension of gravity from what we recognized on Earth
to a force that operated throughout the whole universe, and I want to spend the rest of the
lecture on that, on Newton's discovery and Newton's formulation of a law of gravity.
So here's a kind of cartoon that may or may not represent the truth, but here's Newton
sitting under the apple tree and rumor has it the apple fell, clunked him on the head
and he realized gravity.
Well that's the point I'm saying, that's nonsense, our cave ancestors knew that.
If this picture is true, Newton was looking at the same time at the moon, and what he
recognized, and what his genius was, was to realize that the same force that keeps the
moon in its orbit is the same force that pulls the apple down from the tree and clunks him
on the head.
Those are one and the same force, Newton called them universal gravitation, and he developed
a formula that describes the universal gravitation not only between the Earth and the moon and
the Earth and the apple, but also the Sun and the Earth and the Sun and the other planets,
and indeed between any two masses in the universe.
So here is Newton's universal gravitation, in fact you saw Newton's universal gravitation
back in lecture two when I talked about how I was going to use mathematics in this course
and how I was going to give you anatomies of important equations.
So let's look at an anatomy of universal gravitation.
So what we see here is a picture of in one case the Earth, on the left the moon on the
right they are exerting forces on each other, those forces are vectors, so I've got the
arrow over the F and I've got the big arrows representing the vector forces, they are a
distance R apart, center to center, and that center to center is important, it turns out
although Newton had to show this, that a spherical mass acts as if it were a single point located
right at its center, and so this R is importantly the center to center distance when we talk
about gravity.
So there it is, and Newton came up with this formula and he said I think the force of gravity
is proportional to the two masses and inversely proportional to the distance between them.
The force F is the force between two masses M1 and M2, the two masses M1 and M2 are there,
that's the square of the center to center distance between the masses, and there is
some constant of universal gravitation, Newton didn't know its value by the way, it was not
until 1797 that Cavendish measured its value, and he had to do so by actually measuring
the gravitational attraction between two laboratory sized masses, a very difficult
and delicate thing to measure because the gravitational force between everyday sized
masses is really very very weak.
By the way you'll notice that Newton's universal gravitation also obeys Newton's third law,
you can see that I've drawn the two force vectors the same length, and you can see in
this equation it doesn't matter whether it's mass 1 or mass 2 that comes first, the force
of mass 1 on mass M2 is equal to the force of mass 2 on mass M1.
So we have universal gravitation, universal gravitation acts between any two masses in
the universe, it keeps the sun and the whole solar system pulled toward the center of the
galaxy, it doesn't move toward the center of the galaxy, for reasons we saw in lecture
six but it goes in a circular orbit around the center of the galaxy, every pair of masses
in the universe attracts every other pair of masses with a force that is inversely proportional
to the square of the distance between them.
By the way Newton although he didn't know the value of G was able to verify his 1 over
r squared fall off by looking at the moon considering the acceleration of the moon,
he knew the period of the moon's orbit, he knew the radius of the moon's orbit, he
could calculate the acceleration of the moon in its circular path using the considerations
we developed in lecture six on circular motion, and he compared that with the acceleration
of the apple or some other object falling near earth of 9.8 meters per second squared
and he found that the moon's acceleration was smaller by exactly the factor 1 over the
square of the ratio of the distance between the earth center and the moon and the earth
center and the earth's surface.
So he was able to verify this inverse square relationship.
But the big thing that Newton did was to show that his formula for universal gravitation
said that planets should move in orbits exactly as Kepler had described, the sun should be
at one focus, they should move faster closer to the sun, there was a period size relationship,
the planetary orbits, this is close to circular, he doesn't show this with his equations but
that in fact is the case, although there are things like comets that go in highly elliptical
orbits and Newton showed that all these bodies moving around the sun would obey Kepler's
laws.
Now that is not as easy as it sounds, I can't just give that to you as a challenge and for
Newton it was a particularly big challenge because the branch of mathematics that deals
with that kind of continually changing situation, circular orbits are easy, but elliptical
orbits complicated, the distance is always changing, the force is changing, complicated.
Newton didn't have the mathematics to solve that so he invented the mathematics and that
was calculus and he used the calculus to show that his equation of universal gravitation
led to orbits that were just like Kepler described the planetary orbits as being.
So that is a big step and Newton had another realization, he realized there was the possibility
that we human beings could possibly put things into orbit, we could launch satellites and
he realized the possibility of satellite orbits and here's how he did it.
He imagined the planet earth with a giant mountain on top of it and we have to also
ignore the presence of the atmosphere or let the mountain stick up above the atmosphere
or in modern terminology we might launch a rocket straight up to that altitude, tip the
rocket sideways and fire its rocket again.
Here's Newton's realization, you stand on this high mountain and you throw something
off it horizontally.
If you throw it with modest speed it's going to go a ways and it's going to describe a
path that ends up intersecting the surface of the earth and the object crashes to the
ground and from earlier considerations when we talked about motion under the influence
of gravity you might say well that path is a parabola but that was on the assumption
that the earth was flat, we neglected the curvature of the earth, here that path is
in fact part of an ellipse, it's just an unfortunate ellipse because it intersects
the surface of the earth.
Throw the object a little faster and it goes around a little more before it hits the ground.
Throw it faster still and the ground curves away from it at exactly the same rate at which
gravity is pulling it out of the straight line path that it would otherwise go in in
the absence of any force acting on it.
Remember Newton's first law, an object moves in a straight line at constant speed unless
there's a force acting on it.
Newton's law tells you how much that force changes its motion.
What keeps a satellite up?
That's the wrong question as I talked about when I described forces and the influence
of forces.
Here's an example, an analogy with a satellite.
This is a ball whirling around on a straight, it's perfectly analogous to a satellite or
the moon in its orbit around the earth or a planet in its orbit around the sun.
What's going on here is there is a force.
The force is acting toward the center of the circle.
The force is pulling that ball out of the straight line path it would otherwise go in.
It's not a question of why doesn't it fall toward my hand, there is a force on it pulling
toward my hand.
But forces don't cause motion, forces cause changes in motion.
So the question why doesn't the satellite fall down is really the wrong question to ask.
The right question is simply this, is the satellite's motion being altered from the straight line
and it would go in in the absence of any forces and is that alteration such that the force
is equal to the mass times the acceleration and for just the right speed of launching
that satellite off that mountain.
The answer is yes we will get a circular orbit with a circular acceleration.
If the speed is a little slower we'll get an elliptical orbit that may or may not intersect
the earth and if the speed is a little bit greater we will get an elliptical orbit that
climbs to a higher point than the mountain and the object is moving slower as a result
and then comes around and turns back.
So that is Newton's profound realization about the possibility of artificial satellites.
Let's do a modern day example of that.
Let's talk about a special kind of orbit which is in fact the most valuable piece of real
estate in space.
It's called geosynchronous orbit and it's the orbit where a spacecraft would circle
the earth once in 24 hours and what that means is if you put a spacecraft at that correct
orbital altitude and give it that correct speed and put it above the equator so it's
going in an orbit that's in the plane of the earth's equator it will appear to hang motionless
in the sky and you can imagine how valuable that is.
That's where you put communication satellites.
That's where you put the satellites that are giving you your TV satellite TV and satellite
radio and where you're bouncing radio signals and telephone messages and all kinds of stuff
around the planet.
Geosynchronous orbit is a very valuable place in the real estate of space.
So let's find out where geosynchronous orbit is.
Low earth orbit satellites that are a few hundred miles, a few hundred kilometers up
where we put the International Space Station they take about 90 minutes to go around.
The moon orbits in 27 days so somewhere in between there's an orbit of 24 hours.
That's geosynchronous orbit.
Where is it?
Well we know from lecture six that the acceleration of an object in a circular path is the square
of its speed divided by the radius.
Speed is distance per time for a circular orbit that's the circumference 2 pi r over
the period t.
So I'm going to write v as 2 pi r over t.
So a acceleration is v squared over r that becomes 4 pi squared r squared but then divided
by r so there's just one r upstairs and there's our t squared downstairs when we square that.
So that's the acceleration.
So we're still asking the question where is this geosynchronous orbit?
We now know the acceleration.
It's 4 pi squared r over t squared.
Newton's second law which governs motion tells us that the force is equal to the mass times
the acceleration.
We know the acceleration.
We also know the force because the force is Newton's force of universal gravitation where
one mass, little m is the mass of the satellite, another mass, big m is the mass of the earth.
We're looking for that distance r.
We know g.
We know everything else in here.
Let's do it.
So I'm going to equate those two.
That's the statement of Newton's second law.
The force is the mass times the acceleration.
There's the mass.
There's the acceleration.
There's the force.
The little m cancels which is nice because we don't have to say oh let's put a satellite
of 25 kilograms in this orbit.
We've got to have a different geosynchronous orbit for a different mass.
As usual with gravity, mass cancels out because all things experience the same gravitational
acceleration.
Solve that.
We get the cube root.
By the way, that cube root in the squared in there is Kepler's period orbital size relationship.
Work out the details.
There's the orbit radius.
Do the numbers.
There's the period.
We want the period to be 24 hours.
There's the mass of the earth.
There's the gravitational constant.
We get 42,000 kilometers.
That's from the earth's center because the center's center distance is what counts.
We subtract earth's radius of about 6,300 kilometers and we get a geosynchronous altitude
of 36,000 kilometers, about 22,000 miles.
That is the most valuable piece of real estate, at least in near-earth space.
We have many, many satellites up there.
In fact, so many that we're getting worried that their beams will begin to interfere with
each other.
Okay.
Well, let's move on.
I indicated I was putting this lecture here because of energy considerations.
Let's move on and look at energy in gravitational situations.
We found earlier that if we had a mass m and we lifted it through a height h, the change
in its gravitational potential energy was mgh and we've used that a lot.
We can't use that anymore because now we're dealing with going large distances from earth
and the strength of gravity is falling off substantially if we move distances that are
significant compared, for instance, to earth's radius.
Let's look at gravitational energy.
Let's take a look here on the big screen because we want to do a little bit of mathematics
with this.
Okay.
Back in lecture 11, we found that potential energy is the area under the force versus distance
curve.
Here we have the force of gravity.
It's this force that falls off as the inverse square of distance.
It's an attractive force and that means as I move an object closer to a gravitating mass
like the earth, work is done on it.
I do negative work and the potential energy associated is negative and it's this area
under the curve and as I move close to the gravitating object, a substantial amount of
potential energy is involved as I am moving in regions further away because the force
is falling off so rapidly, less potential energy is involved and I'm going to cut to
the chase.
Here's what calculus, which again Newton invented to do this kind of thing, shows.
Newton's calculus shows that if you take zero potential energy to be way off at infinity
and then you bring an object closer to a gravitating center, like start with an object very far
from earth and bring it closer to earth, the potential energy goes down, meaning that it
would take work to move that object farther away from earth.
Potential energies, gravitational potential energies are negative and the calculus shows
that you get a gravitational potential energy that depends inversely on r, whereas the force
dependent inversely on r squared, same gravitational constant mass of the object doing the gravitating
and mass of the object moving near it, doesn't really matter which is which.
So that is the gravitational potential energy and let's take a closer look at that equation,
an anatomy of that equation, u is the gravitational potential energy associated with two masses,
big m and little m, a distance r apart, zero of gravitational energy is at infinity when
they're very far apart, there are the two masses, there's the distance between center
to center of the masses, there's the constant of universal gravitation and that minus sign
tells us that the gravitational potential energy is negative and we're therefore dealing
with an attractive force.
It would take work to separate two objects that are connected gravitationally that are
undergoing this attractive gravitational interaction.
Okay, let's do some practical things with this equation.
Let's ask now about the total energy of an object that is in the vicinity of a gravitating
center, it may be moving, it probably is moving, if it's not moving it's going to start moving
because gravity is going to pull it downward.
So it's going to have kinetic energy and it's going to have potential energy.
The kinetic energy we know of a mass m moving at speed v is a half mv squared.
We've just seen that the gravitational potential energy of an object, a distance r from a mass
capital M, the same object, mass at little m, is minus gm m over r.
So that is the total energy, kinetic plus potential of an object moving in the vicinity
of a large mass m that's exerting a gravitational force on it.
And what I'd like to do is use this to calculate a very special situation, I'm going to leave
that on the screen for now so we can refer to it and let's look at the situation in which
I take this tennis ball and I throw it up in the air and of course it comes down.
What goes up must come down and I throw it a little higher and it goes a little higher
before it comes down and I throw it higher still and it disappears out of your picture
but it still comes down.
Could I throw it fast enough?
Could I throw it hard enough that it would leave the vicinity of Earth and travel to
infinitely great distances from Earth and never come back?
Must what goes up come down?
That's the question I want to ask and I'm going to answer that question by looking at
gravitational potential energy and kinetic energy and their relationship in the total
energy.
Let's take this equation that we've just examined for the total energy and let us see what happens
if we ask that question about throwing a ball up and must it come down.
So what goes up must come down, question mark.
Let's launch a mass m from Earth's surface.
The question is could we get it infinitely far away without having to throw it at infinite
speed?
Let's apply conservation of energy.
Potential energy approaches zero at large r because we define the zero of potential
energy when two objects are infinitely far apart.
If it just barely gets to infinitely far from Earth then it's going to be going slower and
slower and slower because gravity is always going to be pulling back on it and it's going
to reach infinity and this is sort of a story where you have to stretch your imagination
a little bit because this is going to take forever.
It's going to reach infinity just barely coming to a stop.
Now if you don't like that throw a little faster, it'll get all the way to infinitely
far away.
It'll still take infinitely long and it'll still be coasting a little bit but that dividing
line is the case where the kinetic energy is also getting to zero at large r.
So both those terms in our equation for the total energy are zero and therefore the total
energy adds up to zero for the case where I just can get the object infinitely far from
Earth.
Throw a little faster and it'll get to infinity with a little bit of energy to spare.
Throw a little slower.
It may go light years away but in principle in a universe containing only the Earth where
it doesn't get captured by something else, it will come back to Earth eventually.
So there's this dividing energy and it will correspond to a dividing speed.
So if we express this Earth's surface, zero, the total energy, the sum of the kinetic energy
and the potential energy at Earth's surface, the potential energy is negative, we're close
to Earth, the kinetic energy is the energy I need to give it to throw it away and when
it gets infinitely far away, both of those terms are going to go to zero, they're zero
at the surface, not both of them, but they add up to zero at the surface.
So let's find out.
That implies if I solve for the unknown speed, the unknown speed is the square root of 2gm
mass of Earth over the radius of the Earth.
As usual with gravitational problems, the mass is canceled, it doesn't matter what mass
we're throwing, so the answer to this question, what speed do I need to throw something at
to get it infinitely far from Earth, doesn't depend on the mass of the thing I'm throwing.
To the numbers, for Earth you get 11 km per second, which is about 7 miles a second.
That by the way is a speed achievable with our rockets, we have spacecraft to the outer
planets that have left Earth with more than this speed, this is called the escape speed.
We even have spacecraft, the Voyager and Pioneer spacecraft have escape speed relative to the
sun so they can escape the sun's gravity and they will travel through the galaxy basically
forever until they crash into something or extra galactic pick them up or whatever.
Anticipating what's going to come in the very final section of the course when we talk
about ideas of modern and contemporary physics and general relativity in particular, we'll
ask what would have to happen for escape speed to be the speed of light and we'll be able
to derive that quite simply using these considerations and that's what creates a thing called a black
hole because nothing can escape from the black hole because nothing as we'll see can go faster
than light.
So what goes up, must come down, question mark, the answer is no.
If it leaves with more than escape speed, it's not going to come down again, it's going
to escape forever.
So zero total energy, sum of kinetic and potential energy, potential energy being negative as
long as you're not infinitely far away.
That sum being zero is a dividing line between situations in which you're bound to a gravitating
object like the Earth and you can't escape it forever and situations in which you are
not bound to it and even though you might be near it at some point, you will eventually
get infinitely far away.
So what goes up must not necessarily come down.
Okay, let's look in a little bit more detail at what that means.
So we have e less than zero is one possibility.
If the total energy of the object is less than zero, it's in a closed orbit and the orbit
will be in general elliptical although the circle is a special case of the elliptical
orbit.
If the energy is exactly zero, we'll be in a borderline case where there's just enough
energy to escape and it turns out the orbit then is parabolic in shape.
If the energy is greater than zero, it's in an open orbit, it has enough energy to get
to infinity with energy to spare.
The orbit is hyperbolic, it might come in from very far away with a high speed, here's
a gravitating object like the Earth, it kind of gets bent a little bit but then it goes
off eventually on a straight line path very far away with plenty of energy to spare and
it's not bound to the Earth.
So those are the orbits and the energies and the considerations of what kind of orbit
we get with different amounts of energy.
Okay, as we end up, let me issue you a challenge.
Normally I like to put challenge problems at the very end and let you do them or not
but this challenge problem you don't have to do because it's a show something problem.
If you would like to, derive an expression for the total energy e in the case when we're
in a circular orbit and show it can be written entirely in terms of either the kinetic energy
K or potential energy U.
You can stop now if you want and work that out.
Here's the answer.
It turns out that the total energy is negative because the object is bound if it's in a circular
orbit and it turns out to be exactly half the potential energy and it's exactly minus
the kinetic energy, the kinetic energy being positive.
Again, you can work that out by understanding what you know about circular motion and the
forces and circular motion and the energy and the velocity and so on.
You can get to that result.
So there's your challenge and I want to take the result of that challenge and describe
an important and rather counterintuitive aspect of how we move spacecraft around in their
orbits because look at what this says.
Kinetic energy is related to speed.
If I make the kinetic energy bigger and again this applies only to circular orbits, it's
relatively easy to do the math of this consideration for circular orbits.
If I make the kinetic energy bigger because the total energy is minus the kinetic energy,
the total energy actually goes down.
So very strange, very counterintuitive.
Make the object go faster.
That is make it go into a circular orbit where it's going faster and the total energy has
to go down.
That means that faster circular orbit is a lower circular orbit.
It's got even lower negative potential energy and so what that means is if we want to maneuver
a spacecraft using this equation, we have to slow down to speed up.
So here I have a spacecraft that wants to catch up with a space station.
You think well it just blasts its rockets and goes faster but if it blasts its rockets
the first thing that will happen is it will rise into a higher orbit and gravity will
sap its kinetic energy and it will actually end up going slower.
So what we have to do is fire our rockets in the opposite direction as if we wanted to
slow down, we would drop into a lower orbit, we travel faster in that lower orbit and when
we come abreast of the space station we're trying to meet up with, we fire the rockets
the other way, this time in the forward direction and that brings us to a higher but slower
orbit.
So orbital maneuvers are definitely very, very counterintuitive.
Okay, well let's wrap up with a summary here.
We found that the gravitational force acts between any two masses.
The force is proportional to the product of the masses, inversely proportional to the
square of the distance between them.
This gives rise through Newton's calculus to circular or elliptical orbits, at least
in the case of bound systems with total energy negative.
There is a gravitational potential energy which is negative because we're taking the
energy to be zero at infinity and that indicates if you're closer in to a system you could
be bound to it if your total energy remains less than zero.
Total energy being the sum of your kinetic energy and your gravitational potential energy,
if that's less than zero you're in a bound orbit, if it's greater than zero you're in
an open orbit and will never return and the dividing line defines the special speed, the
escape speed at which you would have to launch something from a gravitating object for it
to be able to escape that object forever.
