Welcome to lecture 20, the second of our two lectures on fluid behavior.
This time we're looking at fluid dynamics, the behavior of moving fluids.
And our simple picture of fluids is represented by density and pressure gets more complicated
because when they're moving, we've also got to talk about the flow velocity.
Just like density and pressure can be functions of position, so can the fluid velocity.
Furthermore, with fluid dynamics, all three of these quantities might vary with time,
even at a given position.
So we've got quite a bit more complication.
But we're going to simplify that because we're going to talk about one special case in which
neither density nor pressure nor velocity vary with time at a fixed position, although
they may vary from position to position.
Let me show you what I mean by that.
Here are videos of a couple of rivers.
The river at the upper left is exhibiting essentially steady flow.
The river is flowing.
The water isn't the same water at a given point, as Heraklite has famously said.
You can't put your foot into the same river twice.
But at every given point, we can identify a definite flow velocity.
In the unsteady flow, turbulent flow, you'll notice that the flow is changing with time.
Water bursts up out of the surface and then settles down a little bit.
The flow is continually changing.
With the flow at the upper left, I can add arrows to that flow, indicating the velocity
at each point.
Again, even though the water is moving, those arrows stay the same length and they have
the same direction.
They represent the velocity of that flowing fluid.
Another example of an unsteady fluid flow would be the flow of blood through your circulatory
system.
The blood gets higher pressure and moves faster and then it slows down again.
So the beating heart is producing an unsteady flow and in the rest of this lecture, we're
going to deal exclusively with steady flows.
The mathematical treatment of unsteady flows of the phenomenon called turbulence is a very
difficult, almost intractable mathematical problem and it actually remains an area of
contemporary study in fluid dynamics.
So we're not going to go there.
We're going to look at steady flows, but we have a lot to say about steady flows.
How do we represent moving fluids?
Well, one way we could do it is by simply drawing a flow vector at every point in the
fluid or at representative points.
So something like this, here's a sort of symbolic picture of a river, for example, flowing
through a region where the river gets a little bit narrower for a while and what I've done
here is to indicate by arrows the direction and magnitude of the steady flow of that river.
So the length of an arrow is the magnitude of the flow.
These are vectors, velocity vectors.
The direction is the local direction of the flow.
You can see the flow coming down, going straight and getting a little faster in that narrower
portion and then expanding outward again at the end.
That's one way to do it.
Another way to represent the flow is to draw what are called stream lines.
These are continuous lines that are everywhere in the flow direction and the remarkable thing
about doing that is you get a picture that not only shows you the direction but it also
shows you the magnitude of the flow velocity and you can see that the lines are closer
together in that constricted region of the river where it's narrower and where in the
vector picture the vectors were longer, the flow was greater.
Here the flow lines or stream lines are closer together and that is an indication of the
strength of that flow, the speed of that flow.
By the way, we'll use a similar kind of continuous lines later on when we talk about electromagnetism
and we will represent electric and magnetic fields with the same kind of idea and this
is in a sense the velocity field of this flowing river.
We can visualize the velocity field in some cases by adding some kind of material, maybe
dyes or particles to stream a fluid that show you the actual fluid lines and here is an
example where a car is undergoing aerodynamic testing in a wind tunnel and we've introduced
particles of smoke into the wind at specific points and those particles are tracing out
the stream lines of that fluid flow so we can directly understand what's going on in
that particular flow.
Okay, so that's a look at how we're going to talk about dynamic fluids, fluids that
are moving.
What we want to get to is two conservation laws that describe what's going on in flowing
fluids and these are big important conservation laws not just for fluids but for all of physics
but we want to express them in particular forms that apply to flowing fluids.
They are conservation of mass, matter is conserved, it doesn't appear or disappear, Einstein out
of the picture for now, we'll talk more about that later but in normal everyday operation
mass is a conserved quantity and so is energy and we've seen the importance of energy conservation
so we want to spend the rest of this lecture looking at conservation of mass and conservation
of energy in flowing fluids.
We want to understand how to express those in equation form and then how to handle those
to explore the behavior of flowing fluids.
So let's begin with a look at the conservation of mass which is the easier of these two to
deal with.
How do we conserve mass in a fluid?
Well first of all I want to define something called a stream tube or a flow tube.
A flow tube is a narrow region in a flow so here I have a picture of a flow with some
stream lines and the stream lines show for example that the fluid is flowing to the right
and that it was flowing with lower velocity at the left than it is at the right because
the stream lines have gotten closer together and I want to focus on a very narrow tube bounded
by adjacent or nearby stream lines.
Now of course there are stream lines everywhere, I could draw infinitely many stream lines so
this is kind of a loose idea and I'm sort of taking the limit as I get towards stream
lines that are very close together.
I'm making that tube small enough that fluid properties like pressure and velocity and
density don't vary significantly across the area bounded by that stream tube or that flow
tube so that is how I'm defining this small flow tube and nevertheless the tube may reflect
changes in fluid properties as you move along the tube.
Tube is narrow enough, there's not much change in fluid properties across the areas, they
may be different though at this end than at this end.
So that's my concept of a flow tube.
Two nearby stream lines define the flow tube, it's as if it were a pipe of that shape it
isn't a pipe, it's just an arbitrary mathematical surface but because fluid flows along the
stream lines no fluid flows perpendicular to them so you can think of it as if it were
a pipe, if you put a perfectly frictionless pipe there in fact the fluid would behave
pretty much the same way.
So that's my idea of a stream tube or a flow tube.
Instead of flow fluid comes into this tube at the same rate that it goes out so here
I've shown a little chunk of fluid just about to enter my flow tube and here I show a chunk
of fluid just about to go out of the flow tube and because the tube is narrower this
chunk of fluid occupies a longer space because it's got a smaller area.
So I'm going to assume that these two flow elements, these two elements of fluid have
the same mass.
How can I assume that?
Well I'm just going to make it be that way.
I'm going to measure the mass of this one, I'm going to find out how much of the fluid
I need to get the mass of that one.
So these two have the same mass and because the fluid is flowing in steady flow however
much fluid comes into the flow tube in one second that much must exit at the other end.
If that weren't true we wouldn't have steady flow because we'd either have fluid accumulating
in the tube or fluid being depleted from the tube.
So in steady flow these two fluid elements with the same mass must take the same time
to enter and leave the flow.
Now the mass of a fluid element with density rho area A and length L is the density times
the volume, rho times A times L and rho and A and L may all be different at the two ends
of the flow tube.
The fluid element is moving at speed V, here it's V1, here it's V2, the speed may be different
at two ends of the flow tube and so the length of the flow tube or the length of the fluid
element about to enter the flow tube or about to leave the flow tube is V times that time
delta T in which this fluid element is going to enter and in which this fluid element is
going to leave.
So far I'm writing these quantities without any subscripts because they apply to either
end of the flow tube.
So I can find the fluid element mass it's rho times the area times the length that's
rho the density times the area times the length which was V delta T and that expression again
applies at both ends of the flow tube and the masses are the same even though the density
the area and the speed may vary.
The time is the same because we've said it takes the same amount of time for that mass
M to enter as for that mass M to leave.
So here we have it the fluid elements mass is rho A times the fluid velocity V times
the time delta T it takes it to enter or leave the flow tube.
Now in steady flow again the masses entering and leaving the flow tube and time delta T
are the same so if I put subscripts one on the density the area and the velocity coming
into the flow tube and two on the density velocity and area coming out of the flow tube then
those two quantities are equal again the delta T is the same because this mass this fluid
element is entering the flow tube in the same time that this one is leaving.
So I can write that rho one A1 V1 just dividing canceling the delta T is equal to rho two
A2 V2.
Equivalently the quantity rho AV ends up being a constant along a flow tube.
So that's a statement that statement that English language statement or equivalently
expressed entirely in mathematics where one and two designate any two points along that
flow tube that is a statement that energy is that mass is conserved in a steady flow
that's how mass is conserved in a steady flow.
Let's take a further look at that equation we just developed.
We'll do an anatomy of the equation.
That equation is called the continuity equation.
There are a number of continuity equations in physics and what they express is the conservation
of some conserved quantity.
For example there's a conservation a continuity equation in electromagnetism that expresses
the conservation of electric charge.
Here we have a continuity equation that expresses the conservation of mass in this case the conservation
of mass in a flowing fluid.
Here's our equation rho times area times volume is a constant along the flow tube.
You identify a flow tube, you pick the values of rho and A and V at one point, you measure
them at some other point and in steady flow they must be the same because no fluid is
leaking out of that tube from the sides so whatever fluid comes in has to go back out
that quantity has to be a conserved quantity.
Rho is again the fluid density, A is the cross sectional area of the flow tube and V is the
flow speed.
That quantity rho, A, V is constant along a flow tube.
It's a constant for a given flow tube and they vary from place to place as you move
sideways in the fluid perpendicular to the flow.
You may find these quantities vary, you may find they don't, it depends but they could.
This is constant though along a flow tube, along a given flow tube and this quantity
rho, A, V if you work out the units of it mass per unit volume area, mass per cubic meter,
meters squared, meters per second, work that all out and you find the units of that are
kilograms per second so that number that's constant is the mass flow rate.
It's the number of kilograms per second flowing through the flow tube.
At any point in the flow tube you sit there and that many kilograms per second go by
you and that number doesn't change as you move along the flow tube.
That's the statement that the mass is conserved, mass isn't appearing or disappearing, conservation
of mass.
Now in liquids as we've seen in the previous lecture, for liquids the density is a constant
because the molecules and liquid are close together, it's hard to compress it.
That happens to be also approximately true for gases.
When they're flowing at speeds they're much less than the sound speed.
It's that property that makes gases behave sort of like liquids at speeds well below
the sound speed and it's also that fact that makes the whole business of supersonic aircraft
flight a very different physical process than subsonic flight because the gases behave
actually very differently at supersonic speeds than at subsonic speeds.
For liquids, rho is a constant and it's also approximately true for gases at subsonic speeds
and then we can just cancel the rho because it's also a constant and we have another constant
just A times V along a flow tube and if you work out the units of that, that's cubic meters
per second so that's the volume flow rate.
So let's do an example where we use this equation whose anatomy we now understand.
Here's a beautiful river in upstate New York, the Ossable River, lovely river flows through
the mountain, the Adirondack Mountains and eventually down into Lake Champlain, northern
part of Lake Champlain and here's its beautiful canoe stream.
Early in the summer it's typically 40 meters wide, about 2 meters deep of course rivers
vary and it's flowing at about 4 meters per second.
Just before it enters Lake Champlain it goes through this gorge called the Ossable Chasm
and at the narrowest it's less than 4 meters wide.
Before it was 40 meters wide in the normal flow.
It's flowing at speed of about 6 meters per second, about 50% faster than it was before
and the question is what's the depth in this chasm?
Well we can work that out using the continuity equation.
It's a liquid so A times V is a constant, we don't need to worry about the density rho.
A is the width times the depth, I'm assuming it's got kind of a rectangular cross section.
In the normal river it's 40 meters wide, 2 meters deep, it's flowing at 4 meters per
second, so A V is 320 cubic meters per second.
So again we are looking at the Ossable Chasm 3.7 meters wide, 6 meters per second flow
speed, we found the volume flow rate it's 320 cubic meters per second, that's the flow
rate anywhere by conservation of mass.
So in the chasm the thing we don't know is the depth D, so we have the width 3.7 meters,
the unknown depth D, the 6 meters per second, they have to multiply together to give 320
cubic meters per second.
We solve for the unknown depth D and it's 14 meters or 47 feet, wow that's deep.
So there is an example of the use of the continuity equation to tell us something about a flowing
fluid.
Well that was conservation of mass.
Now let's move on and talk about conservation of energy.
And when I talk about conservation of energy at first I'm going to say let's assume there's
no friction or anything, sapping energy from the fluid, let's suppose we haven't put any
pumps in the fluid to add energy or put in turbines to extract energy and we want to
develop an equation that expresses conservation of energy in a flowing fluid.
So that equation is called Bernoulli's equation and it's the equation that expresses conservation
of energy and I'm going to restrict myself here to incompressible fluids, meaning fluids
for which the density is constant.
So here's the question, I'm going to start again with a flow tube, I haven't bothered
to draw the flow lines, the stream lines, but here's a flow tube and this flow tube rises
in height and amount delta y from one end to the other.
There's a pressure P1 at the one end and an area A1 and it's fluids coming in with velocity
V1 and a hunk of fluid delta x1 is coming in.
And I'm going to talk this time about the same fluid element as it comes in and as it
exits and I want to know how much work is done on that fluid element as it moves from
the coming into the flow tube, coming out of the flow tube.
We're going to apply the work energy theorem that we developed in lecture 11 that says
the change in kinetic energy is equal to the net work done on an object.
So here we're applying good old Newtonian physics to this more complicated case of a
fluid, work is force times distance.
Well, coming in, there's a pressure force, pressure one, the pressure inlet times the
area and the fluid moves a distance delta x1.
So force times distance is P1A1 delta x1.
Going out, there's a pressure P2 from the external fluid is pushing back.
So instead of doing work on the fluid positive work, it's doing negative work.
So going out, we have minus P2A2 delta x2.
The work done by gravity, well, as the fluid rises, gravity is pushing downward.
So we're working against gravity, we would have to do positive work, gravity does negative
work and it's minus mg times the height, which is in this case delta y or y2 minus y1.
So there's the work done by gravity as we go through the flow tube.
So we're still asking this question, how much work is done?
We've got three contributions, incoming work from pressure, outgoing work from pressure
and the work done by gravity.
So the network is the sum of those three, two of which happen to have negative signs.
There's the network done on that fluid element as it goes through the tube.
The kinetic energy change is the kinetic energy at the outlet end, a half mv squared, v2 in
this case, the velocity it has at the outlet, minus the kinetic energy at the inlet, one
half mv1 squared.
And what work energy theorem tells us is that the network done will be equal to the kinetic
energy change.
So we're going to equate those two and I'm going to divide by the volume A times delta
x of the fluid in each case.
If it's an incompressible fluid, its volume hasn't changed, its shape may have changed,
but its volume hasn't changed.
And so there I get that expression when I divide by the volume and dividing by the volume
turns the mass into mass per unit volume or density, which is why the density appears
there.
So there's my almost final expression, I just do a little algebraic rearrangement, put
all the terms of the ones on one side, all the terms with the twos on the other side,
and I have this quantity p1 plus a half rho v1 squared plus rho gy1 is equal to the same
thing with the twos at the other end.
Equivalently, that quantity, pressure plus a half rho v squared plus rho gy is constant
along that flow tube.
OK, let's take a closer look at that equation and see exactly what it says.
Well Bernoulli's equation, as we saw it, expresses conservation of energy in a flowing fluid.
It's restricted to incompressible fluids, and let's look at the individual terms.
Clearly the second term is like kinetic energy but divided by volume, so it's an energy density.
The third term is like potential energy but divided by volume because it's got rho instead
of mass.
It's an energy density, and pressure is also a measure of the density of a kind of internal
energy associated with molecular motions in the fluid, and we'll talk more about that
when we get into thermodynamics.
That quantity is constant along a flow tube.
The pressure, an internal energy density, the kinetic energy density plus the gravitational
potential energy density, those add up to a constant but individually they can change.
You can change energy back and forth among different forms in this flowing fluid, and
that's what we want to look at in a little bit more detail.
That constant again is a constant for a given flow tube.
It may vary from flow tube to flow tube, but as you move along one flow tube, that quantity
stays the same.
Frequently we deal with cases where there's no height change, a pipe running along horizontally,
for example, a river flowing horizontally.
When there's no height change, then we can drop the rho g y because that's constant,
that's the same on both sides of the equation, and we simply have that the pressure, that
internal energy density plus the kinetic energy density adds up to a constant.
That property is called the Bernoulli effect, the fact that pressure and something involving
velocity add up to a constant because it says that in places where pressure is high in a
flowing fluid, other places on the same stream tube where pressure is lower, the velocity
will have to be higher.
This principle often gets misused.
This is called Bernoulli's principle, and the Bernoulli effect is this effect whereby
high pressure goes with low velocity and vice versa.
Be careful.
It's only true as you move along a flow tube.
It's not true that the pressure is high here, then the velocity will be low over here.
It's only true along a flow tube.
P plus a half rho v squared equals constant.
A couple of examples of that, of this high pressure with low flow speed and vice versa.
In an airplane wing, the flow over an airplane wing, the wing is designed so the flow speed
over the upper part of the wing is higher than over the lower part of the wing, and
that in turn by Bernoulli's effect causes lower pressure above, higher pressure below,
and that's one way of looking at what supports an airplane.
By the way, I think it's easier to think of an airplane in terms of Newton's third law.
What that flow is doing, you'll notice the outgoing flow is pointing a little bit downward,
and so the wing is deflected air downward.
It's exerted a downward force on the air, and the air is therefore exerted an upward
force on the wing.
It's not a contradiction with Bernoulli's effect, because the whole Bernoulli equation
came out of Newtonian physics, but in this case, a simpler version based on Newton's
third law I think is more effective.
Look at how a curved ball behaves.
A ball that's moving through the air without curvature, without spinning, has a symmetric
flow around it, and the pressure is the same on either side.
But when you set the ball spinning, friction of the fluid with the ball, and train some
of the air with the spinning ball, and it causes a higher flow on one side of the ball,
flow speed on one side of the ball, that causes a lower pressure.
This picture we're looking down on above, from say a pitched, on a pitched baseball,
and that causes a force that deflects the ball in the horizontal direction, assuming
it's spinning about a vertical axis.
So that's the Bernoulli effect, the presence of high pressure with low speed and vice versa.
Let me give you a few examples and applications of the Bernoulli effect.
So over here, I have a rather loud blower, and I want to be very clear that it is blowing
air out, away, you can see it doing that, clearly.
So we know that that air is being blown outward.
Here's another obvious case of that air being blown outward, that air column is supporting
that ping-pong ball, not surprising.
It's in a symmetric situation, so the air speeds on both sides of the ping-pong ball
are the same.
But now what happens if I do this?
The ball ought to fall.
The air column is not pushing it straight up, it's not counter-balancing gravity, all by
itself it seems, and yet the ball is happily supported there.
What's going on?
Well this situation is no longer symmetric, and the air flow is in fact faster over the
upper half of the ball than over the lower half, and that results in a lower pressure,
and the higher pressure below then is effectively supporting that ball, and I can tip it quite
a ways down before that effect ceases to be useful.
Here's another example.
I'm going to attach this funnel to the hose, and I'm going to take this balloon, and again
that air is blowing out of that funnel, away from the balloon, you can see the balloon
kind of blowing away.
But now I'm going to put the balloon in the funnel, and at some point, even though the
air is flowing out, the balloon is sucked into the funnel and held there by some kind
of force, I've got to pull it to get it out.
Why did that happen?
Because when the air was flowing out of that hose, the presence of the balloon created
a very narrow space between the balloon and the funnel, and that caused the air to flow
very rapidly, and by Bernoulli's equation, that caused the pressure to be lower because
of the rapid flow, as the flow expanded when it got outside the funnel, the flow speed dropped,
the pressure went up, and so the higher pressure down below and the lower pressure up above
forced the balloon to stay in the funnel.
So those are some examples of Bernoulli's effect, and Bernoulli's effect can be quite
counterintuitive and quite fascinating.
Okay, so let's look at some more serious applications of Bernoulli's principle, and we'll actually
work an example of one of them, and I'll let you do an example of the other one as a challenge.
So here are some pictures of applications.
One is the way we measure speed in aircraft.
We measure speed with a device that senses the air flow in one way by stopping the air
and causing the velocity to be zero, and another way that samples it, letting the air go by
at its normal speed, and by comparing the pressures at those two points and applying
Bernoulli's principle, we're able to calculate the actual air flow speed.
That's how aircraft use speedometers, if you will.
Another example shown at the bottom is the dangerous situation of arterial stenosis in
which plaque builds up in an artery, restricts the flow of blood in the artery, and you
might think that would lead to higher pressure, but for all other conditions being equal,
what it leads to is higher flow speed by the continuity equation, fluid has to move faster
to get by that limited area, and that results in lower pressure, and in extreme cases you
can actually collapse the artery because the pressure in it gets so low that external
pressure collapses it, and I'll let you think about that in a challenge problem, I'll give
you shortly.
Let's look at this aircraft's speedometer in a little bit more detail.
This thing is called a pitot tube, and in my example, I'm assuming a plane is flying
at 33,000 feet, that's about 10 kilometers altitude where air has a density of 0.41 kilograms
per cubic meter.
Pressure difference in this speedometer between point A and point B, point A is where the
air is flowing right by with its normal speed V, point B the air has come right into the
tube and is forced to stop, let's assume that difference measured by that pressure indicator
is 15 kilopascals.
What's the plane's air speed?
Well the Bernoulli principle applies, the sum of the pressure and the kinetic energy density
is the same at both points.
VA is the unknown air speed, VB is zero because the air has been stopped.
So PA plus one half rho V unknown the air speed squared is PB, there's no second term
on the right hand side because the air has been stopped at B, V is zero.
There we are, or put it a different way, one half rho VA squared is PB minus PA, pull the
PA to the other side of the equation, that's the delta P we're measuring.
So let's solve for V squared, there's V squared, V is the square root of that, and if we do
the numbers this airplane is moving at 600 miles an hour, a typical speed for a jet airplane.
So there's a realistic example and a practical application where we use Bernoulli's equation
to learn something we couldn't learn by running a wheel along the ground like in a car, but
so we have to do it some other way and we use Bernoulli's equation.
So let's move on and wrap up with just a few other points about Bernoulli's equation and
fluid energy, sometimes fluid energy is not conserved, let me give you a couple examples.
Fluid does have a kind of friction and that friction is called viscosity and it's particularly
important when the fluid is flowing near a stationary material boundary, like the walls
of a pipe.
So if you have a pipe, instead of the flow being uniform across the pipe, it's zero precisely
at the edges where the fluid is literally attached to the boundary and then it increases
toward the middle of the pipe.
And how important that effect is depends on the width of the tube in relation to properties
of the flowing fluid.
So for water in pipes an inch or two in diameter, it's not a big deal, molasses or honey flowing
through the same pipe, it would be a big deal because those are very viscous fluids.
So we have high speed in the middle, low speed, zero speed right at the walls.
Another example is if we put turbo machinery, that is pumps or turbines into the flow.
Pumps add energy to the flow, so they put another term in Bernoulli's equation.
Turbines extract energy and the kind of turbines we think most about these days are wind turbines,
that's one of the fastest growing new forms of energy, there's a picture of a wind turbine.
And if you think about the energy density in a fluid, it is one half rho v squared but
that energy is moving along with fluid speed v and that makes the energy flow in the fluid
proportional to v squared times v or v cubed.
And since that means if you simply double the wind speed you will cube that effect that
is two cubed or eight times the amount of energy being carried in that wind.
And that tells you one reason why wind turbines need to be high because that viscosity slows
down the air at the ground, you have to go up quite a ways, tens of meters before you
get rid of that so-called boundary layer effect from the ground and at high heights
you get winds that are much stronger and a small change in wind speed because of that
v cubed makes a big change in the amount of energy you can extract from the wind.
Okay, let's wrap up.
We've visualized fluid flow with streamlines, we have found the continuity equation to describe
the conservation of mass in a fluid flow and rho v a became the constant quantity, we looked
at Bernoulli's equation expressing the conservation of energy, we had this more complicated sum
of three terms, pressure, kinetic energy density and potential energy density being constant
in a flow tube and that led us to Bernoulli's principle, high velocity, low pressure and
vice versa.
Well, let me end with a quick challenge to you.
Find a formula in that picture of the stenosis for the pressure at the stenosis in the clogged
artery.
In terms of the blood density rho, the normal blood pressure p sub naught, the normal blood
flow speed v sub zero, the normal artery area a sub zero as shown in the picture and
the area a at the constriction and we're going to assume the pressure doesn't vary with time
which is not true of course for blood because the heart is pumping all the time and the
pressure is going up and down but we'll just assume that for a simple example.
And I'm not going to work out the solution in all this detail but I'm going to give you
a hint.
You will need to combine both the continuity equation and Bernoulli's equation, those two
conservation statements we derived in this lecture.
And take your pencil and paper out and go to work.
And here is the answer.
Answer to that challenge is this complicated expression but involves the difference of
the squares of the two areas.
If the two areas are the same, there is no pressure difference.
If the areas are different, there is a pressure difference and if the second area is smaller,
the pressure actually drops.
