Welcome to lecture 24 in which I want to discuss the behavior of gases because these behaviors
are going to provide us with pretty deep insights into some fundamental laws of thermodynamics
that we'll be dealing with in upcoming lectures.
In particular I want to deal with something called the ideal gas.
Now when you hear the word ideal, as for example you talk about say an ideal battery
or an ideal frictionless situation, you pretty much know the physicist is talking about something
that doesn't really exist.
Well in the case of ideal gases that's not quite so.
Most common ordinary gases like the air around me right now are in fact very, very close
to behaving like ideal gases.
So ideal gases are not some vague idealization and theoretical thing, they're a very, very
good approximation to many, many real gases.
But we're going to look at ideal gases because they're going to give us tremendous amounts
of insights into this contrast between the macroscopic picture presented by thermodynamics
in which we have temperature and pressure and heat flows and the microscopic picture
of matter in which we understand the behavior of matter as following from the application
of things like the laws of mechanics to the individual particles that make up matter.
An ideal gas is particularly simple and it's easy to understand and it's easy to characterize
and that's the reason we want to look at ideal gases.
Other materials solids and liquids are much more difficult and complicated to understand
as our gases that exhibit non-ideal behavior.
The ideal gas is simple primarily because its molecules are far apart.
They exhibit very few interactions.
The only thing they really do in a really ideal gas is they undergo collisions occasionally
and in fact you can even idealize to the point where they don't do that.
The behavior of ideal gases because of that becomes basically universal, independent of
the gas.
It doesn't matter whether I've got helium or hydrogen or oxygen or nitrogen or air or
neon, well it does matter a little bit in ways I'll get to at the end of the lecture.
But the main behavior of ideal gases doesn't depend on the nature of the gas.
The constant volume gas thermometer that we talked about for example you can put pretty
much any gas in it although if you really want to get down to low temperatures you want
to put in something like helium that has a very, very low liquefying point.
But the point is in the realm where the ideal gas approximation applies gases behave like
this regardless of the nature of their molecules regardless of what kind of gas they are.
So let me begin by looking at some empirical that is experimentally determined behaviors
of ideal gases and then we're going to switch to a theoretical analysis that's going to
explain these behaviors.
So here are some experimental results that people knew about long before they understood
what I'm going to be getting into in this lecture, the molecular picture of what's going
on with gases.
Experiments with gases showed that if you fix the temperature of a gas then the pressure
of the gas would be inversely proportional to its volume.
So at a fixed temperature if you compressed a gas its pressure would double if you for
example dropped its volume in half.
Its pressure would half if you doubled its volume.
The product PV would remain constant at a fixed temperature.
So that's the inverse relationship.
Pressure times volume is a constant.
If pressure goes up volume goes down.
If pressure goes down volume goes up proportionately.
It's an inverse relationship.
All these individual descriptions about individual behaviors of gases have particular names named
after the people who discovered them but I'm going to cut to the chase and go right
to the universal law that talks about ideal gases.
If you change the temperature the quantity P times V, pressure times volume changes proportionately.
If you've got a gas with some value of P and V at some temperature say 200 kelvins and
you double the temperature to 400 kelvins P times V will go up.
P may change, V may change but the product PV will double if you change the temperature
or double the temperature.
And notice when I talk about doubling temperature I don't mean going from 10 degrees Celsius
to 20 degrees Celsius.
That's not a doubling of temperature.
A doubling of temperature is on the absolute scale where the zero is the true absolute
zero.
So I mean going from 200 kelvins to 400 kelvins.
From room temperature 300 kelvins to 600 kelvins.
That's what I mean by a doubling of temperature.
So I'm talking about absolute temperatures here.
You change the amount of gas, how many molecules there are, PV also changes proportionately.
Double the amount of gas and either the volume will double and the pressure will stay the
same or the pressure will double and the volume will stay the same or some combination of
those will occur that will double the quantity PV.
Put this all together and you have the ideal gas law and the ideal gas law reads like this.
It says pressure times volume, the pressure of the gas times the volume that gas occupies
is the product of three things.
The number of molecules, the amount of gas in other words, the constant of nature which
I'll talk about and the temperature.
Let's look at that in more detail.
P is the pressure.
V is the volume.
We're assuming this gas is in some kind of closed container and that volume determines
the volume of the gas.
N is the number of molecules.
K is called Boltzmann's constant.
It's just a universal constant of nature and it has an interesting unit.
Its units are joules per kelvin.
It's a conversion if you will between temperature and energy and we'll see more about why that's
significant shortly.
It has the SI units 1.3 times 10 to the minus 23 joules per kelvin and then finally T is
the temperature and it's got to be an absolute units in the SI system that means kelvins.
It can't be in Fahrenheit.
It can't be in Celsius.
It could be in Rankine if you rewrote this in the right units but it's almost universally
used in the SI system and then T is in kelvins.
By the way, if you've had a chemistry course in particular, you may have seen the ideal
gas law written PV equals nRT with a lower case n.
That lower case n is the number of moles of the gas, a mole being 6 something times 10
to the 23 molecules and R being a gas constant which is analogous to Boltzmann's constant
but expressed in terms of moles.
Chemists kind of prefer to write the ideal gas law as nRT on the right hand side.
We physicists tend to write it as nKT because that gets sort of more down to the basics.
The number of individual molecules, the relationship between energy and temperature and then the
temperature.
So I'm going to write the ideal gas law exclusively in this form.
PV equals nKT but if you've learned it as nRT, it's exactly the same thing.
We just define the constant and the counting of molecules differently.
So there's the ideal gas law and I want to emphasize that that is an empirical law that
was discovered by experiments on gases.
And the main thrust of today's lecture is to understand where the ideal gas law comes
from and understand how it must be true on the basis of simple Newtonian mechanics.
So that's going to provide this wonderful link we're going to make between this microscopic
interpretation, statistical mechanics and the macroscopic interpretation, thermodynamics
with its large scale quantities like temperature and pressure and volume.
Now I want to emphasize again, this law that you see here, there's no mention of what kind
of gas it is.
There's no number in there, no parameter that gets tweaked to make the difference between
hydrogen and oxygen or nitrogen and radon or whatever the gas is.
It's described if it's behaving ideally, which means if its molecules are really far apart
and a few other assumptions will get too shortly, then this law describes it without regard to
what kind of gas it is.
So let's move on, getting into the theory of the ideal gas and I want to start with
something I've mentioned I do to my students occasionally and now I'm going to do it to
you.
We're going to have a math alert.
This is really probably the first and maybe the biggest math alert in this course.
There's a lot of math coming, more than usual, many screens on the big monitor.
I'm going to go slowly but we're going to have to slog through it.
Why are we doing this math?
Because it will lead to deep insights about physical reality and that's the meaning of
this math alert.
Before we get into the math alert, I want to make some assumptions about the system
I'm going to describe.
I'm going to describe a system which is basically an ideal gas in some kind of closed container.
So here are my assumptions.
I assume there are identical molecules and each molecule has mass m.
You say, well, what about air?
Well, air has oxygen, nitrogen and a few other things.
Well, we can generalize this to a gas or the mixture of molecules but my assumption is
we have identical molecules and each has mass m.
There is no internal structure or size to these molecules.
They aren't extended, they aren't carbon dioxide with two oxygens and one carbon or
water vapor or H2 with two Hs.
That assumption we're going to relax by the end of this lecture.
It turns out not to be essential to the idealness of the gas but I'm going to start out with
that assumption.
Crucial assumptions of the ideal gas.
These molecules do not interact by any kind of long range forces.
There are no long range interactions at a distance that these molecules undergo.
They do not attract each other at a distance.
They do not repel each other at a distance.
If those assumptions are violated then the gas does not behave ideally and to some extent
all gases violate these assumptions slightly but the violation is very small for gases
whose molecules are far apart which is why typical diffuse gases we deal with in everyday
life like fierce atmosphere under normal atmospheric conditions behave almost ideally.
No long range interaction forces.
The only time the molecules interact is if they collide and they collide like point-like
billiard balls and go bouncing off although I'm even going to assume there aren't any
collisions but that's not an essential essential assumption it'll just make the math a little
bit easier.
And I'm going to assume and this is generally true unless there's a really weird situation
that sets up some preferred direction in the system.
The molecules have a random distribution of velocities and it's random in both direction
and speed although the distribution of speeds although it's random has got a pattern to
it which we'll look at later.
But a molecule is equally likely to be going this way or this way or this way.
You say wait a minute isn't it more likely to be going down because of gravity?
Well gravity is so weak and molecules are moving so fast at typical temperatures that
that's not an issue.
You know you might imagine some place like in the atmosphere of a neutron star with its
enormous immense gravity where in fact there was a preferred direction of downward and
you'd have to work out a different theory.
But for the ideal gas in a situation like Earth's atmosphere with Earth's gravity the
distribution of speeds is random.
There are other places where it's not random for example if you have an ionized gas which
has its electron separated from its protons and you put it in what's called a magnetic
field we'll get to that in the next section of the course it might have a preferred direction
of its speeds.
But I'm assuming and this is true for ideal gases like the Earth's atmosphere that there's
a random distribution of velocities in direction.
And here's another one right out of Newtonian mechanics, right out of the section on mechanics
the collisions with the container walls are elastic.
And remember that an elastic collision is a collision that conserves kinetic energy.
So when a molecule barrels into the wall of the container it bounces back with the same
energy it had going in it doesn't give any of its energy to the wall.
And of course that's not perfectly true but on average it is quite well satisfied.
So let's now move on and look with our math alert in mind at the ideal gas.
So here we go with the theory of the ideal gas.
What we're going to assume is we have a rectangular box containing a number of molecules there
are those identical molecules that are moving about with random speeds and random directions
within the box.
So I've indicated the molecules by little spheres I've indicated their velocities by
little arrows they're moving about at random in that box and there are n of them.
Capital N that's how many molecules there are and the end of the box here has a surface
area A and the box has a length L and I'm going to call this the x direction and then
that's the y direction and that's the z direction but I'm really only going to care about the
x direction because I'm going to generalize to the other two.
So there's what we've got a box of molecules they're far apart and they don't tend to interact
they collide with the walls of the container when they hit it and they bounce off with
the same energy they went in with the ideal gas.
Let's focus on just one molecule which I will call molecule number i the ith molecule and
I'll distinguish that molecule from all the others by using the subscript i.
It has mass m our assumption was that all the molecules had the same mass so the ith
molecule has mass m and it has an x component of its velocity which is v sub x the component
of its velocity along the x direction it may have a y component a z component I'm only
concerned about the x component for now and it's the x i because it's the x component
of the ith molecule's velocity the jth molecule or the fifty first molecule or the four thousand
three hundred and eighty third molecule may have a different component of its velocity
in the x direction this is what the ith molecule has the ith molecule collides with the right
hand and wall say it has it because it has an x component of its motion so sooner or
later it's going to hit the end of the container in the x direction and when it does it's going
to exert a force and here's a picture showing how that force comes about so here comes the
ith molecule in with some velocity it's not entirely in the x direction but it does have
an x component it's also got a y component it hits the end wall at the maximum x value
in this container and it bounces off at the same angle it came in with by the way it has
to do that to conserve momentum so that's what it does bounces off at the same angle
it came in at and notice that its y velocity which was downward its y component is still
downward that hasn't been changed only the x component of the velocity has been changed
and that means the momentum of the particle has changed how much has it changed well if
the particle simply came in and stuck to the wall it would have lost all its momentum and
it would have gone from m v x i remember momentum is the product of mass and velocity
it would have gone from m v x sub i to zero it would have changed by m v sub x sub i but
no that's not what happens it bounces back its x component of motion reverses it goes
back out at the same velocity it came in with the same x component of velocity the same
y component the x component has changed direction though and that means it's not only given
momentum to the wall it's also gone back and gotten more momentum from the wall in that
collision and so the momentum change is delta p of the ith molecule p standing for momentum
is twice what it had coming in it would have been only one if the molecule had stopped
when it would come bouncing back out again it's gained momentum in the opposite direction
the total change has been twice what its initial momentum was so delta p i is two m v x i that's
the change in momentum for that molecule and we know that when things change their momentum
forces are involved the fundamental statement of newton's second law and here we're tying
all this thermodynamic and gas stuff to fundamental newtonian mechanics newton says force causes
change in momentum the fundamental statement of newton is not f equals ma but f equals
rate of change of momentum so there is a force exerted on the wall you can think about it
several ways clearly the momentum of the particle the molecule has changed that means there's
been a force on the molecule where did the force come from the only place it could from
the wall and by newton's third law if the wall exerted a force on the molecule the molecule
exerts a force back on the wall so we're really using newtonian mechanics here now
let's ask how long after that collision with the wall the molecule returns I don't care
what the molecule is doing whether it's bouncing up and down like this we're going straight
back and forth in the x direction as long as I know the x component of its velocity
that's what determines how long it takes to get from here back to there and that's a
distance l and distance is speed times time so the time involved is distance divided by
speed or l over vx and the question I want to ask is not how long does it take the molecule
to get to the other end of the box but how long after this collision does it take for
the molecule to get back here and that's twice l it's got to go so that time is delta t is
2l over the speed vx sub i so it's going to return to the wall after that much time and
therefore the average force it exerts the average force is going to be fi average with
the bar for average the change in momentum with respect to time the rate of change of
momentum on average now that's not what really happens what really happens is bang it has
a collision and there's a great big change in momentum briefly and then there's nothing
for a while it comes back bang again but remember there are zillions of molecules and they're
all bouncing off all the time and they really only want to know what the average force is
and with so many of them that will average out to a smooth steady force so that's the
force from the ith molecule and we can write that now as delta p 2m vx i divided by the
time delta t and we can do a little algebra on that that comes out the v downstairs in
the denominator becomes a v upstairs here that's mv squared and we got the l and the
2's cancel okay first screen of the math alert so there's our force our average force due
to the ith molecule bouncing back and forth the average force on the surface area a the
average force on the wall due to all n molecules will be the sum of these forces over all the
values of i so I'm going to use the big Greek sigma that means sum and a little i down there
says sum over all the values of i molecule one plus molecule two plus blah blah blah blah
there it is that's the average force on the wall due to all the molecules on that right
hand wall well the mass of all the molecules is the same so each term in that some it's
like you know a times it's like a b plus a c you can factor out the a it's a times b
plus c it's the same thing I can factor out the m because it's the same for all molecules
and certainly the length of the box is the same that doesn't depend on the molecule so
you can factor both those things out so I've got m over l times this sum now the pressure
is defined as the force per unit area as we saw in the lectures on fluids for example
so the pressure is the average force divided by the area so I'll just take the average force
and divide it by the area there's the area and then the area is multiplied by the length l and
that's the volume v of the box it's this area times its length so this becomes the mass divided
by the volume times this sum of all the x components so now there's where we are another
screen of math but we're getting there multiply the right hand side by one I can multiply anything
by one doesn't change it but I multiply it by one in the form n over n where n is the number of
molecules so I've got an n I'm going to put one n on the outside and one n on the inside of that
sum that's fine because n is a constant it just multiplies through that sum that quantity is the
average because it's a bunch of stuff added up and divided by the number of terms it's the average
of the squares of the x components and I'm going to call it v sub x squared average so I'm going
to write this in a more simple form nm v sub x squared average so there's what we've got now
the pressure is the number of molecules the mass divided by the volume by this average
square velocity the molecular motion is random so the average of the x velocities and the y
velocity squared and the z velocity squared has to be the same otherwise we wouldn't have that
random assumption satisfied and if the x and y and z directions are all at right angles which
they are then these velocities add by the Pythagorean theorem so the average square of the entire
velocity the speed squared is vx squared plus vy squared plus vz squared average and consequently
v squared is 3vx squared or 3vy squared average or 3vz squared average because they're all the same
or equivalently vx squared average is a third of the average total speed and I'm going to take
that result and put it in there and then I get pressure is nm over 3vv squared are you really
feeling the math alert now this is heavy but we're almost there and we're going to get a great big
insight in the end so there's where we are the pressure is the number of molecules the mass
divided by three times the velocity times this average squared uh just three times the volume
of times this average squared velocity multiplied by the volume both sides pv that takes out the
v down there makes it pv on the left hey this is beginning to look like the ideal gas law multiply
the right side by one in the form two over two I got two thirds in I got a half mv average squared
look at that you know what that is we dealt with that a lot in mechanics that is the kinetic energy
in this case that's the average kinetic energy so there I am with pv equals two thirds n times this
term which is the average kinetic energy and let's now do a comparison with the ideal gas law
both this theoretical result and the ideal gas law have pv on the left hand side
what's on the rest on the right hand side of the empirical law it's k it's n we got n on both of
these and we got kt and so what we recognize here is that kt the product of that Boltzmann constant
with temperature is two thirds of the average kinetic energy and there's that statement and the huge
insight we get from this is that temperature is a measure of the average molecular kinetic energy
that is the theory of the ideal gas temperature measures the average molecular kinetic energy
a very big powerful result let me leave that result on the screen because it's so big and
powerful and let me do a quick demo that looks at that so over here I have a demonstration
in which I've got a number of little ball bearings and they're going to be agitated by what's actually
a part of a loudspeaker going to vibrate up and down rapidly and I'm going to set those balls into
motion when they're moving relatively slowly they still sort of form a solid layer at the bottom
that's essentially what a solid or liquid would be but now as I increase the amplitude of that
oscillation you see the molecules beginning to bounce all around and eventually they're bouncing
around at random speeds and in random directions and that is simulating a gas and the bigger the
amplitude of that motion the faster those molecules are moving and if I put this little thing in to
present maybe represent say a piston that might be sticking in a cylinder of gas you can see the
pressure that that system is inserting you see the volume increasing and if I push down on this I
can feel the upward force increasing as I push down that's a model for an ideal gas we don't have
10 to the 23 molecules like we'd have in a gas but we've got maybe a hundred or 50 or something
and there's a simulation of what's going on in an ideal gas okay well let's just leave that on
because that's such a powerful result and let's just move on and look at a few other aspects
of ideal gases or maybe not such ideal gases first of all we found that the molecular speeds the
average is three halves kt we can define a kind of average speed from that which defines a so-called
thermal speed the average speed of a molecule under a given conditions for example at air
at room temperature it's about 500 meters per second for the average speed of the molecules
there turns out to be a distribution of speeds called the Maxwell Boltzmann distribution there
are pictures of it for 300 kelvins and 80 kelvins and there is this mean thermal speed it's not
quite the same as the peak but it's pretty close and then there's a high energy tail of faster
molecules and some molecules moving more slowly so when i said there's a random distribution of
molecular speeds but it's got a pattern this is the pattern of those molecular speeds there's a
theorem in thermodynamics which i'm not going to prove but it says this it says if you have any
system in thermodynamic equilibrium the average molecular energy is a half of this quantity kt
and notice now remember k had the units of joules per kelvin so it's really a conversion
between temperature and kinetic and molecular kinetic energy and the rule is there's a half kt
for every degree of freedom what's a degree of freedom it's a way a molecule can take on energy
and in the case of our ideal point particle molecules that were completely structuralist
the only energy they have is the energy of their translational motion from place to place and there
are three degrees of freedom because there are three directions they can move in so we conclude
that the average kinetic energy a half mv squared average is three halves kt which is exactly the
result we got from our lengthy mathematical calculation on the other hand what if we have more
complex molecules what if we relax that assumption that the molecules are structuralist well if we
have something that's monatomic like helium it really is essentially a tiny little structuralist
point and it has those three translational degrees of freedom go to something like oxygen or nitrogen
in addition to translation those molecules can rotate about one of two different axes
and so they have five degrees of freedom and that affects how they can take on energy they get
five halves kt of kinetic energy of energy per molecule and that affects their specific heats
because it affects the amount of energy it takes to give them a certain change in their in their
speeds go to diatomic and they at high temperatures and they begin to undergo vibrations that doesn't
happen at low temperatures for certain quantum mechanical reasons you get three translational
degrees of freedom two rotational one vibrational kinetic energy and one vibrational potential
energy for a total of seven degrees of freedom there and finally you look at triatomic molecules
like water or nitrogen oxide or they get very complicated i didn't put carbon dioxide there
because its molecules are in a straight line and it's a little less complicated so complex molecules
still behave as ideal gases but their specific heats the amount of energy it takes to raise
the gas temperature varies and depends on the structure of the molecule on how many of these
degrees of freedom the molecule can carry the molecule can have the number of ways that energy
can be divided in different modes of motion or potential energy in those molecules and finally
let's move beyond the ideal gas to look at real gases and see how they're different first of all
real molecules occupy space there's molecule b coming toward molecule a and that's the closest
it can get because these molecules occupy space and so there is a circle around molecule a whose
diameter is twice that of molecule a and that volume is excluded to molecule b its center molecule
b center can't get any closer than that distance from molecule a and consequently the volume v
that enters our expressions is actually should be actually a little bit less than the volume of
the container if the molecules are tiny and very far apart compared to their size that
excluded volume is so little we ignore it but as you begin to cool the gas down and it gets
close to the liquefaction point then the molecules get close enough together that that effect comes
in and makes a correction to the ideal gas law real molecules also exert forces on each other
there are weak forces they're attractive they drop off rapidly with distance they have to do
with something we'll talk about in the next section when we talk about electric forces and
electric dipoles and they actually have something to do with what's called the dipole moments of
the molecules and they involve very weak very rapidly dwindling forces that are basically
residues of electrical forces between molecules that although they're neutral have different
distributions of electric charge but the main point for our purposes here is there is associated
a potential energy that means the temperature is no longer strictly a function of molecular
kinetic energy and that is the key to the ideal gas assumption and so as a gas gets more dense and
closer to liquefaction then the assumptions of the ideal gas begin to break down there is an
approximate equation called the van der Waals equation that approximately describes gases
if they don't get too close to liquefying but ultimately they get so close we have to resort
to the whole science of that phase diagram that I introduced in the previous lecture so
the ideal gas law is a beautiful approximation that applies to real gases in the real world to a
very good extent but as you begin to get near the place where you liquefy the gases it breaks down
first in minor ways as I've described here and then in more way major ways but most importantly
the ideal gas gives us this brilliant insight about temperature being a measure of molecular
kinetic energy okay let's wrap up we've done here the kinetic theory of the ideal gas we've
been through a lot of heavy mathematics it's confirmed the empirical observations that pressure
times volume ought to be proportional to the number of molecules and the absolute temperature
it links the macroscopic physics that is the subject of thermodynamics about heat and temperature
with the microscopic physics statistical mechanics newtonian mechanics we use things like elastic
collisions we use things like newton's third law we used a lot of stuff from mechanics to
describe what was happening to these molecules and we showed how the motions of the individual
molecules gave us the ideal gas law we got this brilliant insight the temperature is a measure
of the average molecular kinetic energy half mv squared average is three halves kt for the simple
structuralist ideal gas and then we elaborated looking at the molecular speed distribution
the thermal speed we looked at more complex molecules and we took a brief look at what happened
when the ideal gas assumption breaks down as you go beyond that and toward liquefying a gas
