Welcome to lecture 25, whose big idea is an extension of a principle we saw earlier way
back in lecture 11, the principle of conservation of energy, now into the realm of thermodynamics
as well as mechanics. And we're going to be talking about things we can do to ideal
gases to change their internal energy or affect other changes in them. And we understand the
ideal gases as a very simple system and that's why we're going to work with it. But the ideas
I'm introducing here will apply to any system. So we want to begin looking at the conservation
of energy as we understood it back in lecture 11. In lecture 11 we were talking about the
conservation of mechanical energy, kinetic energy of bulk moving objects, potential energy
when we lift something against gravity, and we found that when only conservative forces
act, forces that give back the energy we put into them, store it as potential energy and
allow us to get that energy back, then the sum of the kinetic and potential energy didn't
change, conservation of mechanical energy. We excluded, we explicitly excluded processes
like for example friction, which involve non-conservative forces, like when I push this book across
the table, the book doesn't come running back at me because that's a non-conservative
force. And we couldn't apply the principle of conservation of mechanical energy when
non-conservative forces were acting. And we know why. What happened is the friction
here generated ultimately what we would have called heat, before we knew what heat really
was, in the tabletop. We lost mechanical energy. But we didn't really lose energy altogether.
We only lost mechanical energy. It changed into another form. What form did it change
into? It changed into the internal energy, itself a form of microscopic energy, of kinetic
energy and perhaps potential energy of molecules moving around. So it just changed into another
form. And we want to express that. So we're going to generalize the principle of conservation
of energy to include internal energy. We're going to give it the symbol U, a little bit
of confusion there because in mechanics we used U for potential energy. Now we're using
it for internal energy. It's also called thermal energy. And we're going to allow non-conservative
forces. So we're going to write a statement of conservation of energy that includes the
effects of non-conservative forces in generating this internal energy, this random energy of
random molecular motion that we used to call heat. And now we know to call internal energy
or thermal energy. And we're going to express that in what's called the first law of thermodynamics.
And what the first law of thermodynamics talks about is the internal energy of a system and
not so much the internal energy but changes in internal energy. And it says there are
basically two ways to change the internal energy of a system. So the left hand side
of the first law of thermodynamics has the change in the system's internal energy. Delta
U, change. On the right side is any heat that may have flowed into the system. And again
let me remind you, heat is energy in transit because of a temperature difference. So one
way to change a system's internal energy is to add heat. Another way is to do work on
the system. By the way, if you've had a course in physics or engineering, you may have seen
the first law written with a minus sign on the W that's commonly done. And that's because
the first law was originated in discussions of engines. And engines tend to take in heat
and give out work. But I think it's more clear and consistent to write delta U equals Q
plus W. And in fact, in my long years of writing textbooks, I've recently made that change
in the sign convention. So you will see it written either way. And I'm going to write
it with a plus sign on both terms. So if those terms are positive, they mean energy has been
added to the system either as a heat flow or as work being done on the system. Let's
look at some examples of how that would work. So over here, I have an obvious situation in
which I want to heat some water in a beaker. So what do I do? I put it on the hot plate.
We discussed the hot plate in the context of energy flows. We know that there's a conductive
energy flow from the hot plate into the water through the bottom of the beaker. And then
there may be convective flows inside there that are heating the water. So that's an obvious
way. That's Q. That is changing the internal energy of the water by adding heat. So Q is
positive. In that case, I'm not doing any work on it. It's just sitting there. On the
other hand, I could pick up the spoon and I could shake very vigorously. And I'd have
to do it for quite a while. And I probably want to insulate this so I don't lose any
energy. But in principle, if I agitated this very violently for a while, doing mechanical
work on it, not flowing heat, the spoon is not any hotter than the water. So I'm not
causing energy to go from the spoon into the water by a process of heat flow because heat
is energy driven by a temperature difference. I'm simply doing mechanical work. And that
mechanical work can also end up as internal energy of the system. So in fact, I could
do both at the same time. And so what the first law of thermodynamics is telling us
is that there are two different ways to change the internal energy of a system. You can add
heat and you can do work. And it doesn't matter what you do. The end result is the same. The
water gets hotter. That's why we don't call what's in the water heat. Because it could
have got there by mechanical work or it could have got there by actually flowing heat. It
could have also got in by sticking it in a microwave oven. And that would qualify actually
as work not heat because that is not random thermal energy that's flowing in in that
case. So two ways. We can add heat, we can do work, and it doesn't matter which one
we do. The end result is the same either way. Now this idea that work and heat are in some
sense equivalent in their ability to change the states of substances, to change their
internal energy, goes back a long ways. And it was James Joule in 1845 who really quantified
that. And I showed you a picture much earlier of Joule's apparatus and how Joule came to
understand thermal energy and heat and work in similar terms and why the unit of energy,
the Joule is named after Joule. But as you can see, it would take a long time and a lot
of stirring to heat up that water as easily as I can do it with my hot plate. So it's
not trivial to establish this so-called mechanical equivalent of heat. Let's look at how Joule
did it. Here's a picture of Joule's apparatus on the left and I showed you that picture
before. It consists of a paddle wheel kind of arrangement that goes into ultimately an
insulated can. And on the right what I didn't show you before is a diagram of the system.
And what happens is strings are wound around that spindle at the top near that crank. The
crank is turned slowly to wind up those strings which have weights on them. That puts potential
energy into those weights, gravitational potential energy, mechanical energy, and then the weights
are let go, they fall, they spin the paddle wheel, and very careful measurements of temperature
show how much the internal energy of the water has increased as measured by the temperature
increase. By the way, Joule tried several other methods. He had viscous fluids flowing
through tiny holes and generating fluid friction and he also tried compressed gases. But this
experiment was the most successful and it established the relationship between the measure
of energy as thermal energy which is the calorie and had been named before people knew that
thermal energy was a form of energy and what's now called the SI system of energy, the SI
system's unit of energy which is the Joule. So it established that relationship. So there
is Joule's experiment and what we want to do in the rest of this lecture is look at examples
where we do work on systems or we flow heat into them and we understand what happens. And
again the system we're going to use is the ideal gas because as we saw the ideal gas
is very, very simple and in particular the ideal gas is simple because its internal energy
and its temperature are directly related because there's no interaction between the molecules
and so they have kinetic energy and that kinetic energy, that random kinetic energy is a direct
measure of the temperature. We got that wonderful insight about temperature and kinetic energy.
So let's look at a particular ideal gas system. If you study thermodynamics at all you will
see the system over and over and over again ad nauseam because it's a very simple system
for understanding what happens in an ideal gas. I have an example of the system over
here. It consists of a cylinder, a piston that is free to move up and down in that cylinder.
I can therefore change the volume of the gas in the cylinder. I could flow heat into it.
I can apply pressure to it. I can make all kinds of changes in the volume, the temperature
and the pressure of that gas. This particular system has some ways to get additional gas
in also and in the ideal situation that I'm going to be discussing I'm going to imagine
instead of this nice transparent cylinder I've got a cylinder that is thermally insulated
on all the sides and the piston is also insulated so heat can't flow in and out but the bottom
may or may not be insulated so that we can let heat flow in or out of the system or we
can prevent heat flow as we wish. So that's the kind of physical manifestation of what
I'm going to talk about and what I'm showing here in this picture. The ideal gas system
I've got in this insulated cylinder. I've got an ideal gas in the cylinder and it has
some volume, some pressure and some temperature and I can change those by flowing heat in,
by moving the piston and doing work, by letting the piston rise and the gas does work. I can
do all kinds of things. I'm going to describe these things I do, these processes in what's
called a PV diagram. A diagram in which I have volume on the horizontal axis and pressure
on the vertical axis and I imagine starting at some pressure I'll call P sub 1 and some
volume V sub 1 and there will be some temperature T sub 1 and given the number N of molecules
in there the ideal gas law PV equals NKT would tell me what the temperature is so any two
of those quantities fix the third one. So I'm at some temperature P1, V1 and T1 and
maybe there's some final temperature P2, V2, T2 here the pressure is lower, the volume
is bigger, I don't know whether the temperature is higher or lower, I'd have to calculate
that and there might be some process I do, something I do that gradually changes pressure
and volume and moves that gas sample to a different place in its PV diagram and if I
do that relatively slowly the entire gas will stay in equilibrium and it will have a well
defined temperature and I can think of the gas as going through a sequence of states in
that PV diagram. If I do that slowly enough by the way there's nothing that would keep
me from going back through that same sequence of states and such a process is called a reversible
process, it's a process that occurs slowly enough that you could reverse it and that
plays an important role in more advanced treatments of thermodynamics. Now I've drawn one path
here that I might take in the PV diagram but I could take another path, I could start out
with a nearly constant pressure and then drop it more quickly and end up at the same final
point or I could take that path. Now once I'm at one of those points, the starting point,
the final point, any point in between, the state of the gas is completely characterized
by its pressure, its volume and its temperature regardless of how it got into that state and
yet what happens in going through those different paths may be quite different and we want to
explore that in more detail. So let's look at the work that gets done by the gas as we
play with the piston in one of these piston cylinder systems. And this has really practical
applications. Engines are basically devices, gasoline engines, other kinds of engines are
devices in which pistons and cylinders, pistons are going up and down and cylinders and work
is being done and so on. So this has a lot of practical stuff to do with engines, also
has a lot to do with meteorology as we'll see at the end of the lecture. So let's look
at an example here of work done by a gas. From lecture 11 we know that work is force
times distance and we saw how that led to the situation where if we had a varying force,
a force that varied with position, the work was the area under the force position curve.
So let's apply that now in our thermodynamic system. So here's our piston, the piston has
some area A, there's some pressure of the gas P and pressure is force per area, so the
gas exerts a force P times A on the piston. Let's let the piston rise. Let's let it rise
a distance delta x. Well work is force times distance. So this is the work done by the
gas, the force the gas is exerting times the distance it's moved. That's P A, the force
times delta x, which I can also write as P times A delta x. But what's A delta x? A
delta x is just the volume change. The piston was down here, now it's up here, the gas has
expanded into this area or this region and that's an additional volume A delta x and
so the gas's volume has changed by an amount delta v. So the work done by the gas in this
simple case and I'm assuming it didn't move very far and so the pressure stayed constant
is P delta v. If the pressure didn't stay constant then I would look at the area under
the PV curve analogously to the way I looked at the area under the force position curve
and that area, it would be the work done by the gas, it would be the area under the PV
curve. Now that's the work done by the gas. What I put in the first law of thermodynamics
was the work done on the gas and that is the same thing but with a negative sign. So the
work done by the work done on the gas is minus P delta v. So that is how we figure out the
work done and I haven't said anything about the particular nature of the process. It could
have been any path and that still would have been true but for example a path that went
like this there would have been more work involved because the area would have been bigger.
So that's the work done by the gas in any sort of thermodynamic process. Let's take a look
now at some specific processes that are actually important in a number of situations and they're
going to be important soon in our understanding of how engines work in particular. So let's
look first at one of the simplest kinds of process, a so-called isothermal process. Isothermal
means the temperature is the same. So an isothermal process is one that occurs at a constant temperature.
How would you make an isothermal process occur? Well you'd put your gas sample and again I'm
talking about ideal gases because they're easier to think about. You'd put that ideal
gas in contact with what I call a heat reservoir. Something that is maintained at a fixed temperature
tea no matter what happens. It could be something like my hot plate. It could be a huge volume
of water, so much water that when you put something else in contact with it the energy
that flows out of it doesn't change the water's temperature significantly. Remember water has
a very high specific heat so it's hard to change its temperature. You have to flow a lot of energy.
So I don't really care how we do it. I'm going to picture it like this with the heat reservoir.
Imagine to be a great big volume of water or some other substance that just maintains a fixed
temperature tea. Remember the bottom of my piston cylinder system might or might not be
insulated if it isn't. I've got these two things in thermal contact and at least if processes
occur slowly enough the temperature of that gas will always be the temperature of the reservoir.
It won't be able to change. So what does the first law say for an isothermal process? The first
law always says the change in internal energy is Q plus W. In an ideal gas the internal energy is
proportional to the temperature. That's the beautiful thing about an ideal gas and since the
temperature isn't changing neither is the internal energy and therefore delta U is zero for an
isothermal process in an ideal gas and the first law becomes simply then Q plus W equals zero or
Q equals minus W. What does that mean? It means for example if heat flows into this system so Q
is positive then W will have to be negative and the system will do work on its surroundings and it
will take that heat energy and what will happen is the gas as heat flows into it will expand and
it will push up on the piston and it will do work. In other words negative work will have been done on
the gas. On the other hand if I do work on the gas by say pushing down on the piston so I do positive
work on the gas that says the heat flow into the gas will be negative. In other words heat will flow
out of the gas and into the reservoir. Why is all this happening? Because I'm fixing the temperature,
I'm not letting the internal energy of the gas change because the temperature is fixed and the
internal energy is basically a measure of temperature. So that's an isothermal process. We can look at
the work done in an isothermal process by taking the ideal gas law, PV is NKT, T is constant so P
then becomes proportional to one over V and so I have a sort of hyperbolic path in the PV diagram
and if you remember from high school math if you took an algebra 2 or pre-calculus, you don't
quite need calculus for this, you define the natural logarithm function as the area under a
hyperbolic curve, a one over X curve and so we have that same kind of curve and so it's not
surprising without working out the details that the work done on this gas is something that depends
on the amount of gas and the temperature T and then it depends on the logarithm of the ratio of
the initial to final volume and if you work out whether that logarithm is positive or negative
depending on whether V1 is bigger or smaller than V2, it works either way. You can either go from
that upper state P1 V1 to P2 V2 or you can reverse them and go put P1 V1 down at the lower right
and go up that curve and this gives you the work done on the gas either way. If that number comes
out positive, work is actually done on the gas. If it comes out negative, work is done by the gas.
So that's one important process. Another important process is the so-called adiabatic process. In an
adiabatic process there's no heat flow, that's the definition of adiabatic, it means no heat is
allowed to flow into or out of the system. You can achieve it by insulating the system from its
surroundings or you can achieve it, so there it is, I put an insulation on the bottom of my piston
cylinder system or you could achieve an adiabatic process by making a process occur very fast so
there's no time for heat to flow out, so you can do it rapidly also. Calculus shows and I'm not
going to prove this that P times volume to some constant which is characteristic of a given gas
is a constant in this case. The first law for an adiabatic process, well the first law reads change
in internal energy is Q plus W but there's no change in internal energy in an adiabatic process
and so Q is zero and that immediately tells us that delta U is W. If you do work on the system,
the internal energy and therefore the temperature if it's an ideal gas goes up. If you look at
adiabatic and isothermal processes there's an interesting distinction and I'm going to look at
the process particularly of expansion. Isothermal there's no temperature change, no change in
internal energy, adiabatic there's no heat flow. Work may be done at the expense of internal energy
if a gas expands adiabatically, it does work on its surroundings and its internal energy and
therefore its temperature drop and so if we look at a picture starting from the same point in the
upper left of this diagram, an isothermal process takes us down this hyperbola, an adiabatic process
takes us down a steeper curve because the temperature in that case has to drop. Well let's do a real
practical example of this. Let's look at something definitely practical, a diesel engine. A diesel
engine is different from a gasoline engine and it has no spark plugs and the diesel fuel is ignited
or the mixture of fuel and air is actually ignited by the rising temperature associated with a
compression that occurs so rapidly that it's essentially adiabatic there's no time for heat to
flow in or out significantly and a diesel engine might have what's called a compression ratio of
about 11 to 1. That's the ratio of the volume, maximum volume in the cylinder when the piston is at
the bottom to the minimum when it's at the top and this gamma happens to be 1.4 for air and that
has to do with the molecular structure of air as basically diatomic molecules and the question is
what's the maximum pressure in this cylinder when it's compressed like that? P1 it starts out at one
atmosphere as we suck air into the engine. The initial volume is V1 whatever that is there it is.
The final volume is V2 that's the compressed volume and that is V1 divided by 11. We want the
pressure P2 we want the pressure here when we're in the minimum state so here's our equation which I
didn't derive but motivated for adiabatic expansion or compression P times V to the gamma this factor
1.4 is constant and that's equal to P1 times V1 to the gamma because that's true anywhere in the
process it's also equal to P2 times V2 to the gamma but V2 this minimum volume is V1 divided by 11
because that's the compression ratio so I'm going to stick that in for V2 I'm going to solve for P2
P2 is P1 V1 divided by V1 over 11 to the gamma and that's a V1 to the gamma downstairs and that's a
V1 to the gamma upstairs and they cancel so it's P1 times 11 to the 1.4 power and that comes out to
be 29 atmospheres that's a big high pressure it takes that kind of high pressure to compress the air
in the cylinder enough so it will actually ignite the fuel that's by the way why diesel engines have
to be very rugged they're big heavy engines and they're typically used in trucks and buses they are
used in cars too and about 50% of cars in Europe are diesels but diesel engines have to be built
more ruggedly than gasoline engines because they have to have this higher compression you wouldn't
want this in a gas engine because the mixture would ignite when you didn't want it to let's do a
demonstration that shows this process of compression ignition so over here I have a another piston
cylinder system and you might think that's the cylinder but that's actually just a safety cylinder
inside there's a thinner cylinder of glass heavy rugged glass and at the bottom of it I've put a
small wad of tissue paper and I'm going to compress that gas adiabatically and I'm going to ensure
that the compression is adiabatic by doing it so fast that there won't be time for heat to flow
in and out I could do it slowly if I did it very very slowly heat would have time to flow in and
out of that gas and I'd have an isothermal process and the gas would stay at the same temperature
but I'm not going to do it isothermally I'm going to do it so fast that it is an adiabatic process
so watch carefully at the bottom there's a little wad of it's actually just a piece of white tissue
paper ignition and you can see the smoke filling the cylinder temperature had to go up pretty high
to light that little piece of tissue paper adiabatic compression occurs when no heat is allowed to
flow in or out in this case none of the heat or none of the internal energy that developed as a
result of the work I did on it when I compressed the cylinder was able to flow out as heat it simply
didn't have enough time before the temperature got high enough to do the ignition so those are two
examples the diesel engine and this ignition system that are sort of technological instances
let's look at a couple now of natural occurrences where we worry about adiabatic compression and
expansion in earth's atmosphere normally it gets cooler as you go up you climb a mountain it gets
cooler you fly up in an airplane and the temperature outside the airplane is very cold the reason for
that is because the atmosphere is basically transparent sunlight comes through the atmosphere
heats the surface of the earth and then the atmosphere is heated from the surface by conduction
and convection and latent heat coming up so the atmosphere normally cools as you go up and there's
some rate at which it cools so I've got a graph here that shows temperature on the horizontal
axis altitude on the vertical axis temperature is decreasing with altitude the rate of decrease
is called the lapse rate and it varies with meteorological conditions so normally that's the
situation now imagine some air that gets heated near the surface of the earth maybe you've got a
parking lot with its black pavement absorbing a lot of extra sunlight or maybe you've got a
a smokestack and and heated air is coming out of the smokestack in any event that heated air is
hotter and therefore less dense than its surroundings and therefore it's buoyant it's
going to rise as as we saw in lecture 19 buoyancy forces cause something that's less dense to rise
so it rises and the question is what happens after it rises well here is a picture of the
rising air the rising air expands because it's rising into air that is also less dense and in
expanding it does work pushing against the pressure of the surrounding air and it's this parcel of
air is pretty big and air is a pretty lousy conductor of heat there isn't much heat flow out
through the contact between that rising parcel of warm air and its surroundings and consequently
we can think of that as an adiabatic process and therefore no heat is flowing out therefore a
very little heat is flowing out and therefore the gas expands and it does work against the
surrounding air and so its temperature drops it cools adiabatically and there are two possibilities
does it cool more slowly than the temperature drops in the surrounding air in that case it
continues to rise and that's called an unstable atmosphere that's conditions on a typical nice
beautiful clear day any parcel there that starts rising continues to rise upward because it's always
warmer than its surroundings but another possibility is if the temperature rise in the atmosphere is
more gradual or sometimes a condition called an inversion it's actually reversed and the
atmosphere gets warmer as you go up but it doesn't have to get warmer it just has to get cooler at
a slower rate than a rising parcel of air would cool and when that happens we have a stable
atmosphere and the rising parcel eventually reaches a point where it's in equilibrium with
surroundings and it can't rise any farther and that's what gives rise to dangerous smog conditions
here's a picture of the two conditions we see an unstable atmosphere a clear day this is the
city of toronto viewed from across the lake and we see a situation where the atmosphere is stable
and the smog is trapped in the famous smogs of los angeles for instance are caused by conditions
of inversion or conditions where the temperature rise with altitude is slow enough that parcels
of rising air eventually reach equilibrium as they cool adiabatically and they're stabilized
and then you can't get rid of the smog and everything else in the atmosphere there's one
example here's another example if you live near the rocky mountains for example live in a place
like denver you get these shinook winds shinook is a native american word that means snow eater
and these shinook winds occur when cool air high in the mountains falls becomes more it's
more dense and it falls toward the plane and as it falls downward it heats up adiabatically it's
now adiabatically compressed it heats up and by the time it reaches the ground level the level
of say denver after coming down from 10 12 000 foot mountains it is much much much warmer and those
are the warm warm shinook winds and if you do the challenge at the end of this lecture you can do
some calculations about the shinook winds so there's another meteorological example okay well
let's summarize lecture 25 we've seen basically a generalization of the principle of conservation
of energy called the first law of thermodynamics that talks about the two ways of changing the
internal energy of a system by doing work or flowing heat thermodynamic processes are described by
these paths in the pv diagram there are many many thermodynamic processes but two really important
ones are isothermal processes that occur at constant temperature p times v is a constant in
that case or adiabatic processes that occur in the absence of heat flow and for them p times v to
some exponent called the adiabatic exponent gamma is a constant and we've seen several examples of
how that works and if you would like to be done you're done but if you would like to get challenged
let's look at a challenge i'd like you to derive a relationship between pressure and temperature in
an adiabatic process we had a relationship between pressure and volume now i'd like you to
derive a relationship between temperature and pressure pressure and temperature and find first
of all the maximum cylinder temperature in that diesel example assuming the air started at 20 degrees
Celsius and the temperature on the plane in the shinook example let's assume a temperature of minus
five Celsius up in the mountains and 60 kilopascals low pressure up in the high mountains and a pressure
of 90 kilopascals on the plane and we want to know what the temperature is down on the plane
these problems look very different but they're basically the same problem
so here's the solution to the challenge problem first we're going to solve the ideal gas law for
the volume v ideal gas law says p v is n k t we're going to substitute that into the adiabatic
relationship p v to the gamma equals constant we're going to substitute the algebraic solution
for v and we get p to the one minus gamma times t to the gamma equals constant i'm not going to
go through the algebra you'll have done that if you've solved the problem you're given both p and t
at one point p and t up in the mountains p and t in the cylinder when it's at its maximum volume
and you're given p at the other point so all you need to do is solve this relationship
for t at the second point and do the numbers in both cases we're dealing with air and air has this
adiabatic exponent gamma of 1.4 you do it for the diesel engine you find a maximum temperature of
765 kelvins again all this needs to be done in absolute temperature that's about 492 celsius
you do it for the shinook winds and you find the temperature on the plane same thing is happening
adiabatic compression is about 301 kelvins or 28 degrees celsius
