Welcome to lecture 27 in which I'm going to talk about the consequences the second law
of thermodynamics has for technologies that we use to try to extract energy in particular.
It's pretty clear from last lecture that we can't convert random thermal energy, the random
motion of molecules that you used to call heat, directly into mechanical energy with
100% efficiency.
The example of the block, the movie of the block sliding along the table losing its
directed kinetic energy to the internal energy associated with random molecular motion, the
impossibility of playing that movie in reverse, the impossibility of having all that random
motion turn into directed motion, the sheer improbability of it rather than absolute impossibility
is an illustration of this fact.
Nevertheless, we run a lot of our world on so-called heat engines, devices that do extract
energy from hot things, burning gasoline, burning oil, burning coal, fissioning uranium.
You name it, we have heat engines that extract energy from hot things and convert it into
mechanical energy.
The second law of thermodynamics says they can't do that with 100% efficiency, but we
can do it.
So we want to look in this lecture at what the second law says more precisely about our
ability to extract energy from sources that are basically hot, our ability to convert
thermal energy into useful work.
We already know we can't do that with 100% efficiency.
How well can we do?
So let's begin with another statement of the second law of thermodynamics.
This is a statement attributed to Kelvin and Planck, both names that are well known in
physics, Kelvin for whom the Kelvin is named, the temperature unit Planck of Planck's constant.
And their statement of the second law says this, it is impossible to build a heat engine
operating in a cycle that extracts heat from a reservoir, a source of thermal energy, and
delivers an equal amount of work equal to the amount of heat extracted.
It's important to recognize the word in a cycle here.
You can briefly extract energy from heat and turn it all into work.
You could do that with a process of isothermal expansion that we talked about earlier in
which a gas expands and it pushes against a piston and does work.
But if you want it to keep pushing against that piston to repeat the process, you've
got to go back and cool it back down and do things in a cycle, and that is where it becomes
impossible to extract heat from a reservoir and deliver an equal amount of work.
So that statement, although it doesn't look it, is equivalent to the statement or it's
a more restricted version of the statement that entropy must increase.
The second law in heat engines.
So what that says is, here's a picture of what would be a perfect heat engine.
And I'm drawing here conceptual diagrams of engines.
They aren't pictures of actual engines and the mechanisms that work inside them.
They're simply conceptual energy flow diagrams.
So here at the top I show a heat reservoir.
I put it at the top because later I'm going to put a cool one at the bottom.
And I show a flow of heat coming out of the reservoir, turning the corner, and emerging
as useful work.
And the thickness of that arrow represents the flow of energy.
And in this case, the amount of heat extracted and the amount of work that is delivered are
the same.
That's a perfect heat engine.
And that's what the Kelvin Planck statement is saying is impossible.
Instead, a real heat engine looks like this.
It extracts energy from a hot reservoir.
It delivers some mechanical work.
But of necessity, necessity dictated by the second law of thermodynamics, it has to reject
some energy as a heat flow to a lower temperature reservoir, typically in the case of real engines
like your car engine, the surrounding environment.
That's why your car has a radiator to get rid of that waste heat.
That's why power plants have cooling towers to get rid of that waste heat.
So that's the second law and what it says about heat engines.
A perfect heat engine is impossible.
We want to explore real heat engines in some more detail.
Now, in the 19th century, a young French engineer, Sadie Carnot, who died at age 36 in a cholera
epidemic, unfortunately, worked out the details of a particular engine.
It's called a Carnot engine.
And he was able to talk about the efficiency of the Carnot engine very quantitatively.
Real engines aren't built exactly like Carnot engines, but in principle, they could be.
But their workings are somewhat similar.
They are cyclic.
And one thing about the Carnot engine is it is, in principle, reversible.
It takes its operations take place very slowly.
And we saw, if that happened, systems stayed in thermodynamic equilibrium and you could
reverse the paths in PV diagrams.
So a Carnot engine could be run in reverse.
It could take in work and transfer heat from a cool thing to a hot thing.
You got a name for that.
That's a refrigerator.
We'll get more to that in a minute.
So let's take a look at Carnot's engine.
By the way, Carnot's books and notes were buried with him when he died of cholera because
devoid the spread of the disease.
And so we don't have as much of his work as we'd like to.
But here's the Carnot engine.
The Carnot engine, we're going to describe its operation in the PV diagram.
Conceptually, it looks something like this.
We have a hot reservoir and a cold reservoir.
We have some mechanism for extracting work from the hot reservoir, namely a piston cylinder
system.
In this case, the piston cylinder system is connected by a crankshaft to a wheel that
it can turn and do mechanical work.
So we're going to start out at position A here, state A, in which we're going to take
the piston in its most compressed state.
The gas is most compressed.
There's just a little bit of gas in there.
And we're going to take that cylinder in that state and we're going to put it in contact
with that hot reservoir.
So the gas is going to expand isothermally as a result of contact with that hot reservoir.
It's going to push on the piston and it's going to do work on whatever we have connected
to that wheel.
So that's the initial state of the Carnot engine.
So what happens?
Well, the gas expands isothermally, a process we discussed before.
It expands isothermally to some state B where the piston has now moved part way out.
And we're now in a situation where we disconnect at that point.
We disconnect the piston from either reservoir and we insulate the bottom of it.
And so we let the motion continue.
We let the expansion continue because of this hot, still somewhat high-pressure gas that
got its energy from the hot reservoir is able to continue expanding, but now it expands
at the expense of its internal energy.
While it was expanding isothermally, it was taking energy from the hot reservoir because
it was in contact with it.
Now we've disconnected and so the process becomes adiabatic expansion, expansion that
occurs in the absence of a heat flow.
So there's the second part of this cycle is adiabatic expansion.
And we let the gas expand and we've designed the engine just right so that when it gets
to point C where the piston is as far out as it can be, it's turned the wheel.
The wheel is still turning, by the way, it's got a little bit of inertia, so it will keep
turning this.
We connect at that point, the gas has got the most volume it can have in this engine.
We connect it to the cold reservoir and then the turning wheel will actually do work on
the piston.
The piston will do work on the gas and the gas will compress and since it's in contact
now with the cold reservoir, the gas will compress isothermally following this kind of path but
going back up.
And so there it goes, isothermal compression occurs, brings us to a state where we are
part way compressed and now we again disconnect the piston cylinder arrangement from the reservoirs
and we let that compression continue adiabatically until we are back to state A. Now notice what
has happened here.
We have extracted work from the system during both the isothermal and adiabatic expansions.
In the adiabatic, in the isothermal case it was coming from the hot reservoir, in the
adiabatic case it was coming at the expense of the gas's internal energy.
But then we had to do these compression stages and during these compression stages we were
doing work on the gas and the gas in the isothermal compression phase was rejecting heat, heat
was flowing out of the gas into the cold reservoir, there was no heat flow in the adiabatic part
but we did have to do some more work on it to get up to there.
So we have done some network on the external world, we have pulled some energy out of the
hot reservoir and used it to make that work but we have also dumped some heat back into
a cold reservoir.
That's the operation of the Carnot engine and it necessarily has to take some of the
energy that was extracted from the hot reservoir and dump it into the cold reservoir.
It did extract some mechanical work.
And I have a quick demonstration here of an engine which is not exactly a Carnot engine
but gives you sort of an idea of what's going on here.
So here I have a piston cylinder system that I've showed you before and it's connected
to another container, just an empty container of air.
The air is connected by a hose and if the air pressure goes up it will push up on that
piston.
And so the first thing I'm going to do is plunge this cylinder into the hot reservoir
and you see the piston moves upward.
And it only moves upward a little bit because now the air has come to equilibrium with the
hot water and nothing else can happen.
I've extracted some energy from the hot water and I have done some mechanical work lifting
up that tennis ball.
If I want to go further I've got to cool that air back down again so it has more opportunity
to expand.
So I have to put it into the cold reservoir here, ice water.
And now it's coming to equilibrium with the ice water.
The reason the piston isn't going back down is because there's a little check valve that
lets air flow only one way.
This is sort of like our crankshaft driving a wheel.
We're not driving a wheel here, we're simply lifting that tennis ball.
So now the air has cooled down again.
I've rejected some of the heat I extracted from the hot reservoir but some has gone into
lifting the ball.
Plunge it back into the hot water and the ball rises some more.
Plunge it into the cold water.
You don't see anything happening but the air is cooling down so that now it can extract
more energy from the hot reservoir and the ball goes up.
Now this is not making a rotary motion but it is nevertheless a cyclic engine because
I have to keep going through this cycle of contact with the cold reservoir, contact with
the hot reservoir, contact with the cold reservoir, this is a ridiculous engine but you can imagine
automating this thing and making it all work and doing more and more mechanical work on
that tennis ball and you get the picture.
Currently I can raise that tennis ball as far as this engine is capable of raising it
which is the height of the cylinder that it has.
So there is a crude heat engine and the important thing about that heat engine is it needed
a hot and cold reservoir and not all the energy I extracted from the hot reservoir ended up
as mechanical work for avatational potential energy of the tennis ball in this case but
some of it did but the rest of it got dumped as waste heat into the cool reservoir and
in fact if the cool reservoir weren't big enough it would gradually heat up and I wouldn't
even be able to run the engine anymore.
That would be the two waters coming to the same temperature and entropy increasing and
the loss of ability to do work.
So let's look some more at the Carnot engine and let's figure out semi-quantitatively how
we can make the Carnot engine efficient or at least how efficient we can make it.
So let's go on and look at the so-called Carnot efficiency of this engine.
This efficiency in any kind of device efficiency is a measure of what we would like that device
to give us energy in the case of an engine versus what we have to put in.
We got to buy the gasoline for our car engine.
We got to buy the oil or the gas that heats our home.
We got to buy the uranium we put in a nuclear power plant or the coal.
What we want out is energy what we put in is money or fuel or more importantly the energy
content of that fuel which we extract by burning or fissioning or doing whatever.
That's how we define efficiency.
By the way, we could define efficiency of things like refrigerators similarly.
We want cooling and what do we have to put in to get it.
So efficiency in general means what we want out of something versus what we had to put
in.
And if something is 100% efficient, you get out exactly as much as you put in, maybe
in a different form.
You get out mechanical energy, you put heat energy in, but that's not possible as we've
seen.
In the engine, we would like to get out mechanical work, good, solid, directed kinetic energy
or the potential energy of my tennis ball.
That's what we want out.
But what do we put in?
We put in the energy we extracted from the hot reservoir and where did we get that energy?
Well, I got it from a tub of hot water, but in practice we get it from burning a fuel.
The boiler in a coal burning power plant, the great huge pressure vessel that holds the
efficient uranium in a nuclear reactor.
The tubes of hot liquid that take concentrated sunlight and heat them up in a solar thermal
power plant.
It doesn't matter what it is, but somehow we're putting in energy from a hot source
in the form of a heat flow and the efficiency is the amount of work we get out divided by
the amount of heat we had to put in.
So here's the picture again, the conceptual picture of our real heat engine.
The hot reservoir, the cold reservoir, which again is typically the environment, heat flowing
out of the hot reservoir, some of it being converted by the mechanism of the engine,
which you saw for that engine, but we haven't really described in detail or we did look
at it diagrammatically for the Carnot engine, and then some heat being rejected to the cold
reservoir.
So the efficiency is the work.
The work is the difference between this energy and this energy flow because what happens is
heat is flowing out, some of it's converted to work, some of it's converted to, some of
it's still heat and is dumped to the cold reservoir, and the heat flow that doesn't
go to the cold reservoir ends up as work.
That's because if the engine operates in a cycle, its internal energy doesn't change
over a whole cycle.
So if you think about the first law that says delta U equals Q plus W, there's no change
in the internal energy, so the net heat, QH minus QC, is the work we get out.
So in my expression for efficiency, instead of W, I put QH minus QC, I do a little bit
of algebra on that.
You can divide the first term through by the QH, you get 1 minus QC over QH for the efficiency
of this engine.
And I'm not going to go through the detailed mathematics, it isn't terribly difficult but
it would take a while.
If you look at the isothermal and adiabatic relationships that I introduced in lecture
25, then you find that ratio of heats is in fact the ratio of the cold temperature to
the hot temperature.
And so the Carnot efficiency, the maximum possible efficiency of Carnot's engine, assuming
there's no friction or other problems like that, the Carnot efficiency is 1 minus the
coldest temperature over the hottest temperature.
So there it is, Carnot engine, Carnot efficiency.
Now let's look at some other situations in thermodynamics, some other practical situations.
Here is something we talked about in the previous lecture.
We talked about taking hot water and cold water, putting them next to each other and
how they would become lukewarm water and we would have had an increase in entropy and
the loss of the ability to do work.
Now you can see where that loss comes from.
The loss of the ability to do work comes from the lack of that temperature difference that
I could use to run a heat engine.
A heat engine requires hot stuff and cold stuff.
It requires a beaker of hot water and cold water to run that engine over there.
I couldn't run that engine if those two waters were at the same temperature.
And if they had the same total amount of internal energy.
Okay, well here we are in the state where we can't run a heat engine.
Entropy has increased and we're in this lukewarm state where we've lost the ability to work.
Here's what would not happen.
We would never see a heat flow from one of the warm things to the other, one of them
cooling and the other getting hotter.
That simply doesn't happen.
That's another thermodynamic impossibility.
Heat doesn't flow spontaneously from cold to hot.
And that is another consequence of the second law of thermodynamics.
And another statement of the second law says it's impossible to build a refrigerator because
that's what a refrigerator is.
You put a lukewarm beer in your refrigerator and the beer gets colder in the refrigerator
and you probably don't notice this but at the back of the refrigerator heat comes out.
That's the heat that was extracted from the beer.
Right, there's some other heat too and what this statement is saying is you can't just
take the heat out of the beer and dump it out the back of the refrigerator.
That won't happen spontaneously.
So here's a perfect refrigerator.
It removes heat from a cool reservoir and transfers it to a warm reservoir, impossible.
What has to happen instead is you also have to do mechanical work.
That's why you have to plug your refrigerator in.
A real refrigerator looks just like an engine in reverse.
In fact, since Carnot's engine is reversible, if I run it in reverse, as I said earlier,
and put mechanical work in, it would move heat from the cool reservoir to the hot reservoir.
But again, I would have to do mechanical work to make that happen.
So here's a statement of the second law, the clausia statement.
It's about refrigerators.
It says it's impossible to build a perfect refrigerator just like the Kelvin Planck statement
said it was impossible to build a perfect engine.
And by the way, I'm not going to have time to go through this but you can prove that
if one of these statements is false, the other one has to be false also.
So in a sense, they are equivalent ways of stating the second law of thermodynamics
or their consequences of each other.
So that's the second law of thermodynamics expressed in two ways.
One about refrigerators, one about engines.
And now we're going to put them together and I'm going to prove a theorem called Carnot's
theorem.
Carnot's theorem is really important because it says, so what good is all this?
I showed you what the efficiency of a Carnot engine is and how it requires a high temperature
and cold temperature and the efficiency can't be any better than the 1 minus that ratio.
But surely there's a clever engineer who can build a better engine than a Carnot engine.
So we don't have to worry about that.
There is no such engineer because there is no engine that's better than a Carnot engine.
And that's what Carnot's theorem says.
It says you can never build an engine whose efficiency is better than the Carnot engine.
Not because you're not smart enough.
Not because you don't have a good enough machine shop.
Not because you haven't invented the right thing because it is physically impossible.
It is thermodynamically impossible to build a better engine.
So let's look at Carnot's theorem.
Carnot's theorem says no engine can be more efficient than a Carnot engine whose efficiency
we know.
Now a Carnot engine is in principle reversible so you can run it as a refrigerator.
And let's suppose that we have a Carnot engine whose efficiency happens to be 60%.
That's determined by 1 minus that ratio of the cold temperature over the hot temperature.
And so that is the Carnot engine's efficiency.
We picked the temperatures to make that be the case.
What about the better engine?
Well let's suppose just for a sake of argument we've got a better engine whose efficiency
is 70%.
So here's the better engine in one of our conceptual diagrams.
It's got a hot reservoir.
It extracts say 100 joules of energy from the hot reservoir.
It delivers 70 joules of useful work because it is a 70% efficient engine.
And the rest of the energy it extracts from the hot reservoir is rejected as waste heat.
That's 30 joules.
The better engine.
Now let's connect that to a Carnot engine running between the same two reservoirs.
And let's run the Carnot engine in reverse.
So the Carnot engine is running as a refrigerator.
That's accepting mechanical work from the better engine.
And because the Carnot engine has 60% efficiency, it takes 60 joules of work in.
It pulls another 40 joules from the low temperature reservoir.
It's functioning as a refrigerator and it dumps 100 joules into the hot reservoir.
So you'll notice we're extracting no net energy from the hot reservoir.
We're putting 30 joules into the cold reservoir and we're pulling 40 joules out of the cold
reservoir and the balance isn't quite right.
There's an extra 10 joules coming out.
It's 10 of the joules of mechanical work that the better engine was doing.
And so if I cut to the chase on all this and wipe out all these flows that don't account
to anything because there's no net energy transfer conceptually, that thing looks like
that.
It looks like a perfect heat engine.
It's extracting 10 joules.
What happens to be from the cold reservoir and delivering 10 joules of mechanical work
and that's impossible according to the Kelvin Planck statement of the second law of thermodynamics.
So Carnot's theorem tells us the very best we can ever do is with a Carnot engine.
No other engine can be any better.
Now real engines are actually worse for several reasons.
One reason is if any process occurs that's irreversible, if the system ever goes out
of thermodynamic equilibrium, like the explosion of the gasoline in the cylinder of a car,
very non-equilibrium situation reduces the efficiency.
If there's any friction, the piston's going up and down in the cylinder, that's why you
put oil in your car and check your oil to lubricate that, but it's still not perfectly
frictionless and you lose energy there.
So any processes that are reversible, processes like friction, processes that result in thermodynamic
disequilibrium, lower the efficiency.
So when I talk about the Carnot efficiency, that is an absolute maximum limit.
In principle we could get arbitrarily close to it, in practice we don't do very well.
It's an upper bound, it's not the actual efficiency of any real engine.
By the way, another problem is if you don't maintain a fixed temperature at the hot and
cold reservoir, then the Carnot efficiency involves some kind of average temperature
and you may be getting hotter temperatures than you need.
Let's look at what Carnot's theorem says about a really practical case and that is
the efficiencies of thermal power plants.
Power plants that produce electrical energy by heating, heated substances either by burning
typically fossil fuels, coal or natural gas, most likely, rarely oil, or fissioning uranium.
Power plants tend to have these enormous cooling towers, you may think of them as something
that nuclear power plants have, this happens to be a nuclear plant, I can tell by its reactor
and its relatively small smokestack, but it could equally well be a coal-fired power plant.
They both need cooling towers and what the cooling towers are doing is getting rid of
that waste heat that the second law of thermodynamics mandates.
The maximum temperature in a typical coal-fired power plant, and this is set by the materials
we make the boiler of, and the boiler in a coal pipe is pipes, they're heavy duty pipes
that get high pressure in them, but they're small and they run through the region where
the coal is burning, and limitations in those materials set about 650 kelvins as the maximum
temperature.
In a nuclear plant, at least the kind used in most of the world and particularly in the
United States, the entire reactors contain an enormous pressure vessel, kind of like
a pressure cooker, and that is harder to make that really thick, and so that limits the
temperature in nuclear plants.
The minimum temperature is typically at or a little above the temperature of the environment
about 310K maybe.
So the thermodynamic efficiency limits, 1 minus TC over TH, gives us a maximum of about
52% for the coal plant and about 46% for the nuclear plant.
Now again, that is an upper limit.
The actual efficiency of operating sort of old generation ones that aren't being built
right today, but were built 10, 20 years ago, coal plants is in the low to mid 30s.
The average efficiency of most nuclear plants is also in the low to mid 30s, but a little
bit lower.
I like to use 33% as a rough number for them because what that means is every time we generate
electricity in a power plant, we throw away two thirds of the energy we use.
Actually efficiency is 30, 40%.
We can do a little bit better with what's called a combined cycle.
I won't spend a lot of time on this, but this is a system where we run a so-called
gas turbine like a jet engine.
It operates at very high temperatures, but it exhausts its energy at high temperatures,
its waste heat.
And so that's kind of useless, but then that waste heat is used in these combined cycle
systems to run a conventional steam turbine.
And these can have actually considerably higher efficiency.
So if you hear about somebody building a combined cycle power plant, either a coal gasification
one or more likely one running on natural gas, it's not cheating the second law of thermodynamics.
It's not getting around it, but it's being clever in the way it uses it, and ultimately
it's working at a higher high temperature, and that's what's making it a more efficient
power plant, but it has to have this combined cycle to do that.
Finally, let me end with a more general abstract topic.
I'm going to give you a choice.
Suppose I offered you 200,000 joules of energy, and you could have it in one of the following
three forms.
You could have a two-ton car moving at 30 miles an hour along a horizontal road.
If you do the calculation a half MV squared, you'll find that's about 200,000 joules of
energy.
You could have a teaspoon of gasoline, which contains about 200,000 joules of energy.
That's how much energy could be released if you burned it.
Or you could have a gallon jug of water at 30 degrees Celsius in a room at 20 degrees
Celsius.
There's more internal energy in the water than there is in water at 20 degrees C by 200,000
joules.
Which of those would you rather have?
Think about it a minute.
I'd rather have the car.
The reason I'd rather have the car is because the car has that directed, non-random kinetic
energy.
If I had the gasoline, I could burn it, and I could burn it at pretty high temperatures,
and so I could make a pretty efficient heat engine that would extract that energy, but
it wouldn't be 100% efficient.
With that jug of water, if I ran a heat engine between 30 degrees Celsius, that's 303 Kelvin,
and 20 degrees Celsius, that's 293 Kelvin, that difference is so negligible, it would
have very, very low efficiency.
What this brings us to is the idea that energy has not just quantity, but quality.
Energy is associated with low temperatures, at least low compared to their surroundings,
not much higher than their surroundings.
Are situations of high entropy and low energy quality.
Higher temperatures relative to their surroundings have higher energy quality because I can run
a more efficient heat engine.
The absolute highest quality of energy is mechanical energy or electrical energy, those
are equivalent, and those you can convert to any form with 100% efficiency.
Give me 200 kilojoules of electricity, or give me this car, and I can convert that energy
to heat.
A dumb thing to do with it, but I could, but I can convert it to any other form of energy.
Thermal energy, you can't do that with, so there is this sense of energy quality increasing
as you go from low temperatures relative to your surroundings to high temperatures, and
finally being perfect, 100% efficient conversion possible if you have mechanical energy or
electricity, and going the other way, going down that quality scale from highest quality
to lowest, is a matter of increasing entropy.
Let me ask you a more practical question based on this idea of energy quality.
Here are two water heaters, one operated by gas, which is burned right there in the heater,
and one operated by electricity.
Both are widely used kinds of water heaters, and I don't want to bad mouth you if you've
got the wrong one, but one of these is much better in terms of using energy smartly in
terms of energy quality.
Which one?
Well, what a water heater does is produce relatively low temperature water, 120 degrees
Fahrenheit or something.
That is not very high quality energy.
In a gas heater, you burn the gas, and gas heaters, modern gas heaters can be like 80
or 90% efficient, even more, over 90% efficient.
They convert most of the thermal energy that's extracted and burning the gas to heat in the
water, and there's nothing that violates thermodynamics in that.
Thermodynamics is about the inability to extract useful work.
So the gas heater is about, say, 90% efficient.
The electric heater is 100% efficient at converting high quality electrical energy into heat.
But how did you make the electrical energy?
You made it in a thermal power plant that was only about 33% efficient.
Maybe it was a gas-fired plant, maybe it was 50% efficient.
But the overall process is much less efficient with the electric water heater.
And that's generally true.
High quality forms of energy, like electricity and mechanical energy, it really is kind of
a waste to use them for heating, because you're turning the same amount of energy into energy
of very, very low quality.
So we need to learn better to use energy smartly, and that means matching energy uses to the
quality of the energy source, matching sources to their end uses.
All that two-thirds of the energy we throw away when we generate electric power, we could
actually use that energy.
And in fact, some industries and some cities, particularly in Europe, actually are wired
up or piped up with pipes that use that waste energy as heat, because there's nothing to
prevent you from using it as heat.
You just can't convert it into mechanical energy.
Well, let me end not with my usual summary, but instead with a diagram.
This is a crazy-looking diagram.
It is a diagram of energy flows in the United States on the left-hand side, or all kinds
of sources of energy.
And the flows show where they go throughout our whole economy, very complicated.
But what I want you to focus on is the very end.
In the very end, more than half the energy that box up at the upper right is the rejected
energy.
The box below it, the rectangular box, is the energy we actually use.
We reject more than half of the energy that we consume, mostly by burning fuels and fishing
uranium.
We reject it, and the reason we reject it is the requirements of the second law of thermodynamics.
