Welcome to lecture 28, whose subject is electric charge.
More importantly, welcome to section four of the course.
Section four will occupy us from lecture 28 through lecture 40, and section four's topic
is electromagnetism.
Why are we spending so much of the course on electromagnetism?
Because electromagnetism, as you saw back in lecture seven, is an aspect of one of the
three fundamental forces that make up the universe, that govern all interactions throughout
the universe, and importantly for us human beings, electromagnetism is the force that
dominates on scales from roughly the size of the atomic nucleus up to objects of sort
of the size of ourselves.
Beyond that, gravity begins to become more important.
As I stand here, for example, how come my arms don't fall off because they're being
pulled down after all by the force of gravity?
They don't fall off because electrical forces in my body are holding me together.
Electrical forces bind atoms into molecules, molecules into biological tissues and other
substances that we deal with.
Electromagnetic technology is at the basis of most of what we do from things like giant
motors that run subway trains to the tiny nano-electronic scale objects that are the
memories of our computers, that run our wireless networks, that run our cell phones, our televisions.
Everything these days we deal with is basically based on electromagnetic technology.
So electromagnetism is very important and we're going to be dealing with electromagnetism
again from now until lecture 40.
Let me begin before I get into the subject matter of this particular lecture with a brief
history of electromagnetism and it's going to be very brief.
I'm going to end it in the 19th century, which is where our modern day understanding of
electromagnetism actually pretty much ends in a theoretical way and yet electromagnetism
has become a very, very contemporary topic as I suggested with many of the examples I
just gave you.
So let's begin with a brief history of electromagnetism.
The ancient Greeks knew about electricity, they didn't know about magnetism as much,
but they knew about electricity and they study the substance amber, which is basically a
fossilized kind of pine pitch.
It's a very good electrical insulator and it builds up static electricity easily.
Amber in Greek is electron and that's where the word electricity and electron and all
the words associated with electricity come from.
The Chinese at about the same time also experimented with electromagnetism, but for them it was
magnetism and they developed magnetic compasses.
So electricity and magnetism and humankind's understanding of them go back thousands of
years.
Let's jump forward to about the 18th century, in the 18th century Benjamin Franklin put
forward a model of electricity in which he even envisioned it as a kind of fluid and
he was the first to realize that there were probably two aspects to this fluid or two
kinds of it, what we would call today two different charges, again that will be the
topic of today's lecture.
Joseph Priestley, better known for the discovery of oxygen and a fascinating character in his
own right and Charles Coulomb in France, Joseph Priestley in England, both quantified
the electric force.
They understood how to write an equation that described how the electric force between
two charges behaved.
Galvani and Volta at about the same time developed the first battery, it was 1800 and they studied
electric currents often generated in biological systems at first, famous experiments with
frogs and eggs that you may have heard of.
By the time the 19th century came around people were beginning to understand electricity
and magnetism as related things, Orsted and Ampere in particular determined some of the
relationships between electricity and magnetism, relationships that we'll explore throughout
this lecture.
Michael Faraday discovered the phenomenon of electromagnetic induction of vastly important
phenomenon, we'll have a whole lecture on the discovery and theory of it and another
one on practical applications.
And finally James Clerk Maxwell completed our electromagnetic theory in the 1860s and
classical physics version of electromagnetism became complete at that point and again this
doesn't mean it's ancient history because we still use electromagnetism today and it
still has many surprises to offer us.
So that's a very brief history of electromagnetism.
So let's move now to the subject of this lecture which is one of the most fundamental aspects
of electricity and magnetism, namely electric charge.
So what is electric charge?
Well it's a fundamental property of matter.
What is the nature of this property?
Well it beats me, I can't give you an answer to that question.
The reason I can't give you an answer to that question is it's such a fundamental property,
it's really a basic aspect, it's not like something that you grab a can of electric
charge and you paint it on a particle and you make it into an electron for example.
Electric charge is a fundamental property of some of the most basic particles of matter.
Let me give you an example to show you why it is that I can't tell you what electric
charge is because there's another more familiar property of matter that I also can't tell
you what it is and that's mass.
I don't really know what mass is.
I can come up with all kinds of fancy physics definitions, none of them entirely satisfactory.
The reason I understand mass is because I deal with it in my everyday life, pick up the
massive bowling ball, I heft it, that gives me my gut feel for what mass is.
I don't care about equations, I don't care about force equals mg, I don't care about
maybe it's associated with a number of molecules in here or a number of atoms or something
or the amount of matter or some complicated relativistic definition.
I know mass because I've dealt with it enough in my life.
That bowling ball is more massive than that softball and I understand mass in that sense.
And that's the sense in which I as a physicist understand electric charge.
Electric charge is just a bit less familiar to you probably so you don't feel as familiar
with it as you do with mass.
But electric charge is one of the most truly fundamental properties of matter.
It's not some accessory, it's built right into the heart of some of the most fundamental
particles.
There are two kinds of electric charge as Benjamin Franklin suggested.
They're called positive and negative, neither one is a presence or absence of something
so in a sense those terms are misleading.
On the other hand they're useful mathematically as we'll see.
You know probably that like charges repel and opposite charges attract and in a few minutes
I'll give you a demonstration of that.
Electric charge is a conserved quantity.
If you have a closed region, the total amount of electric charge in that region can never
change and it's even more conserved than mass.
The net charge in a closed region won't change.
The amount of mass in a closed region actually can change.
The number of particles in a closed region can change.
New particles can be created out of matter and particles can out of energy and particles
can annihilate to make energy.
Particles can appear and disappear but electric charge, net electric charge can't.
A positive and negative charge can appear.
That's still zero net charge.
A positive and a negative recharge particle can come together and annihilate.
The matter goes away but there was no charge to begin with so there's still no charge.
The net total amount of charge in a closed region can't change.
Charge finally is quantized.
It comes in discrete little amounts.
It was Robert Millican in 1909 who discovered the fundamental charge.
It's given the symbol E since this is a quantitative course.
We will be using that symbol E for the fundamental charge.
We now know that the fundamental charge is actually a third of E and that's the charge
on the subatomic particles, subatomic particles called quarks that make up the protons and
electrons.
They actually carry charges of one-third and two-thirds E positive or negative.
Electrons carry charges of exactly E or minus E actually and protons carry charges of exactly
plus E even though those particles are dramatically different.
The SI unit of charge, we've been dealing in this course in the international system
of units.
The SI unit is the coulomb.
It's got a fancy definition in terms of forces between current carrying wires and things but
basically I like to think of one coulomb as about 6 times 10 to the 18 elementary charge
is 6 times 10 to the 18 E.
That's a rough figure but that's how I think of charges.
It's a certain number of elementary charges, a big number because elementary charge is
pretty small.
So that's the electric charge.
Now I indicated that light charges repel and opposites attract.
That implies there's a force involved and we being quantitative here would like to quantify
that force.
We'd like to understand how to calculate that force and we'd like to understand how that
force acts between individual charges and maybe even between groups of charges.
Why is that important?
That's important because as I suggested when I said my arms don't fall off because of the
electric force, most of the interactions that occur in our everyday world are interactions
involving fundamentally electric forces.
When DNA replicates the DNA molecules that intertwine in the twisted helix, the molecules,
the little parts of those molecules that get together, electric charge is making that
happen.
When you put your clothes through the washing machine, the properties of the soaps you use
have electric charges on particular ends of molecules and that's what pulls the dirt
out of your clothes.
Electric charge is everywhere so we want to understand how electric charges interact.
We want to understand the electric force quantitatively.
So let's take a look at the electric force and then let's do a little demonstration and
then we'll really get quantitative with it.
The force between two charges, two electric charges, depends not surprisingly on the two
charges.
If you have two objects that are completely uncharged, completely uncharged, I'll emphasize
that, then they don't experience any electric force.
If they have zero net charge, they may or may not experience an electric force depending
on whether that net charge is made up of several positive and negative charges.
We'll get to that shortly.
It also depends on how far apart the two charges are, so the farther apart they are,
the weaker the force and it depends on the inverse square of the distance between them
which should ring a bell because back in lecture 13, we saw that the gravitational force also
depends on the inverse square of the distance between masses and the direction is such that
likes repel and opposites attract.
Let's pause and do a quick demonstration of that.
Over here, I have a couple of aluminized balloons and they are connected by thin wires
to this device here and since I'm going to be using this device several times in the
next few lectures, let me just explain you what it is.
It's called a van de Graaff generator.
It's one of the earliest devices that was actually used to power early particle accelerators
for the study of elementary particles, not use anymore because it can't make high enough
energies for today's studies.
What it consists of, it's basically similar to what happens when you shuffle your feet
on a rug and walk across the floor and touch a doorknob or something else metal and you
get a shock.
What's happening is you're pulling electrons off materials, you're building up a charge
on yourself and you touch something else and charge leaps from you to that metal object
and you feel the tingle of a shock.
This thing works the same way.
It's got a belt inside this transparent plastic tube.
The belt is being driven by a motor and the belt is in contact with some felt cloth.
It pulls electrons off that cloth.
It transfers them up to the top of the belt where some metal brushes near the top of the
belt of the electrons jump to those metal brushes and they're connected to this big
sphere and so the sphere requires an electric charge.
Here I have these two balloons also connected to the top of the sphere, again by conducting
wires and so they are going to acquire a charge also because charge will flow along those
conducting wires.
Let's do a demonstration of that.
I'm going to simply throw a switch to turn that belt on and you see the balloons moving
apart.
Clearly a force involved there and that force is in this case a repulsive force because
the charge on the balloons is the same because they're connected to that sphere.
If I try to push one balloon toward the other, the other balloon goes away because there's
a force and I'd like to understand quantitatively the nature of that force and how it depends
on things like the distance between the balloons, the charge on the balloons and so on.
I'm going to turn this off and just to be on the safe side, I'm going to discharge it
with another electrode that I've connected through the wiring of the building to the
ground.
There it goes and that discharged and now the balloons have come together because there's
no charge.
Let's look further at the nature of this electric charge.
It depends, as we said, on the inverse square of the distance between the charged objects.
The direction is such that opposites attract and likes repel and mathematically the electric
force is described by Coulomb's law.
Here's Coulomb's law, so we'll do one of our anatomies of an equation with Coulomb's
law here.
Take a look at what this law is telling us.
This is named after Coulomb.
I want to emphasize that both Coulomb and Priestley were involved in discovering the
physics behind this.
On the left of the equation, we have the force between two charges which have labeled Q sub
one and Q sub two.
It's negative if the force is attractive, positive if it's repulsive.
There are the two charges.
You can see how we get the attractive and repulsive because two numbers with the same
sign multiply to make a positive.
Two negatives multiplied together are positive, two positives multiplied together are positive.
Positive means the force is repulsive.
A negative and a positive doesn't matter which is which.
Multiply them together and you get a negative number and that indicates the force is attractive.
Finally, the square of the distance between the charges appears at the denominator of
Coulomb's law.
That's Coulomb's law that describes the electric force between charges.
Coulomb's law requires some kind of constant in there.
The force is proportional to the product of the two charges, inversely proportional to
the square of the distance between them.
In the SI system of units, the constant has the value nine times ten to the nine and if
you work it out, it's Newton meter squared per Coulomb squared.
That's what it's got to be to cancel the two Coulomb's, Coulomb's times Coulomb's with
the charges and the meter squared in the denominator and that gives us a force.
I want to emphasize that number, the value of the Coulomb constant in this particular
unit system is an artifact of the human unit systems.
The value of that constant in relation to some other constants is more significant as
I will show you shortly.
Let me do a little comparison here with gravity because we've already dealt with the gravitational
force back in lecture 13 and there's some similarities here.
First of all, they're both proportional to the inverse square of the distance between
the objects, but here's a big difference.
There's only one kind of mass whereas there are two kinds of charges.
Because there's only one kind of mass, gravity is always attractive.
There are two kinds of charge and the electric force can be either attractive or repulsive
and that makes for an enormous difference and here's another big difference.
The electric force is fundamentally much, much, much, much stronger than the gravitational
force and being quantitative, let's take a look now on the big screen at how we understand
that quantitative difference between gravity and the electric force.
So let's begin with two protons.
Here they are.
There's some distance r apart.
What's r?
Well, it turns out it doesn't matter.
The reason it doesn't matter is because both forces behave the same way with r, both depend
on the inverse square of the distance.
So between those two protons, there's going to be a repulsive electrical force which I've
labeled f sub e.
By the way, I didn't point out but you'll notice that the electric force obeys Newton's
third law.
It involves q1 and q2 and it doesn't matter what order they're in and so multiplying those
two together gives the same force regardless and so the force is on, of charge q1, on
charge q2 is the same as q2 on charge q1 and I've indicated that here by drawing vectors
of the same length.
Those are different force vectors because they have opposite directions but they have
the same magnitude just as Newton's third law says they should.
So somehow Coulomb's law knows about Newton's law.
There's also attractive gravitational force between those two protons because they have
mass and all masses attract all other masses.
So I've labeled that f sub g.
I've indicated that it's smaller by drawing a shorter arrow.
It's actually much, much, much, much, much, much, much smaller, so much smaller I couldn't
draw it to scale on here.
And let's do the quantitative calculation.
Turns out that the mass of a proton is about 1.67 times 10 to the minus 27 kilograms.
Protons are not very big, not very massive.
They carry one elementary charge which is 1.6 times 10 to the minus 19 coulombs.
The electric force we just saw is k q1 q2 over r squared where k is that coulomb constant
9 times 10 to the 9 si units.
I've put e squared here for the q1 q2 because both protons carry the elementary charge e,
so it's k q1 q2, k e times e, k e squared over r squared.
The gravitational force, as we saw back in Lecture 13, is g, the big gravitational constant,
times the product of the things that are interacting gravitationally, that is the two masses.
In this case, it's simply the square of the proton mass, m squared, and that's divided
by r squared also.
Same r in both cases because it's the two protons that distance r apart.
So let's look at their ratio.
The electric force divided by the gravitational force, that's k e squared over r squared,
the electric force divided by the gravitational force, gm squared over r squared, put them
like that, the r squared's cancel, and we have k e squared over gm squared.
We've got everything we need to calculate that.
We've got k, we've got e, we've got m, and we've got the gravitational constant, which
is rather small, you'll notice, in si units.
It's not the same units as the coulomb constant, but that suggests already 9 times 10 to the
minus 11, that there's a difference in the strength of those forces, put those together
and you get a difference, a factor of 10 to the 36.
So the gravitational force between two protons is smaller than the electric force by a factor
of 10 to the 36, an enormous number, a one with 36 zeros after it.
So how can we understand that huge difference?
I mean, we worry about gravity all the time, we worry about falling, we look at tall buildings,
we climb mountains, we worry about gravity, we feel gravity, gravity pins us here to Earth.
How can it be that gravity is so weak and the electric force is so strong, and yet we
don't seem to notice that.
We think of the electric force as sort of a minor thing.
We see two socks cleaning together when we take them out of the dryer by static electricity.
That seems to be a minor thing.
How is it that gravity seems significant and the electric force doesn't?
Well, take a look at this picture.
I've shown two pictures of Earth.
In one picture, I'm looking at Earth electrically, and Earth contains ultimately protons and
electrons, positive and negative charge, and partly because the electric force is so strong,
those protons and electrons come together to form basically neutral objects, like for
example atoms.
So Earth is essentially neutral, it isn't exactly neutral by the way, it carries a very
small negative charge, but it's basically neutral.
So even though Earth has a lot of electric charge in it, it has zero net electric charge,
or very nearly zero, and so it has no large-scale electrical effects.
On the other hand, there's only one kind of mass with gravity, there's not two kinds
of mass.
Even antimatter has positive mass, not that there's antimatter in Earth to any significant
extent.
One kind of mass, that mass is only attractive, and so large agglomerations of mass come together,
and even though gravity is fundamentally very weak, the weakest of the fundamental forces,
nevertheless Earth's gravity, or the gravity of large accumulations of matter, becomes
quite strong.
So that's why, ironically, it's precisely because the electric force is so strong that
we don't tend to notice that.
Okay, let me move on.
I want to make one important point about all this business about the electric force between
two charges.
I've strictly speaking and talking about the force between two tiny infinitesimal points
of charge, like electrons and protons.
It turns out Coulomb's law also works if you have spherically symmetric distributions of
charge, balls of charge of any size.
But when you begin to get into more complicated shaped objects, what you have to do is look
at the interactions of all the charges that make up those objects.
Charged objects are called charge distributions, and I want to look at some charge distributions.
There are simple charge distributions, the hydrogen atom, for example, consists of a
proton and an electron.
But more common are complicated distributions of charge.
Here are some pictures.
Molecules are charge distributions.
Your computer memory is a distribution of two electrical conductors.
And when they're charged, it says, yes, one, there's information in that memory, zero if
they're not charged.
Your cell membranes are charge systems.
Printers and copiers use electric charge to fling charge droplets of ink at the paper.
Thunder clouds are charge distributions.
The sensor in your camera that captures an image involves electric charge, antennas are
distributions of charge.
So as your heart, as we'll see shortly, batteries, atomic nuclei, soap, as I mentioned, works
because of the distribution of charge.
Electric power lines are distributions of charge.
Let's take a look at how we deal with distributions of electric charge.
Suppose I raise the question, suppose I have two electric charges and I want to know what
force they exert on another charge.
So here's a picture.
We want to know what the force Q1 and Q2 exert on Q3.
And so electric forces, in fact, add.
They add vectorially, and you might say, well, is that in fact the case?
Do they add vectorially?
That sounds obvious.
That's actually not as obvious as you'd think.
The electric force from charge Q1 added to the electric force from charge Q2 gives the
net electric force on Q3.
That's not as obvious as it might sound.
In fact, for gravity, under the general relativistic theory of Einstein, things don't work quite
that simply.
But they do in this case.
And that's called the superposition principle.
So there's the force that Q1 exerts on charge Q3.
It's repulsive because they're both positive.
There's the force that charge Q2 exerts on charge Q3.
It's attractive because Q2 is negative and Q3 is positive.
There's the distance we use in Coulomb's law to calculate the force of charge 1 on charge
3.
Because the distance R23 we use in Coulomb's law to calculate the force on Q3 from Q2.
We know about adding vectors.
We take vectors.
We add them head to tail.
And we come up with the net vector.
And there is the net force that charge Q1 and Q2 together exert on Q3.
And we'd want to know that kind of thing because we want to understand how charge Q3 is going
to respond in the vicinity of charges Q1 and Q2.
So let's do a more quantitative example of that that will give us some insights into
how these charge distributions work.
So here's a simple charge distribution.
I'm going to start with two equal charges Q.
And I'm going to ask what force they exert on a second charge, third charge, capital
Q. And clearly they're all positive.
That's why they're red.
That's my sign for positive.
There's a force F1 from the left-hand charge, which I'll call Q1.
And there's a force F2 from the right-hand charge, which I'll call Q2.
And those forces are equal in magnitude, but they have slightly different directions
because of the orientation here.
And they're going to add to give a net force something like that.
And the net force is going to be vertically upward in this case because of the symmetry
of the situation.
Well, how do we handle a problem like this?
The first thing we do is establish a coordinate system.
So I'll put the charge on the left at minus a, and the charge on the right at x equals
plus a.
This will be my y-axis.
The net force is clearly the sum of the y-components of these two forces.
Their x-components are in completely opposite directions, and so they cancel.
So this is what's making this problem a little simpler.
And let's get into some mathematics.
Charge Q is going to be a distance y up the y-axis.
The individual charges are a distance a along the x-axis from the perpendicular bisector
here.
The angle, which I'll call theta here, and it's equal to this angle by 10th-grade geometry
by the Pythagorean theorem, the distance from either of these charges to charge Q is the
square root of a squared plus y squared.
That's a right triangle.
So there we go.
And we have what we need now to calculate the forces.
F2, F1 acting on y, that's this force, and F2, the y-components of them are k, little
Q, big Q, divided by the distance squared.
And then to get the y-components, the part in the vertical direction, we multiply by
the cosine of the angle.
Cosine, remember, is adjacent over hypotenuse.
So let's work that out.
Cosine theta, adjacent over hypotenuse, well, the adjacent side is y.
That's adjacent to the angle theta.
The hypotenuse is square root of a squared plus y squared by the Pythagorean theorem.
So that's what cosine of theta is.
So let's put that in our equation for cosine of theta, and we get k, little Q, big Q.
There's r squared.
r squared is the square of that square-rooted thing, and then there's the cosine of theta.
Well, that looks complicated.
Let's work on it a little bit.
There's our result.
We're going to simplify it just a little bit.
I have upstairs in the numerator k, Q, big Q times y.
I have downstairs a squared plus y squared times the square root of a squared plus y
squared.
That's the same as a squared plus y squared to the one-half power.
So I can write that whole thing on the denominator as a squared plus y squared to the three-half
power, and I want to make this point.
If I plot that complicated function, it looks something like this.
The force between them would be zero, on Q would be zero if y were zero, if it were
right there.
As I move away, the force gets bigger for a while, because the relatively strong forces
of the two small Qs are producing a fairly large force on the charge-big Q, but as I
move further away, that one over r squared fall-off begins to take effect, and the force
falls off.
That is an example of a complicated, fairly simple, but still complicated, charge distribution,
which shows that the one over r squared behavior applies only, in principle, to point charges,
little individual points of charge.
As soon as you get a complicated distribution, you can have other ways in which the force
depends on distance.
Now we can get a very important insight from looking at this example.
So here's our result from before, and now I want to ask the question, what happens if
we move these two charges, small Q, close together, or equivalently move big Q far up
the axis?
So this distance, y, becomes very large compared to the separation of these two charges.
So what if y becomes much, much greater than a, using the mathematical symbol there for
much greater than?
So here we've seen what happens.
We've symbolically moved the charges Q closer together.
The distance a has become smaller compared to the distance y.
These angles have become smaller.
The force is already more in the vertical direction.
What happens?
Well, first of all, the quantity a squared plus y squared in the denominator becomes
approximately just y squared.
a becomes much smaller than y.
a squared is that much smaller than than y squared, and we can ignore a squared compared
to y squared in the denominator.
Equivalently, this diagonal distance has become approximately the same as this distance now,
as that angle shrinks down.
But y squared, we're just going to have y squared downstairs.
y squared to the three halves is y cubed.
And consequently, the force becomes simply 2kQQy over y cubed.
The whole denominator became y cubed, and now I've got a y upstairs that can cancel
one of the y's in the y cube downstairs, and so the force becomes 2kQQ over y squared.
And I've grouped the two Q together because this expression ought to look very familiar.
It's the coulomb constant k multiplied by the value of some charge.
In this case, the charge is the sum of those two charges, the net charge, in other words,
on this system, the second charge that's being acted on, and a 1 over r squared falloff.
So what this is telling us is that this system is now acting like a single point charge 2q
located maybe here, maybe here, doesn't matter, those distances are so small.
So if I were to plot this expression, our original expression, and then plot this new
expression, I would get the 1 over r squared falloff of a true point charge field.
And what this is telling us is that this complicated charge distribution, if I get pretty far away
from it, and here's the distance 3a away, 4a, 5a, those two curves become indistinguishable.
Its electric force is the same as the electric force, essentially, of a point charge.
As I move in closer, then the complicated structure of the charge distribution becomes
evident, and these two forces become different, and in fact, the force of the two charges
when they're far apart as q moves downward actually goes back down to zero when y becomes
zero.
Now what is this telling us?
It's giving us an important insight.
It's telling us that when we have a complicated system of charges, any charge distribution
doesn't matter how complicated it is, as long as it's got some net charge, if we go
far away from it, the force due to that distribution of charge begins to look like a point charge
with that distribution's net charge.
Provided that charge is non-zero, and that the distribution is of finite extent.
Let me just give you an example here.
So on the left, I have some kind of charge distribution, maybe a little negative on the
left because it's bluish or more positive on the right, and I have two charges I'd like
to calculate the electric force on that distribution from.
The force on q1, that would be very hard to calculate.
I'd have to consider all the different directions to all the different charges that make up
that big q.
It'd be hard to do, but the force on q2 would be easy.
It's approximately k big q, the total charge on that messy looking object with charge on
it, divided by that distance.
What distance?
To the center, to the edge, it doesn't matter because that distance is so big compared to
the size of that charge distribution.
So a very important generalization is a system of charge looks like a point charge if you're
very far away from it.
And we can summarize what we know about charge with that and the earlier things we learn.
So electric charge is a fundamental property of matter.
There are two kinds.
It's conserved and quantized.
Coulomb's law describes the force between two point charges.
The electric force obeys the superposition principle, meaning we can vectorially add
that.
And if we get really far from a charge distribution with non-zero net charge, that thing resembles
a point charge and that we can very easily calculate electric forces.
