Welcome to lecture 29 in which I'm going to introduce a new concept, which is actually
pervasive in physics. It's the concept of the field. I'm going to introduce it for electricity
and also for gravitation, but my colleagues who study very advanced subjects like quantum
field theory use the field concept or we talk about Einstein's field equations in Einstein's
theory of general relativity. So this is a very broad concept and this will be your first
introduction to the idea of field. Let me remind you what we did in the previous lecture. We
looked at the electric force between two point charges. So imagine I have two charges, negative
charge, positive charge. I hold them here and they experience a force in this case since
they're opposite charges. It's an attractive force and they accelerate toward each other,
for example. So what's happening is I'm imagining that one charge somehow reaches out across
empty space and pulls on the other charge, yanks it toward it or if they were like charges
they would be repelling. Same idea. A charge somehow reaches out across empty space and
action at a distance acts on something distant. We think the same way about gravity or at
least we did back in lecture 13 when I introduced gravity. So here I have this bowling ball and
what I imagine happening is right now the bowling ball somehow all of the material that
makes up planet earth is somehow reaching out across the space between here and the
bowling ball and pulling down on the bowling ball. That's the concept so-called action
at a distance. An object can exert a force on a distant object across empty space. That's
a concept that turns out to be very problematic in physics. It's problematic philosophically
because how can a distant thing know what's going on somewhere else? It's a problem for
Einstein's relativity because it sort of implies that information and influence can propagate
it faster than the speed of light instantaneously. We'll see later how that's a very big problem
in Einstein's work. So we need to move beyond. We need to move philosophically beyond this
idea of action at a distance and the field concept is going to be what lets us do that.
So let me imagine instead for the case of gravity instead of thinking of the earth as
reaching out and pulling on this bowling ball or the earth as reaching out and pulling
on the moon to hold it in its circular orbit around the earth. Let me imagine instead that
the earth gives rise to in its vicinity something I'm going to call a gravitational field.
And when you first hear this idea it sounds like I'm just introducing extra complications.
But in the course of these lectures on electromagnetism in particular you'll come to see how physicists
view fields as every bit as real as matter. In fact in some ways not as distinct from
matter as you might think. So I'm going to introduce this idea of a field. First it's
going to feel very artificial but it's going to grow on you. For the gravitational field
the idea is earth creates in the space all around it a gravitational field and that gravitational
field reaches out and pulls on this bowling ball. And it pulls with a force at this point
in space there's a gravitational field and if I put the bowling ball there the bowling
ball experiences a force of in fact in the case of gravity near earth 9.8 Newtons for
every kilogram. So if I want to know the force on this bowling ball I talk about how many
kilograms does it have and I multiply it by the strength of earth's gravitational field
which is 9.8 Newtons on every kilogram. If instead of the bowling ball I put the soft
ball at that same point it will experience a force which is also its mass which is much
less times the gravitational field in Newtons per kilogram multiplied by its number of
kilograms and I'll get the force exerted on it. And we can talk about the field concept
whether we talk about gravity or electricity. So if we talk about the field concept the
old view is action at a distance. The earth somehow in this case I'll use the moon as
an example reaches out across empty space and pulls on the moon. So there's a picture of
the earth. There's this interaction between the two of them obeys Newton's third law and
so forth. The two are exerting forces on each other at a distance. The new view is the field
view. In the field view the earth creates a gravitational field that extends throughout
space and what the moon responds to is just what's going on in its immediate local vicinity.
The field unit again is Newtons per kilogram. The amount of force per unit of mass we put
there. The force is therefore the mass times the gravitational field. I've put vectors
on these things because both the field and the force have direction. They're vectors.
And so here's what the picture looks like now. I have the earth and the moon. The earth
creates this mysterious kind of field around it. I've indicated by shading that the field
is stronger nearer the earth because the strength of gravity falls off as the inverse square
of the distance and over there is the moon and the moon doesn't know anything about
the earth. What it does know about is the field in its immediate vicinity and there's
a vector indicating the direction of that field. That's the concept of the gravitational
field. We're going to apply the same thing now to the interaction between electric charges.
So again, instead of thinking that my negative charge exerts a force on the distant positive
charge, I'm going to say instead that the negative charge creates a field in the space
around it and the positive charge responds. Equivalently, the positive charge creates
a field in all the space around it and the negative charge responds to the field in its
immediate vicinity. So we replace action at a distance with this additional new concept
of the field. So here's what it looks like in the electric case. Consider, for example,
a proton. A proton positive charge is going to create an electric field in the vicinity
of itself. In fact, spending throughout all of space in principle. And an electron that
we wanted earlier to say, well, it experiences a force from the proton. No, it experiences
the electric field in its local vicinity and it then responds to that electric field.
The value of the field or the strength of the field is measured in newtons per the thing
that feels electric forces that's charged. So newtons per coulomb, just like the gravitational
force was newtons per kilogram mass being the thing that is involved with gravity, charge
being the thing that's involved with electricity. The field unit is newtons per coulomb. The
electric force on a charge q in a field e is therefore qe. The electric force is simply
the charge times the electric field it experiences just like the gravitational force was mg,
the mass times the field it was responding to. So that's the concept of the field. And
the field is really a big important concept in physics and it sounds right now again like
I've introduced something extraneous, but the field concept is crucial and we're going to
grow on you and it's going to acquire a reality of its own. And let's do a quantitative look
at the field in particular of the simplest kind of system we know of electrically, namely
a point charge. So here's a situation in which I've got a point charge q, a point charge
capital q, there's some distance r apart. This is exactly like what I was doing in the
previous lecture. And in the old way of looking at things I would say, oh, there's a force
on q due to q and I would calculate it with coulomb's law. There it is. f is k, little
q, big q over the distance between them squared and the direction is away or toward depending
on whether the charges are similar or opposites. So there's the old way of doing things. What
I want to do now is abstract away this charge and talk about what's going on just at this
point because of the presence of little q, regardless of what charge I might want to
put there. So I'm going to abstract away this problem about a force between two specific
charges and ask instead, what's the influence that this q creates in space all around it,
particularly at this point? So I'm going to take away q and I'm going to replace a force
with a field, which is there whether or not I put any charge there. And if I happen to
put a charge there, it will experience the force, a force due to the field at that point.
So how do we work on this mathematically? Well, the field is the force per unit charge.
Most likely gravitational field was the force per unit mass, the Newtons per kilogram,
the electric field is the electric force per unit charge, the force per coulomb. Well,
we had a force of k, little q, big q over r squared acting on big q when it was here.
We just abstract away big q divided by the particular charge we put there. And there's
the strength of the electric field at that point. It's just like coulomb's law, except
it doesn't have that second charge because that second charge is sort of latent. We can
put anything we want there, any other charge, and that would give us the force on that charge.
So there's the force per unit charge at q's location. And if I wanted to picture this
field instead of drawing that vague kind of density varying shading that I did on the
previous slide, I can be a little bit more precise. I can draw instead vectors at every
point representing this field. That is the direction and magnitude of the force per
unit charge that I might put at any point. So here is a charge q, the same charge q.
Nearby these field vectors are fairly long because the electric field falls off as the
inverse square of the distance, just like the electric force that it came from did.
Further out, those field vectors are weaker because the electric field falls off with
distance and so they get smaller. There's a better way, though, to talk about that picture.
I don't want to draw lots of field vectors. Instead, what I do is the following. I say,
okay, let me start at some arbitrary point and let me figure out which way the electric
field points. In this case, it's pointing radially outward from the charge. Let me move
a little distance in that direction and let me ask again, which way does the field point?
It's still pointing radially outward. And so I go a little further in that direction
and I just keep doing that. And then I go to other points and I draw a straight line
that heads out in whatever direction the direction of the field is in this case. And
for a point charge, I get a very simple result. I get field lines that start out at the point
charge and they don't move, but they extend radially outward in principle all the way
to infinity. And notice something else about them. The field lines are getting further
apart. And I'd really like you to picture this in three dimensions, in which case they're
expanding outward in three dimensions. And the density of field lines, if you want to
be really precise, the number of field lines that's crossing some kind of area is getting
smaller and smaller. And in fact, that density of field lines in this picture reflects the
strength of the field and the direction of the field line at a given location gives you
the direction of the field. And this should sound a little bit familiar if you think back
to lecture 20 when we talked about the velocity field of flowing liquids. We drew a picture
of a river and we drew velocity vectors in there and then we replaced them with so-called
stream lines that were in fact the field lines of the velocity field of that flowing liquid.
These are the stream lines, if you will, of the electric field. The electric field isn't
anything that's flowing or moving, but these lines describe the direction and the magnitude
through their density of the electric field. And we're going to use field lines extensively
because they give us a really quick good way of looking at an electric field and seeing
how the electric field behaves. So I'm going to move on to a more complicated idea, but
I want you to have in mind now what the electric field looks like. The electric field is this
pattern of lines that give you the direction of the force that would be exerted on a charge,
if you put it at that point, on a positive charge because of the minus sign on a negative
charge, it would feel, of course, opposite the field, but they give you the direction
of the field and their density, the number of them crossing a unit area, to be precise,
gives you the magnitude of the field. So that's the field of the point charge. So let's look
now at a more complicated charge distribution. A more complicated distribution is called
an electric dipole. It's a really, really important charge distribution in physics.
Two point charges of equal magnitude, but opposite signs. So imagine these two charges
are equal in magnitude and they're somehow stuck together on the end of a stick or something.
So they make up a system that has zero net charge and yet it does have two charges in
it and those two charges are located at different places. They're slightly separated. So there's
a picture of what a dipole might look like. A positive charge and a negative charge stuck
together somehow on the end of a stick. Never mind how they're stuck there, you could actually
make one that way by sticking positive and negative charges on a stick, but nature has
a way of making dipoles. It's the simplest charge distribution that has no net charge.
And most importantly, it's a metaphor for many molecules. When chemistry students ask
me, why do I have to take electromagnetism? Well, the answer is because all the molecules
they're working with, or most of them, are essentially electric dipoles. Why do we have
to learn about dipoles? Because dipoles are a metaphor for molecules. If you understand
dipoles, you understand much of the behavior of molecules. Here's an example. There's
a picture of water. It has a negative charge associated with its oxygen and positive charges
associated with the two hydrogens that make up H2O. The exact distribution of charge is
a little more complicated than this suggests, but you can see that that looks electrically
approximately like negative charge above, positive charge below. And water, in fact,
is a very strongly polar. That is, it has a big dipole effectiveness. It's a dipolar
molecule, and that accounts for a lot of water's properties, in particular the fact
that it's a very good solvent. So that's the dipole. That's what a dipole is. And I'd
like to take a quick look at the electric field of a dipole. What does the electric field
of a dipole look like? So we're going to try to figure that out, and that will give
you a better feel for how you develop this picture of electric field lines. So here's
a picture of a dipole, just like I had on the previous slide. And let's go to some point
here near the top right at which we're going to begin by asking ourselves, what is the
direction of the electric field at that point? So let me first draw an arrow that is the
field at that point associated with the positive charge. We're fairly near the positive charge.
The positive charge is positive. The field points away from it, so I've drawn a fairly
long arrow. Let me do the same thing for the negative charge. The negative charge is further
away, so the field is weaker because it falls off as one over r squared, and because the
negative charge is negative, the field points toward it. So there are two field vectors,
because the force obeys the superposition principle, I can vectorially add two forces,
electric forces, I can also vectorially add two fields, and there is the net field line,
and that gives me the local direction tangent to the field. Now what I need to do is move
a little ways in that direction and redo the process. And you can imagine a computer would
be very good at this. I'd get bored with it very quickly, so I'm going to imagine I've
moved along, eventually I come to another point, and you'll notice I've drawn a little
curved arc in there, which indicates that the direction of the field is in fact changing.
And then I draw a couple more vectors, one pointing away from the positive charge, one
pointing toward the negative charge, they've got the right direction, they're scaled as
the inverse square of the distance and so on. I find out the net field from those two,
I move a little further in that direction, and now I keep repeating the process until
I've moved in to make that arc-like pattern. That's part of a field line. I didn't start
right on the charges, but if I started right near the charges, you can see how that arc
would extend back. So let me do that, and now I have a single field line starting from
the positive charge, going out in that arc-like structure, and returning to the negative charge.
That's what the field pattern of a dipole looks like. That's only one field line. There
are instantly many field lines, they're all over the place, and so I'm going to draw a
few more just to give you a sense of what the dipole field looks like. So there's the
dipoles field. I won't prove it, but the dipole field at large distances actually falls off
as one over r cubed, faster than any point charge field because the dipole has no net
charge. Okay, so we understand now a field of a fairly simple but nevertheless really
important charge distribution, the electric dipole. And I want to take you through an
interesting exercise that is going to help us to recast Coulomb's law in a very much
more abstract but powerful way. So let's begin by looking at some simple charge distributions.
I have a distribution consisting of a single positive point charge Q, and I'm going to
adopt the convention that a charge Q has eight field lines associated with it. There are
always instantly many field lines, but if I want to draw it, I've got to adopt some
convention like that. So on the upper left, I have a charge Q with eight field lines. In
the middle, on the top, I have a charge two Q, and so it's consequently got 16 field lines
pointing radially outward. On the right, a charge minus Q, it's got eight field lines
they're pointing inward. Down below, I've got the field of two point charges Q, that's
a distribution we worked with in the previous lecture, and I have worked through that same
process I did for the dipole to draw its field lines. In the middle at the bottom, I've got
a dipole, and on the right, I've got something consisting of two equal or two unequal but
opposite charges minus half Q and plus Q. And I want to do a simple exercise with these
pictures. I want to draw around them these loop-like patterns. Now picture this in three
dimensions. This is a surface in three dimensions, and those field lines are pointing out in
all directions. And I want to ask the question, how many field lines go through that surface,
and the answer is obvious. It's eight. You can count them. Draw a different shaped surface
that completely surrounds that charge. Look at it again. You'll find eight field lines
go out of that surface. Draw another surface. This one doesn't happen to surround the charge,
and you can see as many field lines go out of it as come in and into it. And if I count
a field line going out of it as positive and one coming in as negative, no net field lines
go through that surface. Do the same thing here. 16 field lines. No field lines because
I've got as many going out as going in. Do the same thing here. I've got minus eight
field lines because they're all coming in. You're getting to see a pattern. Do it again
down there. I've got no field lines emerging from that. Some come out, but some go in,
and they cancel each other out. On the other hand, draw some kind of surface around that
single charge plus Q, and you see eight field lines going out. Other one, you see eight
field lines going out. Draw a surface around the entire charge distribution consisting
of two Q, and you see 16 field lines going out. Draw a surface around that charge in
the dipole, and you see eight field lines. Draw around the opposite sign charge, and
you also see eight field lines, but they're going the other way. So it's negative. Draw
a surface around the entire dipole, and you see zero net field lines. If you count those
field lines, you'll find as many going out as coming in to that surface. And finally
for this equal or opposite but unequal charges, there's a charge Q. You've got eight field
lines going out. There's a charge minus Q over two. You've got four field lines going
in. It all makes sense. Draw one around the whole system, and you've got four field lines
that they're going out. All of these reflect a very simple fact. The simple fact is this.
The simple fact is that the number of field lines that emerge from any closed surface depends
only on the enclosed charge. That's a statement of something that's called Gauss's law, and
although it's not at all obvious to you right now, that law is exactly equivalent to Coulomb's
law. That law describes the inverse square law. That's the reason the field lines spread
out in space the way they do, and the fact that you don't pick up any new field lines
except where there is charge. Mathematically, I'm going to go a little higher in math than
I usually do in this course. I'm going to write a calculus expression. I'm not going
to do anything with it, but I'm going to simply say the expression on the left hand side is
sort of a mathematical surrogate for this idea of number of field lines, and it talks
about the number of field lines being proportional to the enclosed charge and nothing else. And
that's the q sub enclosed there, and you see some constants, 4 pi and the Coulomb constant
k, which we're not too surprised to see. I guarantee you it's equivalent to Coulomb's
law, and it also provides an exquisite test of the inverse square law for the electric
field. So there's another way of expressing what was expressed in Coulomb's law, and I
want to end with a rather elegant example of how Gauss's law shows you something very
important about the behavior of materials that we call electrical conductors. What's
an electrical conductor? Well, a conductor is a material in which charges are free to
move. Metals are conductors. Ionic solutions like sports drinks or O2C water, plasmas,
hot ionized gases shown here in the sun's corona are conductors because they've got
free charges. Semiconductors that make up your computer chips, and finally substances
called superconductors, here one's shown floating over a magnet that conduct electricity
with no loss of energy. And electric fields, of course, exert forces on charges. And so
if I have a conductor and I let it come to equilibrium, so I let everything move around
like it wants to until it stops, charges aren't moving, that's the definition of equilibrium,
and therefore there can't be any electric field inside a conductor if it's in equilibrium.
If there were, charges would move. This is almost a semantic thing. If I have a conductor
and it's in equilibrium, there's no electric field inside it. And let me take that fact
and use Gauss's law to prove a very elegant result. So let's go to the big screen where
we do quantitative things. This one isn't quite that quantitative, it's more a conceptual
proof. So I'm going to do a Gaussian proof of this statement. If I have a conductor in
equilibrium, any excess charge must lie on the surface of that conductor. Why do I know
that? Well, I've just shown you that by definition, essentially, if a conductor is in equilibrium,
charges are not moving. And be careful here. I don't mean electrons aren't whizzing around
protons in atoms. I mean in bulk there's no motion of charge. The electric field is,
and I also mean down inside the atom there may be electric fields, but in bulk there
are no electric fields in a conductor in equilibrium. Now that means if I draw any kind of surface,
I call these surfaces Gaussian surfaces because they're associated with Gauss's law, inside
the conductor, the electric field is zero everywhere inside the conductor, so there
are no field lines emerging from that surface. And what Gauss's law told us was that the
number of field lines emerging from a closed surface depended on nothing but the charge
enclosed. So there is therefore no charge enclosed by that surface by Gauss's law.
And I'm going to take that surface and I'm going to expand it till it lies just beneath
the surface of this conducting material. The green blob is the conducting material.
So there's no field lines inside, so there is no charge enclosed, and now I'm going to
move that surface out. Put it just inside the material surface. There's still no charge
within that. Our argument hasn't changed at all. There's still no electric field inside
the material in equilibrium. There's no charge within that surface, and therefore if there
is any charge on this conductor in equilibrium, the only point it can be is on the outside
surface of the material. And that's a very powerful statement. It says that charge on
a conductor in equilibrium must go to the outside of the conductor. And you can kind
of see why that makes sense because if I put positive charge on the conductor, the positive
charge repels. It wants to run away from itself and it wants to get just as far as it possibly
can and that's on the surface of the conductor. Now that may sound almost obvious, but that's
not alone a proof of this statement. That all the charge end up exactly on the surface
is a consequence of the inverse square nature of the electric force, and Gauss's law, as
I said, is equivalent to Coulomb's law and expresses that inverse squareness. So this
provides really exquisite tests of the fact that that exponent in Gauss's law, sorry,
in Coulomb's law, which is equivalent to Gauss's law, is exactly 2 or 1 over r squared minus
2 is the exponent. So there's a very elegant proof that if I have a conductor in electrostatic
equilibrium, all the charge must live on the surface. That has very practical consequences.
And here are three pictures suggesting what some of those consequences are. In the upper
left you see a car being struck by artificial lightning from some kind of particle accelerator.
The driver inside that car is perfectly safe because the charge distributes itself on the
surface of the metal car, at least if the car is made of metal, of a conducting material.
On the right you see a dramatic demonstration from a very large Vandegraaff generator. It
looks like the one I showed you in the last lecture. I had a little one here. We charged
up some balloons. This one is much bigger. It was originally a big particle accelerator.
It's now a demonstration device at the Boston Museum of Science. There's an operator sitting
in a metal covered cage, and he's perfectly safe from that giant bolt of electrical spark
because again the charge lives on the surface. More practically you connect your stereo amplifier
or your Netflix TV box or whatever to your TV with coaxial cables. Coaxial cables have
a central conductor and an outer conductor, as you see here, consisting of kind of a braided
conducting material. And again the idea is any excess charge due to stray electric fields
that might be wandering around and that would cause noise and interfere with your stereo
and with your picture, they go to the outside and they live only on that outer conducting shield.
So the whole concept of electrical shielding is the concept that inequilibrium charge
runs to the surface of a conductor and stays there. I have a colleague who does such sensitive
experiments in her lab at Harvard that she has the entire lab surrounded by copper and very
careful, careful when any kind of wires or other connections have to go in there to preserve that
without any break and so there are no stray electric fields in there to interfere with very
sensitive experiments. So let's wrap up what we've seen here. We have seen that electric fields
provide an alternative to the action at a distance description of electrical interactions.
We've seen how to draw field lines. We've seen Gauss's law for in particular in this case a
dipole, an important charge distribution we looked at and tells us that the number of
field lines emerging depends only on the enclosed charge and in conductors we've seen in
equilibrium any excess charge has to lie on the surface. Now if you don't want to do a lot of
mathematics you're done at this point but I'd really like you to take a look if you do like
doing mathematics at a challenge I'm going to give you and it's a challenge which will prove a
statement I made during this lecture, a very important statement in fact about the inverse
cube dependence of the electric field of a dipole. It's that inverse cube dependence that gives rise
to a lot of the more subtle interactions between molecules so it really is important in both
physics and chemistry. So here's the challenge. Back in lecture 28 we did an example of a simple
charge distribution to find the field on the perpendicular bisector in that case of a line
between two equal point charges. That's what we did in lecture 28 and I worked through it in all
those details. And I'd like you to do the same thing but now do it for an electric dipole and
do it by changing the right hand charge in that example to minus q. So now you're going to have
plus q and minus q and you want to find out what's going on, what effect that would have either on
a third charge or simply what electric field there would be there. And I'd like you to use your
result to examine that special case we looked at before the case where the distance to the
third charge or to the point where we're evaluating the field is very large and I want you to show
from that that the dipole field falls off as one over y cubed. So take a look at that problem
and go to work on it and let's then come back and look at the solution.
Here is the picture, pretty much the same picture as I had in the previous lecture except that now
we've got a negative charge at x equals plus a. We've got all the same math we had before
and the only difference in this case is the direction of the electric field and now I'm
drawing field vectors rather than force vectors because we understand electric fields and I haven't
put any charge up at that point because I don't need to, I just need to evaluate the field and then
ask what would happen to any charge put there. And you'll see that the net field is now pointing to
the right because those two fields now their vertical components cancel and their horizontal
components add to give us a net field to the right which is consistent with that picture of the
dipole field that I drew for you before. The field went sort of parallel to the to the axis
of the dipole the line between the two charges at the point right on the perpendicular bisector
and that's what we see happening here. So field is forced per unit charge so I dropped q out of
the picture. The net field is now to the right and we can calculate the field it's kq over r
squared we dropped the big q and now the relevant trig function is the sine of the angle instead of
the cosine and you can see that because we're looking now for the horizontal components rather
than the vertical components. And if I did the same kind of math I did in the previous lecture
we'd see that the sine of that angle is the opposite a over the hypotenuse square root of a squared
plus y squared. So there's our expression for the field the distance r is still again square root
of a squared plus y squared. We can simplify that by combining the denominators to make a squared
plus y squared to the three halves. This expression looks very similar to what we had before except
that now we've got a upstairs instead of y. And what that means is when we take y much much greater
than a downstairs we've still got y cubed but upstairs we don't have the y to cancel it and
consequently we see an electric field that falls as one over y cubed. So there's our proof at least
in one special case on the perpendicular bisector of a dipole that the dipole field falls off as
the inverse cube of the distance. And if you did a more complicated calculation you would find that
was true everywhere in the field of the dipole although the exact value depends not only on how
far you are from the dipole but on what angle you make with the dipole axis. So dipoles are
important because there are metaphor for molecules and this has told us something about the force
of interaction between molecules and it's weaker than the force of interaction between point charges.
