Welcome to lecture 32 in which I'm going to discuss electric current. This is something
that's probably a lot more familiar to you than some of the more abstract ideas we've
been dealing with in the previous few lectures, because electric current is what flows in
wires, and it's sort of what you think of when you think the word electricity. You
think of the flow of electrons in wires to your light bulbs and your electric stove
and down the big power transmission lines and so on. So we're going to get into more
practical material in this lecture. On the other hand, we're making a rather profound
philosophical switch, because once we allow charge to move, we're no longer dealing with
electrostatic situations. Static means charge isn't moving. Everything we've done so far,
we've talked about electrostatics. Although we've occasionally made some sparks fly, and
they were not electrostatic situations, but when we had conductors charged up or capacitors
fully charged, we had electrostatic equilibrium. Now we're going to abandon the assumption
of equilibrium. We're going to let charge move. We'll see the situations in which it
moves. But here's the big thing. The electric field is no longer zero, or doesn't have to
be zero, in a conductor that isn't in electrostatic equilibrium. I made a big point. E is zero
in electrostatic equilibrium. We're abandoning electrostatic equilibrium. So if you see me
talking about electric fields in conductors, I'm not contradicting myself. I'm now relaxing
the assumption that we were in static equilibrium. We're letting charge move, and then there
can be electric fields. So what is this motion of charge that we call electric current? Let's
begin with a definition of it. Electric current is basically a flow of charge. If you want
to get really technical about it, it's the net rate of charge crossing a given area.
You give me an area like, for example, the cross-sectional area of a piece of wire, and
you can ask, what's the current in that wire? What's the current flowing through that wire?
What's the number of coulombs every second crossing the area of that wire? That's what
we mean by current. We mean the net rate of charge crossing an area. So the picture here
is showing positive charges, a line of positive charges moving along through a conductor, and
we want to know what the net rate of charge crossing that area is. In this case, the current
whose symbol is going to be I, get used to that. I will be the symbol for electric current.
That current is moving to the right, and the unit of current because it's charge per time
is coulombs per second. That's the SI unit. And the SI unit defines the ampere, named
after the French scientist, ampere. And he has an accent on the E, but when we write
the unit out, it doesn't. And as usual, the unit is not capitalized, but the symbol for
the unit, capital A, is capitalized because it's named after an individual. So one ampere,
also called an amp, given the symbol A, is one coulomb per second flowing through whatever
area you specify. And usually, but not always, we're talking about conductors whose area
is easy to define, like a wire. But in my field of solar physics, we're often talking
about conductors or about charges flowing, currents flowing in the atmosphere of the
sun, and then you sort of have to say, well, what area of the atmosphere are we talking
about? So it isn't necessarily something that flows in a wire, but it can be and it
usually is. So let's look at some typical examples of currents. I've just defined the
unit of current as the ampere, one coulomb per second. What are some typical currents
we deal with? Well, if you have an incandescent light bulb, the kinds of things that are now
being phased out because they're energy inefficient, a typical light bulb of 75 or 100 watts draws
a current of about an ampere. Your watch draws a current out of that little tiny button
battery of about maybe a microampere. Cell membranes, the membrane that separates the
inside and outside of biological cells is perforated by proteins that make up little
channels and flowing in those channels are electric currents, typically on the order
of a picoampere, 10 to the minus 12 amperes, a millionth of a millionth of an ampere, a
trillionth of an ampere, very tiny currents. And those currents are carrying materials
like sodium and potassium and other essential products in and out of the cell membrane. If
you've got a cordless drill, a nice powerful cordless drill, it's probably drawing about
25 amps from its lithium ion or its other kind of cadmium battery, whatever kind of
battery it has, it's drawing about 25 amps. So that's what a cordless drill would draw.
Your whole house maybe has a power supply available to it of about 100 amps, maybe 200 amps for
a newer house. That's the most kind of current the entire house would be drawing from the
power system. The power line itself, big high voltage power lines carrying currents across
the landscape, they may be carrying a thousand amperes of current. So those are typical values
of current. An amp is fairly typical for the kinds of things that are going on in your
house. Very, very small currents, cell phone and standby mode, 2 milliamps maybe, down
to a microamp in your watch, picoamp in your cell membrane. But an ampere is a typical
current somewhere in the middle of this range. So currents range all over the place.
Well, let's look in a little more detail at electric currents. Electric current is a
flow of electric charge which quantified it as the net charge crossing an area, the
rate at which net charge is crossing an area. And I want to emphasize that in the context
of the fact that there are two kinds of charges. In fact, in wires, metal wires, the charge
carriers that are carrying current are in fact negative electrons. So in this picture the
electrons are moving to the left, but because they're negative, the net flow of charge is
to the right and that constitutes a current to the right. So a current to the right could
be caused either by electrons flowing to the left or positive charges moving to the
right in this picture. In fact, if we had a situation in which we had both kinds of charge
carriers, positive and negative, and the positive ones were moving to the right and the negative
ones were moving to the left, we would have a current, and each one was carrying a current
of i, we would have a total current, a net current in the system of 2i to the right.
And there are systems that carry current this way, some of them in semiconductors, some
of them in ionic solutions where you have positive and negative ions both. What happens
if I had both charge carriers moving in the same way? Well, I could get that by just picking
up a piece of wire and walking along with it. There's no current then because the flow
of positive charge to the right and the flow of negative charge to the right, if they're
equal, cancel each other out and there is no net current flowing in that wire. So the
fact that there are charges in a material and the material is moving is not enough to
mean that there's a current. There has to be a net flow of charge in one direction or
the other. Either positive or negative charges have to be moving while the others are stationary
or, in fact, both could be moving in opposite directions. But if they're both moving equally
in the same direction, there's no net current there.
So let's talk a little bit more about how current is carried in different kinds of materials
because it isn't just wires, although I am going to concentrate more on wires. So we
want to look at mechanisms of conduction in different materials. And again, we'll focus
on wires, but we want to look at other materials as well. Back in lecture 29, when I first
began talking about conductors, and there I was talking about them in the context of
electrostatic equilibrium, here I'm talking about them in the context of their carrying
current, we saw some different kinds of conductors. And I'm going to use in this example exactly
the same kinds of conductors we're talking about. So the same pictures you saw before.
Here are metals as exemplified by this power line. In metals, the current is carried by
free electrons, and I'll show you in a moment what I mean by free electrons. Ionic solutions,
as for example, a sports drink, which is high in potassium ions, particularly because they
need to move through those membrane channels in the cell membrane to get potassium into
the cells and so on. There the current is carried by both positive and negative ions.
That doesn't mean there's current flowing in a bottle of sports drink, but if you hooked
two electrodes to a battery and stuck them in that sports drink or in seawater, you would
get a current flowing carried by both positive and negative ions. Plasmas, ionized gases,
the kinds of things I studied, I mentioned a minute ago that the solar corona, the sun's
atmosphere is carrying currents because it consists of isolated electrons and ions because
it's at 2 million Kelvin's of temperature, and it is therefore the ions and electrons
are completely separated, particularly hydrogen is separated into protons and electrons, both
are free to move, both carry current, so plasmas like ionic solutions carry current both ways.
In semiconductors, the devices that make up modern electronics, that make modern electronics
work, semiconductors are engineered to have particular concentrations of electrons and
something else called holes, which are actually simply the absence of an electron, but they
move through the material as if they were a positive charge, and so there are two kinds
of charge carriers in semiconductors, electrons, negative, and holes positive, there's a picture
of a semiconductor chip that might be at the heart of a computer, and it's being able to
manipulate the concentrations of those two kinds of carriers that makes for all the wonderful
things we're able to do with modern electronics. And finally, as I mentioned, there are super
conductors, devices that conduct electricity with no loss of energy, perfect conductors,
they really exist, this one is repelling itself from a magnet, its whole thing is immersed
in liquid nitrogen because super conductors require very cold temperatures, we would revolutionize
the electromagnetic technology industry if we ever developed a room temperature superconductor.
For now, the highest temperatures we can get to are a little over 100 kelvins, which is still
about minus 200 Celsius, and only a little bit above the temperature at which they air liquefies,
but in superconductors, a complicated mechanism involving quantum mechanics causes electrons,
even though they're widely separated, to get paired and then they kind of move as waves
with no resistance, no loss of energy through the conductor. So there are some important
conduction mechanisms. But by far the most common one, the one we think about most, and the simplest
one in some ways, although it's not that simple, is the conduction in metals, current carried by
free electrons. I want to emphasize though, before I look at metals, that if the only things that
carried current were metals, a lot of the interesting things we can do with electricity would not be
possible. We wouldn't have semiconductors. If everything behaved the way a metal did,
electricity would be a much duller subject. So let's take a look at conduction mechanisms in
metals in particular, and I'm going to move to the big screen, not because we're going to do
calculations, because I need to be able to point out what's happening here. So let's go and take
a look at conduction mechanisms in metals, conduction in metals. First of all, a metal,
you don't perhaps think of it this way, but a metal is like any other solid, or like most solids,
exceptions are glass and a few others. Solids, if we let them form naturally and sort of cool
down slowly, they tend to form regular arrays of atoms, which we call crystals. So the crystal
structure is called a lattice. It's a regular spacing. And here's what happens in metals,
and this is what makes a metal a metal. In metals, the outermost one or two electrons
of the individual atoms are so loosely bound to their atoms that when the whole structure
forms together to make a crystal, the electrons become freed from their individual atoms,
and they're able to wander through the metal. They can't leave it, because if they did, the
positive remaining positive charge would try to pull them back, but they can wander freely
through the metal without being attached to individual atoms. Now most of the electrons
remain attached to many electrons in an atom of a metal. Iron, for example, has 26 electrons and
only the outermost one in say iron would be free to move around. Iron is not a very good
conductor, by the way. So there is a sea of free electrons that is surrounding the positive ions,
and these free electrons are free to move, and in fact, they do move. And at ordinary temperatures,
they are moving around randomly at pretty high speeds. So here's what the situation looks like.
We're going to focus on one electron and see how it behaves. Now before I go on, I have to tell you
I'm giving you a sort of classical physics picture of a phenomenon that really can only
be explained thoroughly using quantum physics, but it gives us a good idea of what's happening.
So if I focus on one electron, it's in random thermal motion, it's kind of bouncing around in
there, and frequently it hits these ions, and when it does, it typically gives up at some of its
energy, but it also may gain energy back from the ions, and in a state of equilibrium, it's basically
just bouncing around at roughly a constant, and rather high velocity, typically hundreds of meters
a second, and there it goes, and it's bouncing around randomly, and it doesn't on average go
anywhere. I mean, maybe one electron wanders somewhere through the metal, other one wanders
back the other way, there's no current, there's no net flow of electrons in this thing. Now let's
ask what happens if we put an electric field in this metallic conductor. Remember I said,
electric fields are okay now in conductors because we're dealing with situations in which we have
not got electrostatic equilibrium anymore, we've got a dynamic situation in which charges are moving.
So let me put an electric field here that points to the right, these are the field lines, electrons
are negative, charges experience a force QE in an electric field, so the charges here experience a
force to the left, the electrons experience a force to the left. Now that force is actually
relatively weak, and it isn't going to have a huge effect on the electrons motion, but it does have
a little bit of an effect. So as the electron bounces randomly around in the material, here it
goes, there is a slight bias each time it bounces, it's being dragged a little bit further to the
left, and so as a result, despite its random motion, it ends up drifting slowly, bouncing around to the
left, and I really mean slowly. Remember that electron is bouncing around perhaps hundreds of
meters a second through that random thermal motion, the speed of that drift, and we call it a drift
velocity, it's sort of an average velocity, that is very very slow, it's typically millimeters per
second. The electrons carrying the energy, carrying the current in wires flowing in your home are
typically moving at millimeters per second. Now don't confuse that with the speed at which the
electrical energy and the electrical impulse travels, that's close to the speed of light,
but the electrons themselves, I think we often focus too much on the electrons, it's really the
energy in the fields that's important, and the electrons are moving very slowly, typically millimeters
a second. It's a little bit like a car going through city traffic, you accelerate, you get up to 20
miles an hour maybe, then you slam on the brakes, and you may be moving pretty fast in between red
lights or other obstructions, but your average speed is much lower, and that's kind of what's
happening here with the electrons. So the electrons drift very slowly with some velocity, some average
slow velocity, but here's the important thing, if I were to increase the strength of the electric
field, you can imagine that that slight influence it has is going to increase, and the drift velocity
is going to increase accordingly, and so the electrons are going to go faster, and if there's a
bunch of electrons drifting that way, there will be a current, and the current will depend on the
strength of that electric field. So let's look at that in a little bit more detail. In the presence
of the electric field, as I indicated, the electrons acquire this slow drift velocity, because
they're electrons and they're negative, it's opposite the direction of the field, and the drift
velocity will be proportional to the electric field, bigger the electric field, the bigger the
little bit of change that develops in the rapid random thermal motion of those electrons. The
electrons are negative, so there's a current in the direction opposite the field, so current is
proportional to this drift velocity, but with a negative sign, it's proportional to the opposite
of the electric field, but it's proportional. The voltage across the conductor is also proportional
to the electric field, because when I have a conductor with an electric field in it,
nice uniform electric field, voltage is electric field times distance, and so what that means is
that the current is proportional to the voltage in a conductor like a metal. So here's a picture of
the situation, I've got a voltage V across the conductor, some length of conductor, I've got
electrons drifting leftward opposite the electric field, and they constitute a current I flowing
to the right, and my claim is that current is proportional to the voltage. Now that is not an
exact profound deep result, that's approximately true for metals. If the electric field gets too
big, that's no longer true, if the metal gets down to too low a temperature, that's no longer true,
but it's approximately the case that the current is proportional to the voltage in an electrical
conductor like a metal. And that leads us to something you've probably heard of called Ohm's law,
Ohm's law is a relationship between electric voltage and current, and another quantity that
characterizes the conductor, namely its resistance, how it slows down the flow of current. So in many
conductors current is proportional to voltage, the proportionality is this property of the conductor
called its resistance, it's how much it impedes the flow of current, the resistance R depends on
the material properties, like the density of electrons in it, like the crystal structure,
like the presence of impurities, it depends on temperature usually as the temperature goes up
for metals, the resistance also goes up, it depends on the size and shape of the conductor,
and all of that though put together give you this simple relationship between current and voltage,
and you can think of the voltage as kind of a push that's trying its energy per charge,
it's kind of a push trying to push current through a resistance R, the bigger the voltage the more
current you'll get, the bigger the resistance the less current you'll get, that's Ohm's law.
Now I want to emphasize some things about Ohm's law because it's widely misunderstood,
first of all Ohm's law is not some deep profound law of nature like
Coulomb's law for the electric force or its equivalent Gauss's law, those are deep profound
laws that describe all of nature, Ohm's law is an approximate law that describes how some
materials, particularly metals, behave, it's empirical, it's something we observe in the
world and we can kind of figure out why it ought to be true, but it's only approximately true,
good approximation, it's especially true for metallic conductors. Now if you're going to use
Ohm's law and we'll be using Ohm's law in the next few lectures, be careful, know what the
terms in it mean, V is the voltage across some resistance R, it's not just some random voltage
anywhere in a circuit, if you've got a 6 volt battery in a circuit, that doesn't mean V for
Ohm's law is 6 volts, it might be depending on how that battery is connected, but it might not be,
V is the voltage across a particular resistance R, I is the current through that resistance,
note those two words, voltage appears across because potential difference is a property of
two points, current goes through because it's a flow and if you use those words and think about
them when you talk about voltage and current you won't go wrong and R finally is the resistance
we're talking about, there are alternate forms of Ohm's law, they aren't different laws, just
algebra, V is IR, R is V over I, you can put them all together and that tells you by the way that
the unit of resistance is the volt per amp and that unit is given the name Ohm and the symbol for
Ohm is a capital of Greek omega, so there's a Greek letter we're going to have to deal with,
so now we understand Ohm's law and let's see if we really understand it by doing
a quick calculation based on our understanding of Ohm's law, so let's go to our big screen again
and let's look at a real practical situation, here's a car battery and car batteries have
these lead terminals that come out of them and car batteries got acid in them and all kinds of stuff
and a lot of corrosion can occur at a battery terminal, you may have looked at your battery in
your car sometimes you know this white corrosion stuff on, white stuff that forms on it and corrosion
can increase the resistance of the contacts that connect that to the very thick wires that carry
current from that car battery and in this case corrosion has increased the resistance at the
battery to about 0.03 Ohms I'm telling you and I'm telling you that the starter motor by far the
biggest current drain in a car draws 130 amps that's a big current that's why the wires from that
battery have to be so big so let's ask what's the voltage across the starter it's a 12 volt car
battery you might think the starter is designed to run on 12 volts and it probably is but it can
run on less voltage too a typical fairly good battery with a fairly good starter the voltage
across the starter will end up being somewhere between 9 and 12 volts and I'll show you in
subsequent lectures how we figure that out but here just based on this resistance we're going to
ask the question so we can easily do that because the voltage across that resistance is related
by ohms law to the current through that resistance and to the resistance and we're given the current
it's 130 amps that's flowing from the battery through that battery terminal with its resistance
and through the motor starter motor and back and that is 130 amps times 0.03 ohms that's 3.9 volts
so that leaves the car battery voltage the car battery voltage is 12 volts that leaves
8.1 volts across the starter that's a little bit low you probably hear when you try to start
the car it's not that low you're probably going to start but it's not as high as we'd like it to be
well let me move on and end with two other topics involving electric voltage and current
first of all power and then we'll look at electric safety so let's consider electric power we know
that current is charge per time we know that voltage is energy per charge multiply them together
you have charge per time energy per charge the charge cancels and what have you got you've got
energy per time we know way back from mechanics that energy per time is a measure of power that's
what power is it's the rate at which we're using consuming generating whatever energy so the power
in si units is measured in watts and it comes out with voltage and current you could work out the
units in detail it comes out in watts so if you multiply voltage and current you end up with power
in watts electric power is p equals i v and if you know ohms law and you're dealing with a resistance
you can write that in two alternate forms which look like they're contradictory but believe me
they aren't you have to think carefully about them if we take v is i r we'll get power to be i
squared r if we take i to be v over r we'll take get power to be v squared over r two alternate forms
and i'd like to give you an example of that why of understanding electric power and that's the
example of electric power transmission you see transmission lines going across the country
and they carry very high currents well not that high thousand amps maybe but more importantly they
carry very high voltages 345 kilovolts for example 750 kilovolts there are power lines in some parts
of the world that are carrying over a million volts why do we use high voltage for power
transmission well we can understand that by understanding electric power and resistance
so let's look at an example here's a picture of a power plant on the left a transmission line
carrying power to a city on the right and i'm going to assume a current i is flowing in that
transmission line and that there's a voltage v between the transmission line and the ground
and sometimes we use the ground as sort of the return wire i'm going to assume that happens here
it's not usually done these days but it will make my calculation a little bit more straightforward
so the power plant is supplying some power p that powers the product of this voltage and current
so the power transmitted to the city is p equals iv we could possibly transmit that
with a very very large current and a relatively small voltage or we could do it with a small
current and a large voltage well the power lost in the transmission line whose resistances are
is i squared times r as we just saw by applying ohm's law to that expression for power as the
product of voltage and current and so if you increase i you increase the power loss and
that is the reason we don't like large currents in transmission lines we would like to keep the
current relatively small and to supply the same power we've got to make the voltage very very
big that's why we transmit power at very high voltages the best choice is a relatively small
current and a large voltage electric power transmission and why we do it the way we do
more on that later well let's end up with a quick look at electrical safety i had a danger high
voltage sign up here a few lectures ago we worry about high voltages but some people are a little
more sophisticated say it's not the voltage that gets you it's the current yet we don't see danger
high current signs there's no sign in your car that says 130 amps flowing here so why the issue
well the issue is this it really is current that is the dangerous thing current passing through your
body is dangerous but it takes a certain amount of voltage to drive current your body under normal
dry conditions has a resistance of tens to hundreds of thousands of ohms and it would take a very
high voltage indeed to drive significant currents through you so it's neither high voltage or high
current alone that's dangerous it's a combination you have to have voltages that are high enough to
drive big enough currents through you the currents it takes aren't that big currents through your
heart of micro amperes yours will upset the electrical system your heart is an electrical
system as we've seen that that paces your heart so they can be pretty small but usually you
don't get currents very big inside your body unless you've introduced some kind of electrodes into it
so let's look at what's going on here current is what's really dangerous to us but it takes voltage
to drive that current here's a little table that shows you some of the currents that that and their
physiological effects you get about a milliamp half to two milliamps flowing through you you could
barely feel that up to about a factor of 10 more than that 10 to 15 milliamps in your muscles which
are also electrical systems in fact your nervous system is electrochemical so it's upset by these
kinds of things by electric currents your muscles will contract involuntarily you may not be able
to let go of something you've grabbed at some high voltage go a little higher 15 to 100 milliamps
thousands of an amp up to about a tenth of an amp you get a severe shock and your breathing may
become difficult at 100 to 200 milliamps that's actually the most dangerous your heart will go
into fibrillation and you'll die within a few minutes if you're not resuscitated above that
you may get cardiac arrest which is actually easier to restart you out of but you may get actual
burns from the resistive heating and your breathing will stop but you can be resuscitated
not by somebody who doesn't first disconnect you though from the source of the problem so let's
look a little bit more at electrical safety we'd like to keep ourselves safe in the electrical
context and one thing we do is to use the fact that the earth ground provides us with a nice zero
of potential and one side of the electric power line is in fact grounded so here i have a picture
of somebody operating an electric drill with two wires supplying it from an outlet in the wall
and one side of that power line is as i say grounded the other side is the so-called hot side
the grounded side is called neutral in electricians parlance what happens if there's a short circuit
between the hot wire and any piece of metal on that case of that drill if it's an older drill
it's probably made of metal these days it's made of plastic but it may still have screws and things
sticking out well if there's that short circuit meaning a place where a wire that's supposed to
not contact that metal case does so then i can get a current to the case and a current could flow
through me and in the worst case electrocute me or give me a serious shock so to avoid that problem
many devices that were likely to use in situations where we'd be in contact with grounded things like
water pipes for example so in the kitchen with power tools and so on we had a third wire a ground
wire and then if there's a short circuit to that case the current flows down the ground wire and
it breaks the circuit breaker or the fuse that protects that circuit from short circuits which
could otherwise cause fires because too much current would flow so the reason you see grounding
prongs and let me show you some the reason you see prongs like this third prong on this piece of
conductor this this conducting prong this big round one is because all the metal parts of this
power supply the one i used to charge the capacitor in the previous lecture all those metal parts are
connected directly to this prong and that means if anything goes wrong in here and high voltage
gets somehow connected to the metal case it will simply blow the fuse and i will be safe so that's
one way of protecting us from the danger of electric shock here's another way in a lot of
modern plugs one prong is wider than the other and that goes into the outlet in only a certain way
and that's designed to make it less likely that the hot wire is going to short circuit to any
piece of metal like this little piece of glue gun here where there's a metal tip that might
pick up high voltage if in fact something went wrong you want to be even safer you use devices
called ground fault circuit interrupters here's one that's built into a hairdryer because a hairdryer
would be used typically in a wet environment of a bathroom many of them are also built into
electrical outlets you'll see outlets in bathrooms particularly near swimming pools in basements
outdoor outlets that have these extra buttons that are for testing the ground fault interrupter
and what the interrupter does is it senses the current flowing down one wire and the current
flowing back the other wire and if they aren't exactly equal it assumes the current is leaking
off somewhere possibly through a person and getting to ground some other way and somebody's
getting shocked and so it shuts off the circuit before a dangerous current can develop so those
are some ways of protecting us from the dangers of electricity the dangers of too much electric
current flowing through us well let's end by taking a look at what we've learned in lecture 32
we've learned about electric current the flow of electric charge movement of electrons or other
charges through electrical conductors the unit is the ampere equal to a coulomb per second we've
seen several conduction mechanisms especially and most importantly we look at metallic conduction
the electric field and the electric electron ion collisions give rise to this drift velocity
proportional to the field that leads us to ohm's law that relates the current the voltage and the
resistance of that particular piece of conductor we've seen then that electric power is the product
of current and voltage and finally we've looked at electrical safety
