Welcome to lecture 41, the first of three lectures on optics. Now, we've just come through a
long sequence of lectures on electromagnetism, culminating in lecture 40 in our understanding
that Maxwell's equations lead to electromagnetic waves and that we can identify light as an
electromagnetic wave. So in principle, everything I'm going to say about optics in the next
three lectures can in fact be derived rigorously from Maxwell's equations. That would be difficult
to do. I'm going to refer to Maxwell's equations occasionally. Most of the time we can ignore
the fact that light is an electromagnetic wave. In fact, we can ignore the fact that
it's a wave at all. Because whenever light or any other wave interacts with a system
that is large compared to the wavelength, we don't notice the wave aspect of that thing,
light, sound, whatever it is. So when light is interacting with objects that are large
compared with a rather tiny wavelength of light, we can ignore the fact that light consists
of waves. And we can consider it to consist of rays, straight lines of light that move
straight until they encounter some other medium and then they may bend or they may reflect,
or they may refract, or the physics words we use, and then they travel in straight lines
again called rays within those new media they have come into. So we're going to use what's
called the ray approximation. And again, it's good when the size of the systems we're dealing
with is much larger than the wavelengths. By the way, ray optics is also called geometrical
optics because of the straight line rays that we're drawing. The simplest phenomena we'll
deal with with geometrical optics or ray optics is the phenomenon of reflection. And before
I talk about reflection and give you some examples of it, let me just mention here's
one place where we do connect to Maxwell's equations quite readily because what makes
something a good reflector? Well, if you think about things that are shiny, they tend to
be metals, a piece of aluminum foil, the aluminum coating on the back of a mirror, just a shiny
piece of copper. Why are those things good reflectors? They're good reflectors because
they're metals and that means they contain free electrons. And light is an electromagnetic
wave even though we're not going to need to know that for most of these optics lectures.
And so in comes an electromagnetic wave with its electric field, the electric charge of
the electron response to that electric field, the electron oscillates at the frequency of
that incoming wave and oscillating or accelerated electric charge is the source of electromagnetic
radiation and the free electrons re-radiate that wave and out it goes. And that's a very
microscopic electromagnetic description of the process of reflection. So metals tend
to be good reflectors. Let's look at a couple of reflectors. Over here, I've got a nice
white board. It's white, meaning it reflects all light incident on it. It is basically
reflecting 100% of the light that lands on it, approximately. And over here, I have a
mirror and regular ordinary home mirror and the mirror is also reflecting all the light
or almost all the light that falls on it. What's the difference between the mirror and
the white board? Well, the difference actually has to do with how smooth their surfaces are.
They both are reflecting and they're both reflecting in essentially the same way, obeying
what we call the law of reflection. So let's take a look at the law of reflection. In the
law of reflection, we have an incident ray coming in. Here's our ray approximation. It
makes some angle theta one with the normal that is the perpendicular to the system that
it's hitting to the medium that it's going to reflect off of. And the rule for a reflected
ray, and we could prove this rigorously with Maxwell's equations, is that the reflected
ray goes out at the same angle relative to that perpendicular, the dashed line in this
diagram that it came in at. That's the law of reflection. The angles of incidence and
reflection are equal. By the way, that term angle of incidence is going to apply when
we look at the next phenomenon also, refraction. So what's the difference between my white
board and my mirror? Well, the white board and the mirror have different surface roughnesses.
The mirror is very smooth. It's got to be quite smooth. It's got to be so smooth it
doesn't vary a whole lot compared to the wavelength of light, at least over small regions of its
surface. So it's very smooth and it under exhibits what's called specular reflection.
All the light rays hitting it coming in at a given angle hit the mirror at that same angle
and they bounce off at the same angle. And that's why we get a nice, shiny mirror that
gives us an actual image. And we'll see in a moment how that image comes about. The white
board is similar, except its surface is rougher. The incoming rays still obey the law of reflection.
But in this picture, this microscopic picture of it, because the surface is rough, there
are all kinds of different angles. So light rays that are coming in all at the same angle
are bounced back at all kinds of different angles. We can't form an image that way and
we get this sort of incoherent mess of light rays coming out in all directions. And therefore
the white board looks white pretty much no matter how you look at it. So that's reflection.
The law of reflection is simply the law that says the incident ray and the reflected ray
come in and out at the same angle and it happens both in the mirror and in the white board.
It's just the white board. Those angles of incidence relative to the normal to the surface
vary because the surface is rough. So that's reflection.
So let's take a look at our mirror over here. I look in the mirror. I see myself. I see
things in the studio that you don't normally see behind us. There I am in the mirror. Where
am I exactly? And here's my left hand waving at the mirror. But in the mirror it looks
like my right hand. How is all that happening? So let's take a look at how a plain mirror
like that, a flat mirror, forms images. In the next lecture we'll look at curved mirrors,
which are more interesting. But a flat mirror is interesting in itself. So let's see how
this flat mirror forms images. So here's a diagram that shows a mirror running vertically
down the middle and we'll have some object. In this case it's a little triangle and you
can actually think of that as the head of an arrow. I'll be using arrows for objects
and optical diagrams a lot because they're distinguishable one end from the other and
yet they're very simple objects. So here's what happens. Light from the object shines
toward the mirror and you can see in this case three light rays going out. They bounce off
obeying the law of reflection and they continue to diverge as they were doing coming from
the object and down at the lower left I've shown an eye which is looking in to see the
image of that object in the mirror. Now the solid lines I've drawn here which are all
to the left of the mirror show the actual paths of the light. But to that eye it looks
like that light is diverging from a point behind the mirror as far behind the mirror
as the actual object is in front and I've marked that with dashed lines which show apparent
light paths. There is nothing behind the mirror that we're seeing and yet it looks like the
image is behind the mirror. For that reason because the image isn't really there because
there isn't really light coming from the image that's called a virtual image and we'll use
that term over and over again when we look at more complicated images formed by lenses
and curved mirrors. A virtual image is an image that isn't in some sense really there
in the sense that light is not actually coming from the place where the image is. It's going
to be the same size as the object and you can see in this diagram that the image in
the plane mirror is going to be the same distance behind the mirror as the object is in front
and it is actually reversed and you might think it's reversed left right sort of but
what it's really reversed is front to back because the part of the object facing the
mirror of the actual object corresponds to the part of the image facing the mirror and
those directions are reversed. That is what causes my left and right hand to appear reversed
in the mirror but it's more correct to say that the mirror reverses objects front to
back than to say it reverses them left to right. Okay let's take a little look at how
we might use plane mirrors for something more interesting than just preening our faces
in them. Here's a device called a corner reflector. A corner reflector consists of two mirrors
at right angles in three dimensions it's called a corner cube and it consists of a third
mirror at right angles to those two. In the corner reflector a corner cube has the wonderful
property that when light comes in and reflects off one mirror hits the other mirror and reflects
back it comes back exactly parallel to how it came in regardless of what that incoming
angle was. So here's a light ray coming in reflecting off the two mirrors and coming
out not in exactly the same place but parallel to the direction it came in on. Go to some
different light rays and the same thing happens. Let's do a quick demonstration of that with
our optics setup we'll have over here. Okay so what we have here which we'll be using
in this lecture in the next is a white board it's a magnetic white board and I have a number
of optical components I can put on the board and I can they'll stick there because they
got magnets on the back. So here for example is a little simple laser which if I turn it
on will shine a beam that we can see against the board and we can put optical components,
mirrors, whatever on the board and see how those light rays behave. So let me take a
couple of simple mirrors they're just blocks of glass with a shiny mirror piece and let
me put them at right angles because that's what makes a corner reflector as I just showed.
So I'm going to put two of them together at right angles and I'm going to shine a beam
of light in and you can see that the beam comes out it's going in at that angle it comes
back out at that same angle. If I rotate the laser beam it still comes out at the same
angle it went in at I can put it in anywhere and as long as it hits at such an angle that
it's going to intersect both mirrors it will come back out at the same angle it came in
with. This is actually a very useful thing a lot of laser experiments that involve sending
a laser beam some distance and hoping it will come back involves such a system because you
don't need to align the reflector perfectly. When astronauts first went to the moon they
actually took three-dimensional corner reflectors to the moon and they were used for laser ranging
experiments laser beams were aimed at those corner reflectors and they had to hit them but
they didn't have to hit at any particular angle because the reflector returned the ray in the
same direction it came from and those were used to determine the distance to the moon to within a
matter of inches by the way those helped confirm Einstein's general theory of relativity. So there
is a practical example of what we can do with reflection in plain mirrors. Now while I'm here
at the optic setup I'd like to move on to a second phenomenon and that's the phenomenon of
refraction that's the bending of light as it passes from one medium transparent medium into
another. So to do a demonstration of refraction I'm going to take this semicircular piece of glass
now this is glass that has no reflective surfaces or anything on it and I'm going to use my laser
and I'm going to shine the laser right into the box and you can see into the glass and you can see
when the laser beam is going in right perpendicular to the interface to the surface of the glass it
just goes straight in comes out the other side. I'm using the curved piece because I want to ignore
what's happening at the far end and that will be a little easier to understand but notice what
happens if I make the ray come in to the glass at an angle. Well now you see that the ray is coming
in and it's going at a slightly different angle it's being bent. If you look carefully by the way
you may see a slight hint here of a reflection because whenever light hits an interface between
two media it doesn't only refract it also reflects and that's by the way true for any wave when it
goes into a different medium that's how for example medical ultrasound works by reflections off
different materials within the body. As I make that angle of incidence steeper and steeper further away
from that perpendicular you can see the bending becomes more pronounced and more dramatic. That's the
phenomenon of refraction and we want to spend the next a few minutes looking at exactly why refraction
occurs and we want to understand the law that governs refraction. So I'll turn this off and we'll take
a look at why it is that refraction occurs. So here's a wave picture. We're going to take a little
bit of a wave picture here and here's the deal. Different media have different speeds for light or any
other wave. So for example light moves more slowly in glass than it does in vacuum. It moves in fact
at about two-thirds the speed it does in vacuum and we define the index of refraction of a material
to be the ratio of the speed of light to the speed in that material. So for example in glass the index
of refraction is about 1.5 that means the speed of light in glass is C divided by 1.5. The index of
refraction in water is about 1.3 so light moves a little faster in water than it does in glass. The
index of refraction of diamond is 2.4, one of the highest indices of refraction of ordinary materials
and that's part of what gives a diamond gemstone. It's a quality, it's sparkling quality. It isn't just that it's
a shiny piece of stuff. It's that it has a very high index of refraction and there's a lot of bending of light
going on in there. So in this picture I'm showing medium one in the upper region. There's an interface between
two different media, medium two down below. You could think of medium one as air and medium two as glass
as in the demonstration I just did and here come some wave crests moving in medium one with some speed v1
which is such that n1 is C over v1. That's the definition of the index of refraction and then they move more
slowly in medium two and because they move more slowly you can see that they're slowing down because of that
slower motion in order to keep the frequency of the waves the same which it has to be the same number of wave crests
have to cross that interface coming in as going out. The waves have to slow down because the speed is less
and consequently they bend as shown and what we're interested in figuring out here is the angle theta one
and the angle theta two and how those two angles are related. So that's a wave picture of why refraction occurs
and to figure out exactly what's going on here we're going to go to our big screen and look at the relationship
between those two angles the angle of incidence and the angle of refraction. So let's go there.
So here's basically the same picture we were just looking at and I'm going to derive what's called Snell's Law
and if you ever took physics before you saw Snell's Law somebody told you Snell's Law is how refraction works
we're going to derive Snell's Law and see how refraction works. So here come the wave crests heading in
here is that normal to the interface, here's medium one, here's medium two. Here are rays representing the
incident light, rays representing the refracted light, theta one is the angle of incidence, theta two is the
angle of refraction, we want to know how they're related. Wave speed always for waves, the speed of a wave
is the frequency times the wavelength. Now as I indicated the frequency can never change because the same number
of waves you sit on the interface you'll see so many wave crests coming in every second and you'll see so many
wave crests going out and those numbers have to be the same because waves aren't disappearing at that interface
these are transparent media they're letting all the wave energy in. So the frequency stays the same.
What that implies is that the wavelength in medium two down here is shorter than the wavelength in medium one
because the speed is f lambda, f is the same in both cases, the speed is lower in medium two so lambda has to be
lower in medium two by that same factor. Now let's look at a couple of triangles I've marked here, triangles with
angle theta one here and with angle theta two here. Notice that those triangles are right triangles because this
side is perpendicular to the wave crests in each of the two different media so they're both right triangles and
second they share a common hypotenuse and that's what's going to enable us to figure out what's going on here.
They share that common hypotenuse and remember that the sine of an angle is the opposite side over the hypotenuse.
Well look up here here's the opposite side for this blue shaded triangle that's the opposite side opposite theta one
and so by definition the sine of angle theta one is this distance which low and behold is the distance between wave crests
that's the wavelength lambda one in medium one divided by the hypotenuse and similarly for this orange triangle
here's the opposite and that is the wavelength the distance between wave crests in medium two divided by that common hypotenuse
so the triangles share a common hypotenuse so that hypotenuse can be written as either lambda one over sine theta one
or lambda two over sine theta two and we're going to not worry about the fact that it's a hypotenuse anymore
it's given us this wonderful equality because in fact those two triangles have the same hypotenuse.
So let's take what we've just found that lambda one over sine theta one is equal to lambda two over sine theta two
and let's work with that a little bit. First of all let's look at the wave speeds again.
v is f lambda always for a wave so lambda is v over f.
I didn't write that explicitly before but that's what tells us immediately that the wavelength is proportional to the wave speed.
The wavelength is smaller in medium two where the wave speed is lower.
I can just take this relationship and take the reciprocal of both sides it's still a perfectly valid equation so let me do that.
Now the refractive index is defined such that the velocity is c over n.
The velocity of the wave in a medium a light wave in a medium where the index of refraction is n is c divided by n
and n is bigger than one so the velocity is smaller than the velocity of light in vacuum.
So there's the relationship between the speed and c and the refractive index
and that implies that lambda which is v over f becomes c over n times f because lambda is v over f,
v is c over n divide that by f we've got the wavelength in either medium different in the two media because n is different.
So now I can write the wavelengths which I had on the bottom they were downstairs here in the denominator
and so I'm going to write nf over c where I see 1 over a wavelength so n1 f over c sin theta 1 equals n2 f over c sin theta 2
and common to both these are c and f because again the frequency doesn't change the wavelength does but the frequency doesn't
so that's common and consequently we have Snell's law n1 sin theta 1 equals n2 sin theta 2
if anyone has taken any physics has seen that there's where it comes from in the approximation of ray optics
and again we could derive it right from Maxwell's equations but this is a simple but perfectly rigorous derivation of that result.
So we've got Snell's law we understand how refraction occurs in the wave picture.
Let me give you a couple of examples here's a common thing you deal with probably every day a CD or a DVD or a blu-ray disc.
These discs contain enormous amounts of information a blu-ray disc contains 25 gigabytes of data because it's packed into very very tiny structures on that disc.
How can we possibly make that work when a dust moat would be big enough to wipe out thousands or even millions of bits of data?
Well the answer involves refraction here is a picture for old-fashioned sound CD and audio CD but the picture would be similar for DVD or blu-ray disc
and you see an incident laser beam the laser that reads the information off the disc is coming in at some angle
and there is a refraction occurring at the interface with the plastic of the disc and one thing that does have to be pretty standard in discs
is the index of refraction of that plastic it's standardized at 1.55 and that takes the incoming laser beam and takes it to a very carefully focused very tiny spot on the laser itself
and that spot is tinier than any dust moat but where it entered the plastic it was much bigger and that's the reason CDs are basically clean
it takes a lot of dirt and dust to make them not work. So there is one example where we use refraction, straight line refraction, not refraction in lenses yet
we'll do that in the next lecture and it becomes a practical significance.
Okay let's look at another phenomenon that occurs associated with refraction but also gives us back reflection so I'm going to go over to my experiment here
and I'm going to set it up again for a different experiment. Here I've got the same piece of semicircular glass I used before but I now have the curved edge facing my laser
and you'll notice the laser beam is entering the glass going straight in, angle of incidence is zero, angle of refraction is zero goes straight through and comes out
now watch what happens if I come in at different orientations. I'm coming in normal perpendicular to the curved part that's why I'm using this curved piece of glass
let's look at what happens at this other interface between glass and air going from a medium with higher refractive index to one of lower refractive index
the light bends away from the normal it bent toward the normal when we came in when we go out it bends away from the normal
and now watch what happens as I increase that angle. Here I am at about 30 degrees and we're going out at about 40 something degrees
and here I am at 35 degrees and we're going out even steeper and here I am at 40 degrees and wow we're going out really steeply
what's going to happen? Well there's going to come some angle and it's coming up pretty soon here
where that outgoing light ray just barely skims along the surface and after that it basically has no place to go
and so look what it does instead it reflects it reflects off that interface between the transparent glass and the transparent air
there's no reflective substance there and yet we get almost perfect reflection
that almost perfect reflection is called total internal reflection
it occurs when light is trying to go from a medium which has a higher index of refraction to one with a lower index of refraction
and if the angle is above some critical angle the angle of refraction in the lesser index medium in the air in this case
would try to be greater than 90 degrees and that can't happen and so it reflects totally instead of refracting
so we get reflection out of refraction with this particular setup
let's go to our big screen and see exactly how that happens and what that critical angle is
okay so let's take a look at this phenomenon of total internal reflection
we're going to base it on Snell's law which we just worked out for ourselves so we understand where that comes from
and what we have here is some kind of medium like glass
it's the first medium the medium in which the light is going to originate in fact I've put a light source down there in the corner
and I'm going to ask what happens as the light from that light source hits this interface at different angles
so here is a relatively steep angle I'll call that ray number one
and ray number one is going to refract a little ways away from that normal but not a whole lot if it had hit head on it would have gone straight through
here's ray number two
ray number two is at a bigger angle relative to the normal and so it refracts more
and here is that special ray ray three which just skims along the surface
now notice for ray three the angle of refraction is 90 degrees
if I send out a ray at an even steeper angle it can't refract into the air it undergoes total internal reflection
it obeys the law of reflection the angle of incidence is the angle of reflection and away it goes
so total internal reflection begins with ray three that's the dividing line between rays that refract into the air
and rays that reflect by the way there is always a little bit of reflection even for these other rays
that reflection gets bigger and bigger and by the time we get to ray three it becomes all that happens to the light going through there
so let's try to figure out how that happens and here's what we've just recognized at ray three at the critical angle
ray three is at the critical angle that's this angle right here and we want to know what that angle is
at ray three theta two the angle in the second medium in air in this case is 90 degrees
so theta two is 90 degrees the sine of 90 degrees is one
sine theta two is one
so in Snell's law we have N1 sine theta one but I'm going to call theta one theta sub C because it's that critical angle
is equal to N2 the refractive index of the air
and so sine theta C is N2 the refractive index of the air over N1 the refractive index of the glass
let's do the numbers on that
N1 is glass that's 1.5 approximately
N2 is air that's refractive index approximately one the speed of light in air is almost as much as it is in vacuum
and so we work it out sine of theta critical is one over 1.5 that's 0.67
so theta critical is the angle whose sine is 1.67 as 0.67 sine to the minus one of 0.67 is 42 degrees
and that's exactly what we saw in our experiment as we approached 40 degrees we still got a little bit of refraction
but then a little bit past 40 degrees and we got that total internal reflection
so for glass the critical angle for total internal reflection is about 42 degrees
and you can calculate that for any other substance you would like water diamond whatever
and it's internal reflections in the diamond for example that are causing a lot of its sparkliness
so that's how total internal reflection works and that's what the critical angle is for total internal reflection
let's just go over to our demonstration setup again and look at one example where total internal reflection is put to good use
so what I have here is a setup in which I have basically a prism shaped piece of glass
basically an equilateral right triangle and I'm shining light in perpendicular to the first side of it
and that light is hitting this diagonal which is at 45 degrees and remember we just figured for glass the critical angle is 42 degrees
so it's hitting it bigger than the critical angle and so it undergoes total internal reflection and it comes right out the bottom
and this thing behaves like a perfect mirror and in fact that is often used where we want really good reflection
we will often use total internal reflection instead of simply a shiny coating
one place where this is used is in binoculars if you own a pair of binoculars you notice they got a kind of bumpiness
the part you look through isn't in exactly the same direction as the lens that the light comes in through
it takes a little jog and it takes a little jog by reflecting through a pair of prisms
not shiny mirrors but prisms that are set up like this so total internal reflection occurs
so that's total internal reflection and that's it being used for this particular kind of reflection
just used as a mirror but it's not a mirror it's glass with total internal reflection
let me just show you a couple other examples of total internal reflection before we wrap up
here's a picture of a whale or anything else underwater if you're underwater and you look up
if you look at too steep an angle you get total internal reflection
so this whale is seeing some planes flying over it there the whale watching planes they're watching the whale
but the whale is watching them and it sees them it sees the entire outside world in that cone
demarked by these two rays there's a squid off to its right and it sees that squid at almost the same angle
as that right hand airplane because the squid's light rays are beyond the critical angle and so they undergo total internal reflection
another important example of total internal reflection is the rainbow
the rainbow occurs because total internal reflection is occurring in raindrops and it happens that at an angle of about 42 degrees
coming out you get a concentration of rays that's where there's a bright band in the sky
at an angle of 42 degrees between the line from the sun to you and the line where you see the rainbow
and because the index of refraction varies slightly with wavelength that is with color
you actually see the colors of the rainbow so the rainbow is another example
and let me end with one final example optical fibers which have replaced copper wires in high speed communication systems
are simply pieces of thin glass in which light travels down the glass by total internal reflection off the walls of the fiber
and the picture shows a bundle of a few optical fibers that can carry as much information as that huge thick cable
and let me do a very quick demonstration of how that might work
here I have a single strand of coaxial cable it has a shielded conductor some insulation and an inner conductor
here much finer and able to carry much more information is a single optical fiber
and if you'd like to see this optical fiber in operation let me simply hold the optical fiber up to my laser
let the light head down the fiber twisting around in all kinds of circles
that light will go in there it will go round and round and there it is
you can just see it coming out and shining on the screen a little spot as that light has gone all through that fiber and come out
so these fibers can carry enormous amounts of information because of the very high frequency of visible light
ok well let's wrap up
we've seen that reflection occurs when light encounters an interface between two media
we've seen it can be complete or partial
we've seen that the angles of incidence and reflection are equal
we've seen that refraction occurs at interfaces of transparent media
it obeys Snell's law
and 1 sin theta 1 equals n2 sin theta 2
and we've seen the phenomenon of total internal reflection and a number of its applications
well we could stop there but if you're interested here's a challenge for you
here's that diagram about the clean CD
I'd like you to find the laser beam D at that layer at the top
where the information is actually stored on the disk
so think about that a little bit and I'll give you the solution
here comes the solution
by Snell's law sin theta 2 is sin theta 1 over n
by trigonometry that distance X you see is T
the thickness of the layer times the tangent of theta 2
D what we're looking for the diameter of that spot is the big D
the diameter of the spot coming in minus twice that X
let's work through the numbers you can do arithmetic
and you can make your calculator take trig functions
and the answer is 1.8 micrometers, 1.8 millionths of a meter
and that's why the CD is so immune from dust
because refraction gives it a very very tiny spot size
at the layer where it's reading the information
