Welcome to lecture 43, in which we're going to remember what we intentionally forgot in
the previous two lectures, and that's the fact that light consists of waves. Remember
that we were able to use the ray approximation, the approximation of geometrical optics when
the systems we were concerned with, our lenses, our mirrors, things like that, were large
compared with the wavelength of the light. Physical optics, as it's called, as opposed
to geometrical optics or ray optics, becomes important when light interacts with systems
that are the size of the wavelength. And we're going to have many, many uses for light as
a wave in technology, in very precise measurements, in observations we may make, astronomical
observations and so on. But we're also going to find out that the wave nature of light
fundamentally limits our ability to image, particularly either small objects or distant
objects that are very close together. The fundamental phenomenon that waves do that
matter does not do is the phenomenon of interference. And it's interference that we're going to
be dealing with when we talk about physical optics, about wave optics, about the wave
aspects of light, and how they affect optical phenomena. So let me remind you a little bit
about interference, which is a subject I first introduced back in lecture 18 when I was talking
about waves. In fact, we will see a number of connections here with lecture 18 because
we're talking once again about waves, but now specifically about light waves. So let
me remind you that interference can be either constructive, which it is when wave crests
meet each other and wave troughs meet each other. So here we see two waves, they happen
to be out of step with each other, but they're out of step by a full wavelength, lambda,
again that symbol for wavelength, and crests meet crests and troughs meet troughs. And since
two waves can exist at the same place at the same time, and simply add when that happens,
the wave, this wave will be twice as big as either of the two waves that is making it
up, either of these two interfering waves. That's constructive interference. Destructive
interference occurs when crests meet troughs. So here's an example of destructive interference.
Here are two identical waves, except that now one is half a wavelength behind the other,
half a wavelength instead of a full wavelength, and that causes the crests to line up with
troughs and the troughs to line up with crests, and those two waves cancel out completely.
That's complete destructive interference. So how would we make these kinds of interference
happen? Well, if we had two waves, we took some light, for example, and we split it,
and we let one light wave travel a full wavelength longer than the other one, when they came
back together and we rejoined them, they would be constructively interfering and we'd get
back the original light. If we let them go on different paths and one of them came back
half a wavelength after the other, or before the other, then the two waves would completely
cancel and we would see no light. And of course there's all kinds of possibilities in between,
but the big ideas are constructive interference and destructive interference and then a continuum
in between. Here's an example of interference of this sort. It's interference in thin films,
and you've all seen this. If you look at a spill of oil, say on a wet road, you see
beautiful shimmering patterns. Not so good for the road, not so good for the environment,
but it's beautiful. See these shimmering patterns? If you take a soap film, as shown here in
the photograph, and you hold it up to light, you will see these shimmering patterns of
different colors. What's causing this? Well as you can see in the diagram on the left,
what's happening is light is coming into this thin film of material, and if the thin film
has a thickness such that light traveling through the thin film comes back and is interfering
with the light coming in at the surface and those two waves are in step, then I'll get
a bright region looking in at some particular angle or at some particular wavelength. If
those two waves come back and interfere destructively, then I will see darkness at a particular wavelength
or a particular angle. The reason I'm seeing multiple rainbow colors here is the criteria
in that thin film of soap bubble for constructive and destructive interference are different
for different wavelengths. I see those beautiful shimmering patterns. You'll notice it goes
completely dark at the top. At the top, there is no visible wavelength. It's very thin
at the top. A soap film tends to drain down from the top, so it's thicker at the bottom.
At the top, there is no visible wavelength that can undergo constructive interference
in that film. The constructive interference condition is when twice the thickness, because
the light is going back and forth, is m plus a half lambda, where m is an integer. You might
say why is it m plus a half? The reason is because the light undergoes a phase change
at one boundary, at the first boundary, when it's going from air to say glass or soap film
or whatever this thin film is made of, but it does not undergo a phase change at the
other boundary at the far side. What's happening is the light that reflects off the front surface
and the light that reflects off the back surface are interfering. The condition that that interference
be constructive is when twice the distance is m plus a half lambda. I marked that lambda
n because I'm talking there about the wavelength in the particular material we're talking
about, which is different from the wavelength in say air, because the refractive index will
be different. There's a common example interference in thin films, and this phenomenon can be
put to lots of good uses. In particular, it's used for very precise optical measurements
of very, very small distances. You use this method called interferometry. You're looking
at interference patterns to infer distances. More common kind of interference are one that
we're going to deal with quite a bit in this course, not only now, but also later when
we get into quantum physics is the interference that Thomas Young used in 1801 to prove definitively
that light consists of waves, a definitive result that held at least until 1905 when
it became questioned again. But light definitely has wave aspects, and Young proved that using
two source interference, which is something we talked about in lecture 18, and I want
to modify that a little bit now and talk about it for light.
So let's go to our big screen, and let's talk about two source interference. So here
I have two sources of light, and I have to assume they're coherent. That is, they are
emitting light waves in exactly the same phase of exactly the same frequency. We could have
done this for sound waves with two loud speakers being driven from the same source. We could
have done it with water waves if we had a couple of things bobbing up and down into water in
synchronism like this. It's a little bit harder to make two source interference with light,
but if we did have two light sources, what would happen is they would send out circular
wave fronts, or spherical wave fronts in three dimensions, and those wave fronts would go
on out. And as you can see here, there are places where wave crests cross, wave crests
cross, wave troughs are crossing there, wave crests, wave troughs. That's a region where
the waves are interfering constructively. In between, right there is a place where a wave
crest is crossing a trough. And as the waves propagate outward, nevertheless, we still
have these same regions, these bands, these lines in which we have constructive and destructive
interference. Well, let's notice those lines. There they are. Those are the lines of constructive
interference. You have bigger waves heading out along those lines in between their regions
where the waves almost, not quite, but almost cancel each other out. That's two source interference.
If we were to put a screen up here, we would get regions of bright and dark alternating
on that screen, bright, bright, bright, bright, bright, and in between dark, dark, dark, dark,
dark. Now that's two source interference, but how do you get two sources of light? Well,
ultimately, you do what Young did, you do what everybody who's done this experiment since
is done. Instead of trying to make two coherent sources of light, you instead put a single
source of light through two small holes, slits. And so we talk about slit systems and
we talk in this case about two slit interference. So instead of having two source interference,
I now have two slit interference. Here's some kind of barrier to the incoming waves. Waves
go through the two slits in the barrier. Each slit acts as a new source of circular waves,
for reasons we'll talk about later, and we get exactly the same interference pattern.
Let me leave that interference pattern on the screen for a minute as I show you that
this actually does occur. So let's go over and look at our demonstration on the table
and we'll see that we are in fact seeing two slit interference. So what I have here is
a rather small, fairly modest, semiconductor diode-based laser giving out red light. I have
a system here which has a number of different slits and other small apertures for light
to go through, and I have it set to a slit whose spacing between the two slits is 0.25
millimeters, a quarter of a millimeter. And then I have some distance out to a screen,
and this is the classic experiment that shows that light is a wave, because if I look on
that screen, what I in fact see on the screen is a pattern of light, dark, light, dark, light,
dark, and if we could darken the room, you would see quite a few of those light, dark,
light, dark bands, but what I'm seeing here are about five of them. In fact, just what
I have on the big monitor. So we're seeing the first five bands of the interference pattern.
There's a central band in the middle, and then we're seeing these other bands, and that
is an indication that the light waves passing through the two slits are interfering and
producing, when they get to that screen, that interference pattern. They're producing the
interference pattern all along, but I just put the screen there to intersect them, and
so we could observe that pattern. So that is double slit interference, and we're going
to go a little further with double slit interference than simply to use it to demonstrate the
wave nature of light. We're actually going to do some calculations with it. In fact,
we're actually going to come back here in a minute, and we're going to measure a very
tiny quantity, namely the wavelength of light. So let's go do that. Before we can measure
it, we've got to figure out a little bit here what's going on. So let's take a closer
look at two slit interference. So here's a picture of my two slit system before I had
the slits this way, now I've got them vertically. The slit spacing I'm going to call D, that
was the quarter of a millimeter over there. I'm going to have a screen some distance
L away, so that's the distance between the slits and the screen in my experiment, and
I'm going to notice that there are paths from one slit to some point P on the screen, some
arbitrary point P on the screen. That point P is a distance Y away from the center line
between the two slits, and I want to know where the bright and dark fringes of that
interference pattern, they're called fringes, are as a function of this distance Y, and
here's the deal. From the lower slit, it's a distance R2 to point P. From the upper slit,
it's a distance R1. Now this L is typically big, in my case it's a meter, a thousand millimeters.
This D is typically small, in my case it's a quarter of a millimeter, and consequently
you might say well these distances are basically the same, almost, very close. I couldn't measure
the difference with a meter stick, but the interference of light can measure it because
the interference of light is sensitive to distances that are as small as about the wavelength
of light. So let's blow this thing up and take a little look at it. The path difference
here has to be a multiple of the wavelength if I'm going to have constructive interference,
and the paths are not quite the same. So here we go, blow it up, here's that slit separation
D, here are these two lines going way out to point P, which in this blow up is way
far away. These lines are almost parallel, so close I can sort of assume they're parallel,
but they aren't quite parallel, and notice what's different. This path is a little shorter,
and it's shorter by this distance, and this distance by trigonometry is this piece of
the triangle, which is the hypotenuse, and its length is D, the slit separation, times
the sine of this angle theta, and the angle theta is the same as the angle toward that
point P, and you might say which angle, the angle of the lower ray, the angle of the upper
ray, well those are truly almost exactly the same, so we can ignore that difference.
So this is the path length D sine theta, the path length difference. So this ray from the
lower slit to get to this point P, which is above the center line here, has to travel
a greater distance, and the greater distance it travels is D sine theta, and we've seen
that we get constructive interference if that path length difference is a multiple of the
wavelength. So I can write D sine theta has to be m times lambda, where m stands for any
integer. It could be 0, it could be 1, it could be 2, it could be whatever, but it's
got to be an integer to get maximum constructive interference. Now for small angles theta, and
this picture is exaggerated, if you look at my apparatus, the angle to any of those points
on the screen from where the slits are is very tiny. For small angles, the measure of
angle theta in radians is equal essentially to the sine, and that's equal essentially
to the tangent. They're almost exactly equal. That's saying the sine curve has slope 1,
where it goes through a 0 if you want to get mathematical about it. And the tangent of
that angle is y divided by L, because there's a triangle, right triangle formed by either
of these pink lines, y over L is the tangent of that angle. So sine theta is approximately
tan theta is y over L. So we're going to have bright fringes when D times y over L is an
integer multiple of the wavelength. That tells us what y is. y is M times lambda L over D.
So you calculate the quantity lambda, the wavelength of the light you're using, this
L distance to your screen, D the separation, and you will see bright fringes at integer
multiples of that quantity along the screen measured from the center line with one right
at the center, which is the M equals 0 line. You'll get destructive interference if the
path difference is an odd multiple of the half wavelength. And consequently, you'll
get dark fringes when it's y equals M plus a half lambda L over D. So that's two slit
interference. Let's use two slit interference to measure the wavelength of visible light.
We know there are going to be bright fringes when y is M lambda L over D. We know there
are dark fringes when y is M plus a half lambda L over D from this diagram. Let's do the numbers.
We solve the bright fringe equation for lambda. The first fringe, M equals 1, occurs when
lambda equals y D over L. Put M equals 1, lambda equals y D over L. Now we can't do
any more numbers till we have some numbers to do, so let me go over to our experiment
and get the numbers. Now this apparatus has a nice built in scale and I've put the slits
at 10 centimeters and the screen at 110 centimeters, so the difference is 100 centimeters, 1 meter,
1,000 millimeters. It doesn't really matter where the laser is, that doesn't enter our
picture, that's just shining light to go through those two slits. The slits are a quarter of
a millimeter apart, that's what I'm told, and now I have to also get y. y is the distance
between the center fringe and the first fringe. Now I can see five fringes on there and rather
than try to measure the tiny distance from the center fringe to the first fringe, I'm
going to measure the distance between the second fringe in one direction and the second
fringe in the other direction and that distance will be four times the distance from the center
to the first fringe, so let me measure that. That is just about a centimeter, a little
over, it's between 1 and 1.1 centimeters, I could call it 1.05, but it's hair less.
I'm going to call it 1.04 centimeters or 10.4 millimeters. So 10.4 millimeters, that's
four times the distance I'm interested in, divide it in half, I've got 0.52, 0.26, so
that's going to be 0.26, 2.6, I'm sorry, millimeters, 0.26 centimeters, 2.6 millimeters
for that separation. So let's go back to our big screen and continue the calculation with
those numbers. So we've got 2.6 millimeters for Y, we've got a quarter of a millimeter
for D, I'm doing this all in millimeters, upstairs comes out millimeters squared, downstairs
millimeters, so the answer is in millimeters, a thousand millimeters for that one meter
separation of the screen, 0.00065 millimeters, and if you convert that to nanometers you
get 650 nanometers, and that is indeed just about the color of visible red light. So we
have correctly measured the wavelength of light here, that's a small quantity, that's
650 billionths of a meter, a little over half a millionth of a meter, and we have quite
accurately measured it using two slit interference. Okay, well let's move on a little bit and
look at what happens if we have more than two slits, which we can also do. So what happens
if we have more than two slits? Well, let's consider a case where we might have three
slits. Here are three slits. If you want a true maximum, all those waves have to arrive
in phase at that point on the screen, and so we have the same criterion, that D sine
theta, the path length difference has to be m lambda for all of them. So D is the separation
between individual slits, it's got to be true for all the slits. For a minimum things get
more complicated. We have n waves, three in this case, we're trying to sum them to zero,
and they've got to sort of be staggered in phase to come out zero. So the condition for
minimum becomes a little bit more complicated. What happens if we have multiple slits? The
criterion is actually D sine theta has to be some integer divided by the total number
of slits times lambda, and the integer can't be a multiple of the number of slits, or you'd
have constructive interference. Whew, this is getting complicated. But let's take a look
at what happens. What happens is this, when you have lots of slits, you have this criterion
for a maximum, this criterion for a minimum, when this number of slits is relatively small,
for example at the top in this picture, you get the kind of interference pattern we just
talked about. But as the number of slits increases, an interesting thing happens, the brightness
of the fringes increases, and the fringes get narrower and narrower and narrower and
if you have very, very many slits, you have very bright and very narrow, precisely defined
bright fringes in the interference pattern, and in between you have almost nothing. I
can demonstrate that with my device over here, which I'll do very quickly by putting in instead
some multiple slit systems. So let me do that. I'll start out as before with two slits. Let
me dial this down. And on our screen, we see a rather fuzzy pattern of a few dots. They're
a little more widely spaced than before because the spacing of the slit is a little bit different.
But there they are. And now I'm going to dial from two slits to three slits, and you can see
the dots have become a little bit brighter. You may also notice they've become a little bit more
distinct and a little bit narrower. Four slits, they become brighter still and smaller, and the
black gaps between them, where there's very little light, have become wider. And finally,
five slits, I have a series of quite bright dots across, and the number of dots has nothing to
do with the number of slits. These patterns were basically the same in all cases, but what's
happening is the bright interference fringes are becoming much brighter and much narrower. Now,
this is ultimately the principle behind something which is called a diffraction grating. A diffraction
grating is a system in which you have many, many, many, many slits, or in other cases, many
structures that will reflect light because this can happen either with reflection or with slit
like systems. And if there are a great many of them, then individual wavelengths will be sent
very precisely off at different angles. And you'll see bright regions for different wavelengths at
different angles. And this can be used like a prism, but much more accurately to break light up
into its colors. When you look at a CD or DVD or Blu-ray disc at the back side, the side that has
the information, and you wave it around, you'll often see bands of bright colors. That's because
the tracks that carry the successive pieces of information in the CD or DVD or Blu-ray disc are
acting as a so-called diffraction grating, which is what this is called. And you're seeing at
different angles these intensity maxima for different wavelengths of light. This is the basis of
astronomical spectroscopy and spectroscopy used in a lot of other areas of science. Here's an
example. This is called a grating spectrometer. It's used to analyze light. And what it does is
send light from some source, like from a telescope or whatever, through some kind of entrance slit
to collimate it. And then it goes through a grating with typically many, many, many thousands, in
most cases, of lines. And the way that grating diffracts the light or produces this interference
pattern sends different colors to different angular positions on that screen. And that's how you
separate the colors and analyze the light for its constituent wavelengths. So that's an example of a
multi-slit system. And I use the term diffraction grating there because the terms diffraction and
interference are kind of fuzzy terms in their relationship to each other. And I want to end
this lecture by talking a little bit about diffraction itself. Diffraction is best understood by a
principle called Huygens' principle. A Christian Huygens was a Dutch physicist who thought a lot
about waves. In fact, he was the first one to propose that light would be waves, but Newton
ruled in those days. And so he was not considered correct, but he was correct. Huygens says you
treat each point on a wave crest as a source of expanding spherical waves, which then interfere
to produce the propagating wave. It's kind of a complicated way to think about how a wave propagates,
but it can be helpful. So on the left, I've got a picture of a straight wave, and you can imagine
each point on the wave making these circular wave fronts, and they interfere a ways on, and that
makes the later position of the wave front. If the wave front is circular, then you get an advanced
and somewhat larger circular wave front as the wave propagates outward. Well, that's not very
useful, but it becomes very useful when waves interact with systems, particularly sharp edges
and things that are small compared to the wavelength. So here's what happens, for example, at an edge.
The waves bend as they go around the edge. Why do they bend? Well, look at the inset blow up here.
You can see each of those wave fronts producing circular little wavelets. They're called Huygens'
wavelets, and normally in the middle of this region away from that edge, they're just going
straight through. But right near the edge, there's no other waves to interfere, and you get this little
bending around the edge. There's an analogy with sound. Low-pitched sounds whose wavelength is long,
compared to things like doors, for example, go around corners. High-pitched sounds whose
wavelength is short don't show nearly as much of this diffraction effect. That's why you can be in
your apartment or your dorm room or something, and there's some pounding base from somebody's
stereo far away, but you don't hear the high-pitched sound. That's diffraction at an edge. Here's a
couple pictures of this. Here are water waves impinging on a barrier. The barrier is essentially made
by those two little pieces of rock or island there, and you can see the diffraction, the circular
wave front, spreading out beyond that barrier. Here's another example. This is a photograph of
light waves diffracting at an edge, and you see the edges on the left where it's completely black,
but instead of a sudden cutoff where it's either dark or light, you get these interference bands as
the waves coming by the edge are interfering with each other as they go in slightly different
directions. That's diffraction at an edge. Diffraction also takes place at apertures. Any kind of
hole that light might go through, slits, circular holes, the apertures of lenses for telescopes
and mirrors, the large mirrors on astronomical telescopes, all these things are apertures,
and you have to worry about diffraction effects on them. Here's what happens at an aperture. Here
comes some incident light on a slit of some size. It's got now some finite size, which I'm going to
call A, and you'll notice that what happens here in the inset is two waves that are half a slit
width apart, two rays that are half a slit width apart, are going to interfere if that distance,
A over 2, half the slit width, times sine theta, is an integer multiple of half a wavelength,
and they will interfere destructively. So that's A over 2 sine theta is M lambda over 2,
an integer multiple of a half a wavelength. That will give them destructive interference. Those
2's cancel, and we get destructive interference with this single aperture when A sine theta is M
lambda. The first minimum in that pattern, place where M equals 1, then occurs when sine theta is
lambda over A. What does all this mean? It means when I send light through an aperture, a circular
aperture, a rectangular aperture like a slit, what will happen is I will get some interference
patterns on the other side caused, as this little diagram shows, caused by the interference of
light rays coming from different parts of the aperture. This takes into account the finite
size of the aperture, and as you make the aperture smaller, you'll notice that angle gets bigger
because sine theta is lambda over A, and that's where the first minimum is. So here are some
diagrams that express that. Here's the case where A is 10 times lambda. So A is pretty big
compared to the wavelength, and basically what you see for the intensity of light coming through
the aperture is one big spike in the middle, which is what you would intuitively expect,
but if you look closely, you see a couple little wiggles around there. Now we make a twice lambda,
and you see something quite different. The pattern of light coming through the aperture has been
spread out, and then it goes to zero. That's that first minimum, and then there's a small maximum,
and it actually wiggles up and down for a while. And the point is, when the aperture gets small,
you have trouble imaging the system as a single point of light, if in fact it was supposed to be
a single point of light, and if you are trying to image some physical object, the image will begin
to go out of focus. When the aperture size is comparable to the wavelength, the image has become
spewed all over the place, and you've got problems. Diffraction prevents us from easily forming images,
and let me give you some examples of that. The diffraction limit means we need very large
apertures to resolve either closely spaced objects, like, for example, the planets in a
distant solar system. That's why we have rarely got direct images of planets in distant solar systems.
That and the fact that the stars are so bright is why we can't image most binary stars directly.
This is called the diffraction limit. We need enormously large telescopes to overcome the
diffraction limit. The other place where this becomes important is if we're trying to image
very small objects with microscopy, we have basically the same issue. What happens is the
two diffraction patterns, because we can't image a point as a point because of this diffraction
effect, the two diffraction patterns overlap, and we begin to be unable to resolve things that are
either too closely spaced small objects or too close in angle with large objects imaged by a
telescope. Here's an example. Here's a system where we're trying to image a couple of objects,
and they're far enough apart here that they look like a couple fuzzy blobs. You can see a couple
little rings around them. These are the diffraction patterns of the individual objects as they move
closer together. Those diffraction patterns get a little closer together. Now the diffraction
patterns are beginning to merge, and these objects, which should look like points of light,
but aren't because of diffraction, begin to become indistinguishable. There, there are still two
objects, and you can just barely see the thing is slightly elongated in the vertical direction,
but diffraction has wiped out our ability to resolve them. Finally, they're sitting just about
right on top of each other, and we can't even tell that there are two objects there. That's the
diffraction limit. Fraction limit is a serious limitation that the wave nature of light places
on our ability to image things. By the way, one way around this is to use shorter wavelengths of
light. That's one reason people doing microscopy, biologists and so on, will move to ultraviolet
wavelengths or electron microscopes, where you can control the wavelength associated with an
electron. More on that when we get to quantum physics. You don't have that option when you're
doing astronomy, for example, and you need to observe at a particular wavelength of light.
Diffraction limit really hind, really prevents us from imaging very small or very closely spaced
objects. How can we get around it? Well, we could, as I mentioned, lower the wavelength. That's why
we use UV and electron microscopy. That's also what the difference is between a Blu-ray, disc,
a DVD, and a CD. CDs can hold about 700 megabytes of information, 0.7 gigabytes. DVDs can hold just
under 5 gigabytes. Blu-ray discs can hold about 25 gigabytes. Now, there are a number of technological
differences, but the big difference is the color of the laser used to image the information on that
disc. And in the case of Blu-ray, the laser is blue, and it has a roughly 400 nanometer wavelength.
These pictures are all at the same scale. It's about 4 micrometers vertically on those pictures.
And the spot, because of diffraction with the red laser, is simply bigger. And so the information
containing structures, which are these little pits, have to be bigger. And so a major part of the
reason why Blu-ray discs hold so much more is because of the invention of a simple, inexpensive
diode laser that could produce blue light, hence the name Blu-ray. And we're getting around the
diffraction limit. We're able to image smaller structures or get information from these smaller
structures. And finally, in astronomy, you achieve the same effect by using larger apertures. And
radio astronomers are particularly good at this because they will take a whole bunch of radio
telescopes spaced perhaps widely apart, in one case, spaced all around the planet. And they basically
simulate a single telescope with an aperture that big. And so they can do very, very exquisitely
precise measurements and imaging with radio astronomy using these enormous so-called interferometric
telescopes. It's much harder to do with optics, but it can be done. Okay, well let's wrap up.
We've seen that the wave nature of light becomes significant when light interacts with objects
comparable in size to the wavelength. And interference is at the heart of what's going on
with these wave phenomena. We've seen thin film interference, interference in slit systems,
with diffraction grading and spectroscopy, diffraction at edges, diffraction when light passes
through apertures, and this diffraction limit, limiting our ability to image objects of small
size or small angular separation. So that's it for optics, but before you go, if you're interested
in a challenge, here's a challenge for you. That picture I showed you before of the soap film,
how thick is the soap film in the black area at the top of the film? The shortest visible wavelength
is about 350 nanometers, and the refractive index of water is 1.33. Work it out, I'll come back with
a solution. Here's the solution. We get constructive interference when twice the thickness is m plus
a half lambda as measured in the medium, in the soap film, which is made of water. The lowest
d will occur when m is zero. In that case, I have m being zero, and I have 2d equals a half lambda
in the medium, the 2s come together become a 4, and d is n lambda, lambda n, lambda in the medium
divided by 4, that's lambda divided by 4 times the index of refraction, where lambda is now the
wavelength in air, not in the soap film, and that's 350 nanometers divided by 4 times the index of
refraction 1.33, and that's 66 nanometers, 66 billionth of a meter, and you've measured it.
That's the thickness right where that soap film becomes black or becomes transparent because no
light is reflecting off it. No interference pattern can be met, no interference condition can be met
for visible light.
