Welcome to lecture 46. This is not a lecture in which I'm going to introduce all kinds
of complicated physics or do all kinds of complicated calculations, although we will
do a calculation or two. It's a lecture in which I'm going to introduce just one
idea, and it's going to be a very simple idea, disarmingly simple, so simple that
I'll be able to state it in just a single English language statement, no equations,
no mathematics, just a simple statement. And yet it's a statement that's going to
turn our ideas of space and time on their heads, and it's the statement that's
going to resolve the aether quandaries that we've been looking at in the last
couple of lectures. Let me remind you where we stood at the end, basically, of the
19th century. We've got physicists scratching their heads because their
attempts to apply a mechanical view of the universe to electromagnetism, in
particular to the propagation of electromagnetic waves, light, failed. It
failed because all attempts to detect Earth's motion through this aether, this
mysterious problematic substance that pervaded the whole universe, failed. It
left us with the question with respect to what does light move at speed c, we can
no longer answer the aether, we know from binary star observations we can't
answer the source. So what is the answer to that seemingly simple question? Whole
centuries, millennia of common sense ideas about space and time actually hinge
on that answer. That problem was resolved by a single individual who was probably
the most brilliant physicist of all time, perhaps, second after Newton, and that,
of course, was Albert Einstein. Now, before I talk about Albert Einstein, let me
just point out that he didn't develop his ideas in a complete vacuum. There were
others who came close, in particular, Lorenz, whom I mentioned in the last
lectures, having come up with that contraction hypothesis. The French
physicist mathematician Poincare is another example of someone who came
close to relativity, but neither of them really got there, neither of them really
cut through to the simplicity that is the idea of Einstein's theory of special
relativity. That's what I'm going to deal with in this lecture. Let's begin by
taking a look at Einstein himself and what some of his other achievements were,
and then we'll move in and focus on relativity itself. Albert Einstein was
born in 1879 in Olm, Germany. He had an interesting childhood going back and
forth a bit between Germany and Switzerland. He gave up his German
citizenship. He was unhappy with some of the attitudes in Germany. In 1900, he
received his so-called teaching diploma from the Zurich Polytechnic Institute. He
was not a great student, but he was not a terrible student either. He could not
get an academic job following his graduation from the Polytechnic as
could most of his classmates, and the reason Einstein couldn't had to do with
a certain attitude he had that didn't allow any of his professors really to
recommend him highly for a teaching position. He became instead a patent
examiner with the Swiss Patent Office, which was actually a very good job for
him because it allowed him to think in his spare time about physics. It allowed
him to deal with real physical objects, physical things people had invented,
and he was extremely productive during this period. He also became a young
father at about this time. He actually had been a father somewhat earlier, but
this was the first child born into his marriage to Milova Marek, who was a
fellow student of his, a fellow physics student, one of the few women studying
physics at that time. And here is Einstein with Hans Albert. This is actually a
rather rare picture, but there he is with his young son, Hans Albert, in about
the year 1905, which was when he was 26 years old, and that was Einstein's
miracle year. During that miracle year, he published seminal papers in three very
distinct areas of physics, any one of which could have won in the Nobel Prize.
So, 1905, Einstein's miracle year, what went on in that year? On April 30th, he
published his doctoral dissertation. His doctoral dissertation was entitled A New
Determination of Molecular Dimensions. That doesn't sound very exciting, but this
is around the year 1900, and the reality of atoms and molecules was not yet
firmly established. On June 9th, he published a paper which is the predominant
one that won him the Nobel Prize, although others figured in it also. And this
was on the quantum nature of light, something we'll deal with after we get
done with relativity. And the paper was entitled On a Heuristic Point of View
Concerning the Production and Transformation of Light. Again, doesn't
sound very exciting, but it introduced one of the key concepts in quantum
physics. On July 18th, he published convincing proofs, proof that atoms
exist. On the movement of small particles suspended in stationary liquids. Doesn't
sound very exciting again. But the July 18th paper, along with his doctoral
dissertation, were in sort of the same area. They dealt with the random motion
of small particles, and they gave a proof that small motions of tiny little
particles, but not atomic sized particles that you might see under a microscope,
were caused by the particles being hit by random fluctuations in the smaller
molecules and atoms that you couldn't see. And that was the convincing proof
that atoms exist. On September 26th, he published the paper that describes to the
world for the first time the special theory of relativity. It's not called the
special theory of relativity. It's not called my new theory of space and time.
It's called On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies, and that title tells you
how intimately connected relativity is with electromagnetism. And in this course,
I've tried to stress electromagnetism. I've talked a lot about electromagnetic
waves, light as an electromagnetic waves. The ether is the medium in which
electric and magnetic fields were supposed to be stresses and strains. There is
an intimate connection between all those ideas and the special theory of
relativity. And finally, on November 21st, he publishes what's basically a
footnote to special relativity. It's the paper in which the idea E equals mc
squared, probably the most famous equation in the world, was first
introduced. And we'll see later on, as we're studying relativity in the next few
lectures, that E equals mc squared isn't really the most general form of the
equation, and this is an equation that is much misinterpreted. But it's
nevertheless an important idea, and it was given in a paper whose title is a
little more transparent than some of these others. Does the inertia of a body
depend on its energy content? So that's Einstein's miracle year. The important
paper to us here is the September 26 paper, the special theory of relativity
on the electrodynamics of moving bodies. And I want to spend the rest of this
lecture on the ideas that are in that paper, or rather the one simple idea at
the heart of that paper. And I'm going to show it big and bold because it's
such a simple and such an important idea. It's called the principle of
relativity. It's not an idea that's new to Einstein. Galileo and Newton knew of
a principle of relativity. But Einstein generalized that principle and basically
made it his own, and it becomes the heart of what's called the theory of
special relativity, and I'll be distinguishing the special and general
theories as we go along. And here's what it says. The laws of physics are the
same for all observers in uniform motion. Period. That's it. Contained in that
single English language statement is everything you can say about the special
theory of relativity. Take off the in uniform motion, and you've got basically
the general theory of relativity, but that gets a little more complicated and
we'll get to that. But this idea is really, really utterly simple, and that's
all it says. What does this mean? It means no matter who you are, no matter where
you are in the universe, no matter how you're moving, as long as your motion is
uniform and that is unaccelerated, not changing in speed or direction, then you
do physics experiments and you will determine exactly the same laws of
physics I do. Now you might say, wait a minute, can't do physics on Earth because
it's in circular motion, I can't do it in an airplane, where can I do it? Well,
that gets a little bit involved, and in fact it gets so involved that some of
that is what leads Einstein to general relativity, some of those questions. But
let me just say, the Earth's accelerated motion, such as it is, and some of it
doesn't really count, and some of it does, we'll see why. Shortly, the Earth is
close enough to in uniform motion that we can talk about the Earth as if it's a
reference frame in uniform motion, a so-called inertial reference frame. So
we're going to beg for now the question of how we know for sure we've got a
reference frame in uniform motion, and that question is going to come back to
haunt us. But let's assume that we do, and then if you, if I'm in uniform motion
and you move relative to me uniformly, so you are not accelerating relative to
me, but you're moving relative to me, then the laws of physics that you
determined by experiments will be exactly the same as the ones I do. Another way to
put this is, if we each do the same experiment, we'll each get exactly the
same result. All the laws of physics. Here's how Einstein put it himself in his
paper on the electrodynamics of moving bodies published in 1905, the paper that
brought the world special relativity. Here is the beginning paragraph of that
paper. It is known that Maxwell's electrodynamics, when applied to moving
bodies, leads to asymmetries which do not appear to be inherent in the
phenomena. Take, for example, the reciprocal action of a magnet and a
conductor. The observable phenomenon here depends only on the relative motion of
the conductor and the magnet. Now let me pause there and talk to you about
exactly what Einstein is describing here. He's describing an experiment I did
back in lecture 36, and we've got a little clip of it here playing. It's the
experiment where I thrust a magnet at a coil of wire, and I found that there was
an induced current that flowed in that coil of wire, and I measured that with a
meter and so on. Then I did the same thing by holding the magnet stationary
and moving the coil of wire near the magnet, and the same thing happened, and
you might say that's obvious. But it isn't nearly so obvious, because in one
case we describe that by saying there is a changing magnetic field associated
with the moving magnet, and changing magnetic fields make electrical effects.
In the other, where we're removing the conductor, we've got free charges in the
conductor, the charges are moving in a magnetic field, they experience a
magnetic force, and that's what gets the current going. The observable phenomenon
here depends only on the relative motion of the conductor and the magnet. The
asymmetries, that is, the different descriptions, one involving the magnetic
force on moving charges, the other involving the electric field, ultimately
generated by a changing magnetic field, those are the asymmetries. They don't
seem inherent in the phenomenon, namely the generation of an induced current
from the relative motion of the conductor and the magnet. So all that
matters is the relative motion, and he's referring explicitly to that
description of induction when we move a magnet near an electrical conductor.
Then Einstein goes on. Examples of this sort, together with unsuccessful attempts
to discover any motion of the Earth relative to the, quote, light medium, for
which you can read, ether, suggest that the phenomena of electrodynamics, as well
as of mechanics, possess no properties corresponding to the idea of absolute
rest. So what's he talking about here? He's talking about the failure to detect
Earth's motion through the ether. Now, there's an interesting history of
science issue here. It is not 100% clear that Einstein knew of the Michelson
Morley result. Historians of science still debate that. If he didn't, all the
more power to his genius for coming up with this idea without that seminal
experiment. I mean, there were plenty of other pieces of evidence that pointed
to problems with the ether, but that clinching experiment that measured so
sensitively the fact that Earth didn't move relative to the ether. Einstein
may or may not have known about that. The phenomenon of electrodynamics, as
well as of mechanics, possess no properties corresponding to the idea of
absolute rest. What is he saying there? He's telling us for the first time that,
hey, it's not just Newtonian mechanics that doesn't depend on your reference
frame. It's also electromagnetism. And it's the implications for electromagnetism
that are going to lead us deeply into what relativity really tells us about
the world. The phenomenon of electrodynamics, as well as of mechanics,
possess no properties corresponding to the idea of absolute rest. Now, what
does this mean? And what are some alternative ways of saying this principle
of relativity? Well, I've just said it. The laws of physics are the same for all
observers in uniform motion. But there are plenty of other ways to talk about it.
There's no preferred frame of reference. There's no one state of motion in which
you must do physics if you want to get it right. There's no preferred reference
frame. The ether doesn't exist is part of the implications of relativity.
Concepts of absolute rest and absolute motion are meaningless. It is meaningless
for me to say, I am moving and you're not, or I am at rest and you're moving.
Those are meaningless statements. Any time you catch yourself trying to say
something like that, you're not speaking in relativistically correct terms, as it
were. Concepts of absolute rest and absolute motion are meaningless. I am
moving is a meaningless statement. I am at rest is also a meaningless statement.
Only relative motion matters. That's the only thing we can talk about. We can say,
you're moving relative to me, I'm moving relative to you, but we can't say I'm at
rest and you're moving, or vice versa. And to give an example I talked about in
the last lecture, I said you could play tennis on a cruise ship, or for that
matter on a spaceship, even if it's moving at 99% of the speed of light
relative to Earth. And I better add that thing relative to Earth, because if I
just said moving at 99% of the speed of light, that's a meaningless statement.
I can only talk about relative motion. And you can play tennis on the laws of
physics, work the same in either of those cases. We talked about that last time
because we knew that Newtonian physics obeyed a relativity principle, that
Newtonian physics didn't care what reference frame you were in, as long as
you were moving uniformly. Now we add something. You could also put some tea in
a microwave oven and heat it up on that cruise ship or on a spaceship, and that's
a statement that the laws of electromagnetism, I said, electrodynamics, as well as
mechanics, have no concept of absolute rest, have no preferred frame of
reference. Alternate wordings of the principle of relativity. What are some
implications of this principle? The laws of physics are the same for all observers
in uniform motion. It applies to all of physics now. That's why I said all of
physics, not just mechanics, not just electromagnetism, all of physics come
under the umbrella of special relativity. Mechanics, that's no surprise. We already
knew that you could eat those peanuts on an airplane, and you didn't worry about
the fact that it was whizzing along at 600 miles an hour. It becomes a surprise
for electromagnetism, because everybody thought before there was only one frame
of reference, the ether frame, where electromagnetism was valid, where Maxwell's
equations would give you the correct results, where you would measure C for
the speed of light. Remember, in lecture 40, we got into the mathematics a little
bit, and we determined that there were electromagnetic waves. The wave speed was
determined by that cross-fertilization, if you will, of changing magnetism, making
electricity, and changing electricity, making magnetism, and we expressed that
in Faraday's and Ampere's laws, which I've written here in a kind of calculus
form. But the point is this quantity I've circled, the magnetic constant over 4 pi
times the electric constant, that turned out to be the square of the speed of those
waves, and that speed was predicted by Maxwell's equations, by the numbers in
there, to be the speed of light C. So the principle of relativity is telling us
that Maxwell's equations are valid in any frame of reference, and that means that
the speed of light is the same for all observers in uniform motion. Even if
they're moving relative to each other, the speed of light has to be the same for
all uniformly moving observers, even though they're moving relative to each
other. And I'd like to describe for you an experiment that brings that point home.
Before I do that, let me make one sort of philosophical historical point. Einstein
in his paper actually presented two principles he called the postulates. One
was the principle of relativity, as I've described here, that the laws of physics
are the same for all observers in uniform motion. The other was what he said was a
seemingly contradictory statement that the speed of light was independent of its
source. Philosophically, though, you do not need both of those. The principle of
relativity is enough to cover it all, and here's why, because the principle of
relativity says Maxwell's equations have no preferred frame. They're equally
valid in any uniformly moving reference frame, and therefore, the statement that
the speed of light in vacuum is C, 3 times 10 to the 8 meters per second, the
square root of mu not over 4 pi k, that statement has to be valid in all uniformly
moving frames of reference. Let's take a look at what that might mean. So let's
think how we might measure the speed of light. So here you are standing on a
roadside, and there's a traffic light, and the traffic light is going to go on,
and it's going to send out a flash of light, which I've represented here by
some wave crest. And I'm going to give you a really nice clock and a really nice
meter stick, perfectly made, very accurate, and I'm going to ask you to time
with your clock how long it takes the light to go exactly one meter with your
meter stick, and I'm going to ask you to calculate on that basis what the speed
of light is. So here comes the light by you, and you calculate the speed of light,
and you get for the speed of light exactly 299792458 meters per second,
which is the exact speed of light. Now a friend goes by in her sports car,
and she's going at 70 miles an hour toward that traffic signal. What does she
do? We hand her a measuring stick, a perfect meter stick, and a clock, and we
ask her to do exactly the same experiment timing how long it takes light to
cross her meter stick and calculate a speed, and she gets 299792458 meters
per second also. Even though she's moving relative to you, you might say,
well, her velocity is really small, so maybe that's just an error. So you got
another friend who's a pilot, and he's going by in a big airplane, 600 miles
an hour gets the same speed of light with the same good clock and meter stick,
and finally you got another friend who's an astronaut, and she's going by at
half the speed of light, and you ask her to do the same measurements, and she
does, and she gets 299792458 meters per second. We all get the same value for
the speed of light, even though we're moving relative to each other. How can
that be? Well, maybe I'm special, maybe I'm the only one, or you, you're the only
one, you're standing by the road, you should get the right speed because
you're standing on the road where the traffic light is. The traffic light and
the road are irrelevant. The speed of light does not depend on its source. In
fact, from your point of view, you're standing still, and the spaceship is
going by you, but the spaceship can equally well say it's standing still,
and you're going by the other way at half the speed of light, and yet it
understands, if it understands relativity, that you're going to get the same
value for the speed of light. How can that be? How can it be that we get the
same values for the speed of light, which we have measured with our clock and
our meter stick? And these are perfectly good clocks. We bought the best we could
get. They're guaranteed to be accurate. How can it be that we got the same value
for the speed of light? It can only be if somehow my meter stick and your meter
stick and the astronauts' meter stick are not measuring quite the same thing.
They're all measuring accurately, and the clocks are not quite measuring the same
thing, and the clocks and the meter sticks are different in such a way that
they all get the speed of light. You may say, oh, the spaceship's clocks and
meter sticks are screwed up because it's moving so fast, but you can't say that.
That's relativistically incorrect. The spaceship has an equal claim on being
able to do physics as you do. Nobody is right. Nobody's got the right frame of
reference, and yet they all measure the speed of light as the same value. And the
only way they can happen is if their measures of space and time are different.
Space and time cannot be absolute. Space and time simply are not what we thought
they were with our common sense. There is no immutable time flowing unaffected by
anything throughout the whole universe. Newton actually made a statement to the
effect that there was. He was wrong. Measures of time and space are simply not
absolute. They cannot be. That cannot be consistent with the simple statement that
the laws of physics must be the same for all observers in uniform motion. Let me
give you one example where simple Newtonian ideas go awry because of this
fact that measures of time and space are not absolute. And we'll look at more of
these examples in coming lectures. So let me give you a very simple example. How
do you add velocities of things? So here I've got a spaceship, and it's going
past the Earth at 80% of the speed of light, 0.8C. And inside it is a little
spaceship, and the little spaceship is going past the big spaceship or through
the big spaceship at 60% of the speed of light. And I'm going to ask the very
simple question, how fast is the little spaceship moving relative to Earth? And
the answer is absolutely obvious. It's 1.4C. How did you do that? Well, let's get
a little bit abstract about that. It's called, in fact, Galilean Velocity
Edition. You didn't know the word for it. You just knew it made obvious common
sense. I'm going to add 0.6 and 0.8, get 1.4. Let's call u an object's velocity
relative to some reference frame, which I'll call s. And in this case, I'll make
s the reference frame of the Earth. So u is an object's velocity relative to
Earth. Let's call u prime an object's velocity relative to some other reference
frame. In this case, the big spaceship, and I'll call that frame s prime. So u
prime is 0.6C. And u said, and v then is the velocity of s relative to s prime, or
s prime relative to s, it doesn't matter. And that's the 0.8C that the spaceship
is moving relative to Earth. There's v. And u said, well, it's clear, u is u
prime plus v. 0.6 plus 0.8, 1.4. Not right. It would be right if measures of time
and space were the same in all these reference frames, on the Earth, in the
big spaceship, in the little spaceship. But they aren't. We've just seen that they
can't be. Measures of time and space must be different in ways that will come to
understand in coming lectures. But they must be different in order that all these
observers measure the same value for the speed of light. What actually happens in
this case? Well, I'm not going to go through the whole derivation of this math at
this point, although we could do that. What happens is this. There is a relativistic
velocity addition law. And it takes into account this variation in measures of time
and space in different frames of reference. So again, I'm going to use the same
terminology. u is going to be the object's velocity relative to some reference
frame s. u prime is going to be the object's velocity relative to some
reference frame s prime. And again, the object in question here is the little
spaceship. The reference frame s is the reference frame of Earth. The reference
frame of s prime is the reference frame of the big spaceship. And v is the
velocity, the relative velocity between those two reference frames, which is the
0.8c. And here's what the formula looks like, again, with no real justification
or derivation. But what it's got in its numerator is that simple Galilean velocity
addition that you would have expected by common sense held. You simply add the two
velocities. But then it's divided by this factor in the denominator, which is 1.
And if it were just 1, we'd get the Galilean answer back again. But it's 1
plus something. It's 1 plus the product of these two velocities, u prime and v,
one of them being 0.6c, one of them being 0.8c, divided by c squared. So if those
quantities are small compared to the speed of light, if either of those
velocities is small, that little correction term in the denominator is going
to be small. And we're not going to see a result that's much different from the
Galilean velocity addition. But when those speeds get up near the speed of light,
the relative speeds I'm talking about get up near the speed of light, then that
correction becomes significant. It makes the denominator bigger than 1, and it
reduces the added velocity from what you would expect it was from simple Galilean
Newtonian considerations. Let's actually do a calculation like that here on our
big monitor. Okay, so here we are. We're going to figure out how we add the
velocities of these objects in that example I just gave. So here's frame s to
the earth. Here's our big spaceship frame s prime. The relative velocity between
them is 0.8c, 80% of the speed of light. And we want to know what the speed of
that small spaceship inside the big one is relative to earth, applying this new
relativistic velocity addition formula. So let's work it out. It's the Galilean
result, 1.4, 0.6 plus 0.8, divided by this correction term again. Well, that's
0.6 plus 0.8 divided by 1 plus 0.6c times 0.8c over c squared, 6 times 8 is 48. So
that's 1.4c, what we would have got in the Galilean mode of thinking, divided by
1.48. You can see that 1.48 is bigger than 1.4, so the answer comes out less than
c. In fact, it comes out in this particular case, 0.95c. By the way, that's our first
hint at something that's really important in relativity, and that is that no material
object can go relative to any inertial frame at a speed greater than c. And this is
not a proof, but this is a statement that, in fact, that is true in this particular case.
You might think, well, I know how to get to going faster and c. I can kind of leapfrog
by going 10th of c relative to something, a 10th of c relative to something else, 10th
of c, keep adding that up, can't do it. Relativistic velocity addition puts an end to that, won't
let that happen. So relativistic velocity addition is going to preclude our going faster
than c. Well, let's wrap this up, and then I'm going to give you a challenge. We've
really seen one big idea. We've seen the idea that was one of the ideas Einstein posed
in his miracle year, and that's the principle of relativity. The laws of physics are the
same for all observers in uniform motion, and if you remember nothing else about relativity
from this course, that's all you need to know. All the rest follows. It applies to both mechanics
and electromagnetism. It requires that all uniformly moving observers measure the same
value c for the speed of light, and that's impossible unless space and time are not absolutes.
The big takeaway message here. Maxwell's electromagnetism, it turns out, is relativistically correct.
We don't need to make any changes in electromagnetism, surprisingly. Relativistically perfect. No
corrections. We do need to make corrections for Newtonian mechanics, it turns out. Although
relativity already worked in mechanics, it wasn't Einstein's special relativity, and
the Galilean velocity addition being incorrect is the first hint that we need to make some
fairly subtle but significant changes in Newtonian mechanics. And there's the Galilean velocity
addition being replaced with the relativistic velocity addition that includes this correction
term. Okay. Before you go, if you're so inclined mathematically, let me pose you a dual challenge
here. The challenge is, first of all, I'm going to consider a situation now in which
I have two spacecraft approaching Earth at 0.75C each. And I want to know if you're sitting
in Spaceship A on the left, what's the speed of Spaceship B relative to you? You would
think naively 1.5C, but no. In B, I want you to do the adding velocity example again, but
now replace the small spaceship with a laser beam, and of course a laser beam, B light,
goes at speed C. And I would like you to show that as long as the large Spaceship's speed
is less than C, the laser beam's speed relative to Earth is also C. And that will confirm
that the speed of light, according to relativity, has to be the same for all observers in uniform
motion. Okay, work on your challenge. I'll come back with the solution.
Okay, here's the solution. Let's let A Spaceship A on the left be frame S. Let's let Earth be
frame S' and we want to know the speed of the right-hand Spaceship B relative to frame S.
Then V and U are the same. They're both 0.75C. We apply that relativistic velocity addition
formula. Up in the numerator is the 1.5C we would have expected, but downstairs is a correction.
1 plus 7.75 squared, by the way, all the C is canceled because I expressed this as fractions
of C, and the answer comes out 0.96C. So you didn't get 1.5C by having them head at each other
like that. Let's do the same thing here. This will do the math symbolically. Here U' is C.
So wherever I see a U' I put in a C. I get C plus V over 1 plus C V over C squared.
Let's work that out. Put it over a common denominator. I got C plus V over C plus V over
C. Let's flip that the way we do fractions over fractions. We got C plus V times C over C plus
V. The C plus V cancels and the speed of light is the same for observers in both those uniformly
moving reference frames, even though they're in motion relative to each other.
