Welcome to lecture 47, whose twin subjects are space and time and how relativity affects
our ideas of space and time.
In the previous lecture, I gave you just one simple idea, principle of relativity.
The idea that the laws of physics, all the laws of physics, mechanics, electricity and
magnetism, everything is independent of your point of view.
That is, doesn't depend on your frame of reference, that the laws of physics are the
same for all observers as long as they're in uniform motion.
That was one simple idea from that lecture.
This lecture is going to seem a lot busier.
There's going to be some fairly heavy math.
There's going to be some diagrams that are going to be a little bit confusing at first,
and I'll try to explain them very carefully and thoroughly.
But it's not really going to be busy because all it's going to be is an examination of
the implications for the nature of space and time of that essential principle of relativity,
and I'll be very careful to show you exactly where we're applying that principle.
We are going to get quantitative.
We're going to get more quantitative than I do, certainly, in my book, Simply Einstein,
which is a book about relativity for non-scientists.
We're going to get more mathematical than happens in several of the other great courses
that deal with relativity subjects.
We're going to get a little bit more mathematical because we want to understand quantitatively
how these things come about.
We want to understand, in this lecture, quantitatively how it is, not just that it is, but how it
is that our notions of space and time, our common sense notions, notions that have been
with humankind for millennia, simply aren't right.
They aren't completely wrong.
We don't have to throw them away completely, but they aren't right either, and we have
to modify them.
And before we do that, I have to begin by defining one of the key concepts in relativity, a concept
that you're quite familiar with, and that's the concept of an event.
What's an event?
An event is an occurrence that you specify by giving both its place and its time.
So you tell me that such a place and such and such a time, something happened.
A good example of an event is your birth.
Your birth occurred at a particular place, your birth place.
It occurred at a particular time, your birth date.
But your birth place is not an event, it's a place.
Different things happen at your birth place.
You've long since been born, but things are happening right now, other events, at your
birth place.
Your birth place is not an event.
Your birth date is not an event because on your birth date, in your birth place, events
were occurring at other places besides your birth place.
So place and time are not events.
An event requires both place and time.
It's an occurrence specified by giving its place and its time.
That's something we all know.
Mathematically, an event is specified by giving four numbers.
It's three spatial coordinates on an arbitrarily chosen x, y, and z coordinate system, and
its time coordinate, that is, when it occurs, relative to some arbitrary zero of time.
As always, coordinate systems are mathematical artifacts that we human beings impose on reality.
But if we want to describe an event, then we have to impose four numbers on reality.
We have to tell where, that's three numbers, and when, that's one number.
Why it is one time and three space, that's kind of a profound philosophical question,
but that's the way our universe seems to be.
Three spatial dimensions, one time dimension.
All observers agree about the reality of events.
One agree is that you were born.
What they may disagree about are the space and time coordinates of your birth or any
other event, and about the time interval and spatial distance between two events.
And in this lecture, we're going to be focusing on those latter two things, the time interval
and the spatial distance between two events, and I'm going to show you quite rigorously
that they cannot be the same for all observers.
And there's no contradiction of that with the principle of relativity.
The principle of relativity does not say all observers will measure the same values for
all things.
What it does say is that all observers will come up with the same general laws of physics
and how those laws operate, and those laws will include Newtonian mechanics, as appropriately
modified to be relativistically correct, and Maxwell's equations of electromagnetism,
which do not need any modification because they're relativistically correct.
And because, as we saw in the previous lecture, the laws of physics, including Maxwell's equations
and their implication that light goes at speed c and vacuum, because that's got to be the
same for all observers, notions of space and time, measures of spatial distances, and temporal
intervals cannot be the same for all observers.
And that's what we want to plunge into here and have a look at.
So I'm going to begin with a math alert.
Heavy math is coming here, and it's going to give us, as heavy math has in the past,
valuable insights about physical reality.
Now again, the heavy math isn't that heavy.
It's high school algebra, but it gets just a little bit messy.
But if you really want to understand how we go from the principle of relativity, that
the laws of physics are the same for all observers in uniform motion, to actual statements
about what different clocks will read about the time intervals between different events,
then you've got to do this math.
In when I'm doing relativity for complete non-scientists who don't want to do any math
at all, I just state the results I'm going to derive here, but you'll come to understand
those results and how they follow rigorously from the principle of relativity.
So let's go into our math alert.
Here's our big screen where we do our math, and I would like you to imagine a device which
I'm going to call a light clock here in quotes, and the light clock is just a timekeeping
mechanism.
Like any other timekeeping mechanism, it has some periodic happening.
The swinging of a pendulum, the vibration of a quartz crystal, whatever it is that sets
the timekeeping of a clock.
In this clock, the timekeeping is set by a light source which flashes, sends a light
beam up to a mirror, and goes back down again to that light source.
So this is our clock, and the ticking of that clock consists of the interval between the
light leaving the source and the light returning, bouncing off the mirror, and returning to
the source, and you'll notice that this light clock has a length L in its long dimension.
Now I want to emphasize right off the bat, and I'll say this again several times, even
though this device is a rather specialized construct, and it involves the properties
of light, obviously, nevertheless, the conclusions we draw about this light clock are going to
be conclusions not about this specific device, but conclusions about any clock, including
a regular ordinary clock with a quartz watch or whatever you've got, because they are ultimately
conclusions about time itself, not about clocks, but about time.
So let's look further at this light clock.
I'm going to define two events.
Event A is the light flash leaving the source, heading up toward the mirror, hits the mirror,
bounces off, comes back, and when it returns to the source, that defines event B. And I
want to ask the question, what's the time interval between event A and event B?
How long does that take?
Given that I know the length of the light clock is L, and I know something else, I know
that the speed of light is C. Assuming there's a vacuum in here, so we have light traveling
at speed C. So let's plunge into the math and see if we can figure out the answer to
this actually relatively simple question.
And let me be very careful when I ask any question in relativity.
What's the mass of that object?
How much energy does that object have?
What's the time interval between this and that?
How old is this person?
All those questions are questions that I really have to say, what's the reference frame?
Actually, the first question about mass wasn't such a question, but the others were.
I have to generally ask or answer the question, what reference frame am I talking about?
Because many quantities in physics that we think of as being absolutes, in fact, depend
on your point of view, on your frame of reference.
So I'm going to be very careful here to specify I'm asking this question, at least at this
point, in a reference frame which I will call S prime, and that's the reference frame in
which this light clock is at rest.
Is the light clock moving or is it at rest?
Those are meaningless questions in relativity.
There is some reference frame in which you are at rest with respect to the light clock,
or the light clock is at rest with respect to you, or the light clock is at rest in that
frame of reference, however you want to put it.
That's the frame of reference, which I'm calling S prime, and in that frame of reference,
by definition, the light clock is at rest.
And in that frame of reference, the light travels around trip distance to L, up and
back.
It travels at the speed of light, which is C, distances speed times time.
So time is distance over speed to L divided by C, and that's the answer to our question.
That's the time between A and B, events A and B, it's 2L over C, and I'm going to call
that delta T prime, prime again standing for this reference frame S prime, in which the
light clock is at rest.
So that wasn't very heavy math.
Same situation.
Let's ask the same question, but now let's ask it in a reference frame S, in which the
light clock moves to the right at speed B. There is such a frame.
If I had been in the original frame S prime, all I had to do was move to the left with
speed V relative to that frame, and to me, the light clock would be moving to the right
with speed V. So I'm now considering myself to be in a frame in which the light clock
is moving to the right at speed V, and in that frame I'm asking the question, what's
the time between those two events A and B?
Now if we didn't believe relativity, we would in fact come up with the same answer we did
before.
And the reason we would is because we would have the light, you'll see, traveling a longer
path.
It's traveling those diagonal paths, but it would have been going a little bit faster
because it would have had the motion of the light clock vectorially added to the motion
of the light, say vectorially because they're not in the same direction, but they're not
in exactly opposite directions either.
And we would have come up with the same answer.
We're not going to come up with the same answer here, and that's going to be our first insight
into the difference between time in classical physics and time in relativity.
The total distance now is twice this diagonal path, that much plus that much, twice either
of those diagonals.
The light clock is moving at speed V in this reference frame that we're talking about.
So whatever that time interval is, and I'm going to call it delta t without the prime
because we're not in the prime frame now, we're in the frame s, which doesn't have
a prime.
The distance the light clock goes in that time delta t is going to be V delta t, distance
is speed times time.
We want to figure out twice that diagonal.
Well, here's how we can figure out the diagonal.
The tall side here is L, the length L. The short side is half the distance the light
clock goes, or V delta t divided by 2.
We've got a right triangle, and we know the Pythagorean theorem that says the hypotenuse
squared is the sum of the squares on the other two sides.
So there it is.
The hypotenuse is the sum of the squares of L and V delta t divided by 2.
Put that all in the square root.
Take the square root.
That gives me one of those diagonals.
There's two of them.
Double it.
How fast does the light go?
Here's where we're sneaking in the principle of relativity.
Light goes at speed c, period, as far as any inertial observer, anybody in a uniformly
moving reference frame, anybody in a frame of reference that obeys the law of inertia,
an unaccelerated reference frame, those are all ways of describing the same thing, moves
at speed c.
I am not assuming that the light gets added to it the speed of the box.
Remember the examples we did in the previous lecture about relativistic velocity addition,
and if you did the challenge, you found that you can't add to the speed of light.
The speed of light is c in all reference frames, and I'm going to assume that here,
and I'm going to state that light speed is c.
Distance is speed times time, and consequently time is distance over speed.
There's the distance.
We traveled in this reference frame.
There is that distance divided by c, and there's the answer delta t.
Whoops, not quite, because delta t is hiding also in here.
That's why we had to have a math alert.
We've got to somehow get the delta t out of there.
Here was our result, delta t is twice that one diagonal, two diagonals worth, and we
got to get the delta t out of there, so we've got to do some algebra.
We'll multiply first by the c, get rid of it in the denominator, it goes over there.
Now we will square both sides, c squared, delta t squared.
On the left, we take the square root off on the right, and we square the two that was
outside the square root, and that becomes a four, continuing with the algebra.
Delta t squared on the left, four l squared, and now I've just squared out this second
term, that's v squared, delta t squared over two squared, so v squared, delta t squared
over four.
Next I'm going to distribute the four through the two terms, c squared, delta t squared is
now four l squared, and that four wipes out the four in the denominator, and we've got
simply v squared, delta t squared on the right.
This is the heaviest math we're almost done.
Here's what we have now.
Now we have delta t still in two places, but we can begin to get it together because I
can move that term over to the other side of the equation.
I have c squared, delta t squared minus, subtracted this term from both sides, v squared, delta
t squared is now what's left on the right, the four l squared.
Now I can factor out that delta t squared because it's common to both terms, c squared
minus v squared times delta t squared is four l squared.
Factor out the c squared, that gives me a one here, it gives me a v squared over c squared
here, and it divides the right hand side by c squared, and it gives me that, take the
square root, the four l squared over c squared becomes two l over c, I've flipped the equality
left to right, which is also fine, I've taken the square root of that term, and I've taken
the square root of delta t squared to get delta t, or write it like that.
And now, look at our original case in frame s prime, delta t prime we found was two l
over c.
Well, there's two l over c sitting there, in this expression we derived that has delta
t rather than delta t prime in it, those expressions are the same, and so delta t prime becomes
square root of one minus v squared over c squared delta t, or delta t prime is delta
t times this correction factor, which if the velocity were zero, that would be zero, and
this would be the square root of one, which is one, and the two times would be the same.
But if the v is not zero, if there is relative motion between the two frames, then they will
measure different values for that delta t, for that time interval between those two events.
That phenomenon is called time dilation, and time dilation is one of the simplest and
most perplexing, nevertheless, ideas to come out of applying relativity.
Let's look at time dilation a little more, let's do an anatomy of this important equation.
Here is delta t prime, it's delta t times the square root factor.
What do we have on the left?
On the left we have the time between two events as measured in a frame of reference, where
they occur at the same place.
Let me make it clear what I mean by that.
In the reference frame of the light clock, the light left the bottom of the clock and
it came back, and that was occurring at the same place because the light clock wasn't
moving in that frame.
There's delta t, that's the time between the two events in a reference frame where they
occur at different places, and they occur at different places because in this case the
light clock is moving with speed v, the relative speed of the two frames.
That's the anatomy of that equation.
People often describe time dilation by saying incorrectly that moving clocks run slow.
Moving clocks don't run slow.
Well, there's a way to understand that statement if you use it carefully, but what's more correct
is that the time between two events is shortest in a reference frame where the two events
occur at the same place.
Let me give you a famous example.
There's a trip between Earth and a star in a spaceship that can go at 0.8 the speed
of light.
So on the left I've got the Earth and the spaceship just starting out from Earth.
The Earth and the star are 10 light years apart.
The clocks on Earth and star read zero at the start of this trip, and the clock in the
spaceship also read zero.
The spaceship zooms along at 8 tenths of the speed of light, and we want to know what's
going on when we get there.
Well, how long does it take?
The ship has gone 10 light years at 0.8 light years per year.
That comes out 12.5 years in the Earth star frame S.
What happens in the ship frame?
Well, in the ship frame we apply this idea we just developed of time dilation.
Delta t prime is delta t modified by that square root of 1 minus, in this case 0.8 squared.
0.8 is 0.64.
1 minus 0.64 is 0.36.
Delta square root of 0.36 is 0.6.
0.6 times 12.5 is 7.5 years.
So at the end of this trip, the Earth and star clocks read 12.5 years, and the ship
clock reads 7.5 years.
That's a picture in the frame of reference of the Earth and star, not necessarily the
frame of reference of the ship.
Let's ask a question about distances.
In the Earth and star frame, that was a trip of 10 light years.
In the ship frame, that was a trip that took 7.5 years at 0.8 the speed of light.
Well, how far do you go at 0.8 the speed of light?
If you travel for 7.5 years, you go 0.8 the speed of light times 0.75 years, and you get
6 light years.
So as far as the ship is concerned, the Earth and the star are not 10 light years apart,
but 6 light years apart.
That's called length contraction.
That's the idea I introduced that Lorenz and Fitzgerald had thought would solve the
Michelson-Morley problem.
It sort of does.
But it's not that the ether is squishing things, it's that measures of space and time
are different in different reference frames.
So anatomizing this length contraction equation, L prime is the length of an object or the
distance between two objects in a frame of reference where they're moving with some speed
V, L is the length of the object or the distance between two objects in a reference frame where
they're at rest, and V, again, is the relative speed of those reference frames.
Let's draw a few more conclusions about this before we wrap up.
One of the biggest ideas about time and relativity is that simultaneity, the idea that two events
occur at the same time, is relative.
If measures of time are different in different reference frames, so is this measure of simultaneity.
So here's a picture in which two identical airplanes pass each other.
And in a frame where they're both moving at the same speed, their noses and tails coincide
at the same time.
Let me define two events.
Event A, I'm going to call the tail of the upper plane coinciding with the nose of the
lower plane.
Event A is happening on the left side of this diagram.
Event B is the nose of the upper plane corresponding or coinciding with the tail of the lower plane.
That's occurring at the same instant that I've pictured here, and it's occurring on
the right side of the diagram.
Those two events are simultaneous.
But they're only simultaneous in this particular frame of reference where the two airplanes
pass each other going at the same speed relative to that frame of reference, but in opposite
directions.
Let's now look in a different frame of reference.
Let's look at the frame of reference in which the upper airplane is at rest.
Now you'll notice I've drawn it longer than I did before because now I'm in its rest
frame where it has the greatest length.
Now I've drawn the other airplane even shorter than before because it's moving faster relative
to the upper airplane than it was relative to that frame for which they were both moving
in the same direction.
And now look what's happening.
The nose of the upper plane is corresponding to the tail of the lower plane.
That is event B. So event B is occurring now, but event A hasn't occurred yet.
Now event A occurs when the lower plane gets so its nose coincides with the tail of the
upper plane.
When that reference frame B occurred before A. Now let's look at a different reference
frame in which the lower plane is at rest.
It's the opposite.
The lower plane is now longer because we're in its rest frame.
The upper plane is shorter.
Event A occurs before event B. Events that are simultaneous in one frame of reference
are not simultaneous in another.
That idea gets you out of most of the contradictions you think you discover in relativity.
Events that are not simultaneous in one reference frame are not simultaneous in another reference
frame.
We'll see a little more about what that means and implications for causality in a later
lecture.
But I want to wrap up with one of the most famous examples in all of relativity and that's
called the twin paradox and I want to explain to you exactly how the twin paradox gets resolved.
I typically get two or three emails a week from readers of my book on Einstein and from
viewers of my other great courses that talk about relativity asking about this.
So I'm going to be really patient with it and I'm going to go through and show you exactly
how this is not a problem.
So here's the so-called twins paradox.
We've already worked out this one-way space trip in the Earth star frame, the time delta
t was 12 and a half years.
In the ship frame, the time delta t prime was seven and a half years.
So here's what it looked like at the beginning of the trip.
At the end of the trip, we were at 12.5 years on the Earth and star clocks which are synchronized.
They're reading the same time at the same instant.
The ship clock reads 7.5 years.
Now let me let the ship turn around.
The ship goes back.
All the same mathematics applies by the way it applies because it's v squared in all
those formulas so the direction doesn't matter.
The ship goes back.
It takes another 7.5 years in the ship frame, total time in the ship frame 15 years.
It takes another 12.5 years in the Earth star frame, total elapsed time 25 years.
The ship is now had 15 years elapsed.
The Earth star frame has had 25 years elapsed.
If the ship's pilot was one twin and the other twin was left behind on Earth, they were the
same age at the departure.
The traveling twin, the one who went in the space ship is now 10 years younger.
And you can do the math to leapfrog any amount of time into the future with this.
Whoa, how is this possible?
Well there are several things that people seem to think are paradoxical about this and
I want to clarify two of them particularly.
Shouldn't this effect be reciprocal?
Why can't the twin in the space ship say, oh I saw Earth go off into the distance and
turn around and come back?
Well to understand why that's not a problem is to understand what's special about special
relativity.
I mean why doesn't the Earth star move away, turn around, come back?
Or star time should be shorter and clearly it isn't.
The situation is not symmetric.
It's not symmetric because the ship undergoes an acceleration and the Earth and star don't
and special relativity is only about unaccelerated motion.
Special relativity only says the laws of physics are the same for uniformly moving reference
frames.
If you start to accelerate you can't apply special relativity in your frame.
You can apply it to the times you're not accelerating which is what we did in that case but we ignored
that very short time when the ship turned around.
When the ship turned around this twin in the ship felt very great forces as the acceleration
occurred just like you feel when a jet airplane is taking off only much worse.
She felt pinned to the back of the pilot seat and all this kind of stuff.
Earth and star didn't feel anything when the ship turned around because it was only the
ship that was not in a uniformly moving reference frame so there is not a symmetry here.
Now that alone doesn't explain why the two times come out different but it gives you
an out.
It says look you can't make the argument that the ship observer should say Earth and
star went out and came back and they should be younger because the ship observer is in
two different inertial uniformly moving reference frames during this trip.
The Earth and the star stay in one frame so the situation is not symmetric.
Changes in motion matter in special relativity.
Changes in motion doesn't matter.
But now here's the deeper paradox.
Shouldn't the observers on the ship conclude that Earth star clocks run slow?
The way I did this problem I suggested well here's the time in the Earth star frame 12.5
years they think that quote the ship clocks are running slow and they get 7.5 years for
the ship time.
Now you might say naive I said okay well what does the ship observers think do they
think since the Earth star people think the ship clock is running slow doesn't the ship
clocks think the Earth star clocks are running fast.
Sounds reasonable but if you say that you're violating the principle of relativity because
the principle of relativity says if you're moving uniformly if I see something moving
uniformly by me I will apply that same time dilation argument because my frame of reference
is just as good as anyone else's and I will conclude that clocks moving past me are quote
running slow.
Again remember it's a little more subtle than that.
It's about events that are occurring in frames of reference where they do occur at the same
place or they don't occur at the same place.
So the answer to the question shouldn't the ship observers conclude that the Earth star
clocks run slow shouldn't they conclude that yes if they really believe in the principle
of relativity they should conclude that relativity requires that conclusion.
So how can that possibly be right?
How can the Earth star observers say oh the ship clock is running slow but the ship observer
says oh Earth star clock is running slow and nevertheless everybody agrees when the twin
who was traveling gets out of the ship that she's younger than her brother who she left
behind on Earth.
How can that be?
The answer is it's not a contradiction and it's not a contradiction because events that
are simultaneous in one reference frame need not be simultaneous in another.
And let me end by drawing the picture again from the ship's perspective and you'll notice
in this picture the ship is longer than it was because now we're in the ship's point
of view the Earth and the star are squished in the direction of their motion by that contraction
and the distance between the Earth and star is six light years and there's no arrow on
the ship because we're in the ship's reference frame it's not moving the Earth and star are
moving to the left past it at point 8C.
And here's the picture when the ship starts out we've got zero on the ship clock and zero
on the Earth clock and I put some question marks in the star clock because I don't know
what time the star clock reads but I do know this.
Events that are simultaneous in one frame of reference need not be simultaneous in another
so the events of the Earth clock reading zero and the ship clock reading zero need not be
simultaneous and in fact they are not simultaneous and in fact without doing the math and I could
work it all out but I'm going to just give you the number and you'll see how this resolves
the contradiction.
What is in fact the case is that the star clock at this point is reading eight years
that's the time on the star clock the two clocks are not in synchronism in the ship's
frame of reference they are not synchronized the star clock is eight years ahead of the
Earth clock and again I haven't proved to you mathematically why it's eight we could
do that with a generalization of time dilation called the Lorenz transformations which give
you the coordinates x, y, z and t coordinates of an event in one frame of reference relative
to another but this is what happens and so now what's going on here what is the thinking
on all this well at the end of the journey the Earth and star have moved past the stationary
ship stationary in its own frame of reference now we know the ship clock reads seven point
five years the question is what do the Earth and star clocks read well here's the ship's
reasoning the Earth and star clocks run slow by that same factor one minus v squared over
c squared square rooted that's the factor point six that we calculated before so they're
going to have elapsed only point six times seven point five years or four point five
years they're running slow the ship says but the star clock was eight years ahead so it
now reads did read eight years before now it reads eight and four point five is twelve
point five years the Earth clock read zero so now it reads four point five and there
is no contradiction we've got the ship going by the star the star clock reads twelve point
five the ship clock reads seven point five from the ship's perspective seven point five
twelve point five the ship says the star is going past me at point eight c in the Earth
star systems perspective the ship is going past at point eight c the ship's clock reads
seven point five the star clock reads twelve point five and all that matters is that we
compare those two clocks at the same place and there's no contradiction the explanations
are different the ship says the star clock is running slow but it's eight years ahead
of the Earth clock the other perspective the star says this clock the ship's clock is running
slow but my clock is synchronized with the Earth's clock they're both right and they
both give the same result and they would give the same final result after the ship turns
around again well that is crazy but that is what the special the principle of special
relativity says let's wrap this all up the principle of relativity implies that the speed
of light has the same value for all observers in uniform motion because the principle says
the laws of physics are the same for all observers in uniform motion that leads directly to this
formula for time dilation delta t prime is delta t times that square root factor the
time interval between two events is shortest in a reference frame where they occur at the
same place that leads also to length contraction length contraction says an object is longest
in its own refs frame that leads to the relativity of simultaneity events that are simultaneous
in one reference frame need not be simultaneous in another and that's the way out of most
of the contradictions in relativity including particularly the contradictions or seeming
contradictions brought up by the twin paradox.
