Welcome to lecture 49, which comprises a very brief introduction to the general theory
of relativity, the generalization of Einstein's special theory.
Why brief?
For two reasons.
First of all, a number of the other great courses touch on general relativity in astrophysical
and other contexts.
Second, because the mathematics of general relativity, unlike special relativity, is
really quite complicated.
Involves very complicated things called tensor calculus, it's a differential geometry, it's
very difficult to deal with, unlike special relativity where we could use basically high
school algebra to explore what was going on with special relativity.
We'll see just a couple of equations in here, I'm just going to present them to you.
We won't derive them or anything, so this will be a very brief and non-quantitative
introduction to the big ideas of general relativity.
So why do we need a general theory of relativity?
What's wrong with Einstein's special relativity?
Well first of all, it's special.
Now that doesn't mean it's great and wonderful, it means it's special in the sense that it's
limited.
It's limited to the case of observers in uniform motion.
It doesn't say the laws of physics are the same for all observers period, but it could.
Why doesn't it?
Why not the laws of physics are the same for all period?
That would be a truly general theory.
So there's a philosophical motivation for general relativity.
We would like to generalize special relativity to remove that limitation to observers in
uniform motion.
But there's some much more precise motivations for general relativity that drove Einstein.
First of all, special relativity talks about uniformly moving or so-called inertial reference
frames, reference frames in which the law of inertia is obeyed, in which if an object
is subject to no forces, it stays in uniform motion.
But how do you know an object is not subject to forces?
Some forces are hidden.
They're forces like the electric force of the electric field.
You can't see the electric field.
You can't see gravity.
How do you know those forces are or aren't acting?
It becomes difficult to identify uniformly moving frames of reference.
And it turns out you can identify non-gravitational forces, but identifying gravitational forces
turns out to be very difficult.
And so the whole edifice of special relativity, if you will, is built on a foundation that
isn't very solid because it's built on the foundation of uniformly moving reference
frames.
And identifying those is going to prove problematic.
Second, and another gravitational issue is that special relativity isn't compatible with
Newtonian gravitation.
Newtonian gravitation suggests that the Earth sitting here reaches out and instantaneously
exerts an influence on the moon or a satellite or the falling apple or whatever.
It's a theory of instantaneous action at a distance.
And we know that instantaneous transmission of any kind of influence would violate causality
under special relativity because it would require an influence to travel the faster
than the speed of light.
And that can't be.
So it's not compatible with Newtonian gravitation, and we're going to have to modify gravitation
somehow to make it compatible with relativity.
So that's going to be the theme of this lecture largely is, how do we develop a theory of
relativity that gets around these limitations and that is compatible with gravitation?
Well, to make it compatible with gravitation, we're going to have to modify gravitation.
And for that reason, general relativity becomes primarily a theory about gravity.
General relativity was developed by Einstein pretty much on his own in the years roughly
1907 until it reached its final form in about 1915.
And we're going to see what some of the thought processes were that got Einstein to general
relativity.
Einstein's so-called happiest thought, this was his terminology, occurred in 1907.
And it's the idea of what's called the principle of equivalence.
And what it says is this.
It says, look, you can't distinguish the effects of gravity and acceleration.
You get confused about them.
That's why we can't tell for sure whether we're in a uniformly moving frame of reference
and there are no forces acting or whether there are forces acting and we're not in a
uniformly moving frame of reference.
Can't distinguish those two cases.
And for Einstein, that became a very happy thought.
And I want to qualify that thought a little bit.
This is true at least in small regions of space time, over vast expanses of space time
or in regions where gravity is extremely strong.
This statement of equivalence turns out not to be true and that's essentially the global
reach of general relativity.
But in small enough regions of space time, limited in space and limited in time, then
you can't distinguish the effects of gravity from acceleration.
That's why it's hard to identify inertial reference frames.
Let's look at some examples of how this works.
So here I've got a picture, I'm in a, I like to picture an elevator.
And the elevator cable has been cut.
You can see the cut cable coming out of the top of the elevator.
The elevator with me in it and with a ball I've been holding are all in free fall.
We're in free fall in the vicinity of the earth.
So there are, in Newtonian terms, forces acting, honestly, the forces of gravity.
And we know that the force of gravity gives everybody the same acceleration.
We know that the gravitational force, MG, results by Newton's second law in an acceleration
G, which is the same regardless of an object's mass.
And for years, decades, centuries before Einstein, that was just an interesting fact and coincidence.
Einstein made it basically one of the essences of general relativity because the principle
of equivalence is the principle that says that's got to be true.
So here's what's happening.
This situation, free fall under the influence of gravity, looks exactly the same as what
would happen if I were way off in space, intergalactic space, far from any gravitating body, and
I was in uniform motion, which could mean I was at rest relative to somebody or other
in uniform motion, but there's no gravity and there's no acceleration going on.
If I sit in that now spaceship shaped like my broken elevator and I take a ball out of
my pocket, it will just sit next to me and I will float free from the elevator floor
or the spaceship floor, just like a wind in the case of the free fall in gravity, because
we're all falling with the same acceleration.
In the case on the left-hand side, we have no acceleration whatsoever.
On the right-hand side, there are no forces acting.
So doing an experiment of finding myself floating around in a spaceship or elevator and taking
a ball out of my pocket and putting it next to me, and seeing that it just sits there,
I couldn't distinguish those two cases.
That's what's meant by saying the gravity and the effect of acceleration are indistinguishable.
Now you say acceleration, where's the acceleration?
Well, let's look at another case.
Here's another case.
I'm at rest on Earth in my elevator, now it's sitting there at rest.
I take a ball out of my pocket and the ball falls to the ground with acceleration G, and
you'll notice that I'm now glued to the floor of the elevator by the force of gravity.
I take the ball out and the ball accelerates downward.
But I could achieve the same thing if I went into intergalactic space, again, no gravity
around.
I strapped the rocket engine on my spacecraft and I fired the rocket engine so it was exerting
a force on the rocket that was accelerating it, and if I chose the right thrust for my
rocket engine, it would accelerate with acceleration G, 9.8 meters per second squared.
If I take a ball out of my pocket and I drop it, it would fall toward the floor.
Well, would it really fall toward the floor or would the floor come accelerating up toward
it?
The ball would be in uniform motion.
No acceleration, no forces acting on it, but the floor would come accelerating up toward
it and consequently the effect would be the same as if the ball were accelerating downward.
And I would also find myself pinned to the floor of this spacecraft by that acceleration.
So I can mimic the effect of gravity with that acceleration.
That's the second half of the principle of equivalence.
Those are two situations that experiments done, at least in reasonably small elevators
or spacecraft, could not distinguish.
That's the principle of equivalence.
That's Einstein's happiest thought.
So we now have to ask the question, how are we going to describe gravity in this general
theory of relativity in which we have this equivalence principle that says, well, gravity
is a little bit funny here because we can't distinguish it from acceleration.
In particular, if I jump into that elevator in which the cable is broken and the elevator
is accelerating downward with the acceleration of gravity, and I take the ball out of my
pocket just folks, it's as if there's no gravity.
I've transformed gravity away by being in free fall.
Unless you think that's an artificial situation, it's the situation astronauts right now are
in as they're going around the earth in the International Space Station.
They are in free fall.
They're moving under the influence only of gravity.
They happen to be in a much better state of free fall that doesn't ever intersect the
earth, unlike the hapless person in the falling elevator.
But they're in exactly the same situation.
All the objects around them are undergoing the same acceleration.
It's not that there's no gravity in space, as we talked about way back in Newtonian mechanics.
It's that in an object which is in free fall, all the other things around it are also in
free fall.
It's the same acceleration, and so it appears that gravity is not there.
Appears that gravity is transformed away by that going into free fall.
Now, that says, ah, that's okay, we can understand that, that's just Newtonian stuff, but here's
the big philosophical change.
We talked in the last lecture about how the only things that are real are the things that
don't depend on your point of view, and that means if there's a frame of reference I can
get into, and gravity doesn't seem to be there, then what I thought of as gravity, that big
massive force pulling me to Earth, is in some sense not real.
Now, we've got to make another philosophical leap.
We've got to decide that all reference frames are going to be equivalent, not just uniformly
moving ones.
If we make that leap, then when we're in free fall, we're in a frame of reference where
gravity has been transformed away, and so we have to ask the question, well, what then
is gravity if it isn't that big remote action at a distance force of the massive Earth pulling
me downward or whatever?
Well, we can understand that by looking at a larger region of space time, or in this
case a larger region of space.
So here I am again in my falling elevator with the broken cable, except now it's a much
bigger elevator, and I'm much bigger, and below me is the curvature of the Earth.
So the Earth is small in this picture compared to what it was in the other picture.
I notice it's curvature, or equivalently, I'm my normal size, and the elevator's my
normal size, and this is a really massive object that's been compressed to a very, very
small size, either way.
So I take now two balls out of my pockets, and I drop them.
And they fall, of course, toward the center of the Earth, and so their acceleration vectors
are both pointing downward, but down is no longer quite the same direction.
That's what I mean by that principle of equivalence requiring a small region of space time.
If you get in a big region of space time, you'll notice differences in the direction
of gravity.
And here the direction of gravity is indeed downward toward the center, but that means
something slightly different in those two different places.
And so as we fall toward the center, the distance between those balls, which was pretty far
apart when I took them out of my pockets as I get farther down, that distance gets smaller
compared with what it was, because they're falling on these converging paths that go
toward the center of the Earth.
By the way, you'll notice something else in this drawing.
I've become taller, and my arms have become squished horizontally.
Why is that happening?
It's happening because gravity is also changing with vertical position.
It gets stronger as I get toward the center of the Earth, and so there's a less weaker
force on my head and a stronger force on my feet.
And in my frame of reference, that tends to stretch me in the vertical direction.
Those forces are called tidal forces, because they're what also cause the tides.
The tides are caused not by gravity, but by differences in gravity from place to place.
And these tidal forces are something I can't transform away by jumping into another reference
frame.
So those tidal forces, in Einstein's view, are the essence of gravity, because they
cannot be transformed away, and it's the things that are independent of reference
frame that are objectively real.
So gravity is about these tidal forces, what Newton would have called differences in gravity
from place to place.
And again, this is just one quick lecture on the essence of general relativity.
So I'm not going to go into many more details about this.
I'm going to cut to the chase and give you the description of gravity and general relativity,
but it's based on this idea of tidal forces.
And Einstein says, well, what really are these tidal forces?
What are they really about?
What are they really measuring?
They're not measuring force, because there is no gravitational force for them to be the
differences between, because that can be transformed away.
They must be something more essential.
And what Einstein says they are is the geometry of space and time.
The geometry of that four-dimensional space time that we already talked about when we
introduced the idea of invariance.
Four-dimensional space time now has geometry, and it can be funny geometry, it can be curved.
And objects can move in funny ways in this curved geometry, and that's how Einstein's
going to explain gravity.
So these tidal forces are kind of a residual Newtonian idea, which forms the germ of the
description of gravity in general relativity.
What is that description?
The essence of general relativity is summed up in two statements.
One about where gravity comes from, it comes as it did in Newtonian theory from mass.
The presence of matter and energy because of the E equals mc squared equivalents, and
I might add pressure, which is a kind of internal energy.
We'll get to that when we talk about dark matter and the accelerated expansion of the
universe in a few lectures.
The presence of matter and energy changes the geometry of space time.
In particular, it curves space time.
So that's the origin of gravity.
Gravity is not a force, it's the curvature of space time, it's the geometry of space
time.
A fancy word for general relativity is geometrodynamics, the dynamics of objects moving in a funny
geometry, a curved geometry, whose curvature arises from matter and energy.
So the presence of matter and energy curves space time.
This is analogous to Newton's statement that mass gives rise to gravitational fields.
And here's the equation, and I'm not going to derive this equation, I'm not going to
say a whole lot about this equation, but what the equation does is relate something about
the space time geometry.
This big capital G with those subscripts Greek mu and Greek nu talks about the geometry of
space time.
On the right hand side of the equation are some constants, 8 pi times big G, which is
that big Newtonian constant of gravitation, and in the denominator, lo and behold, the
speed of light comes in to the fourth power.
And then this term T with the subscripts mu and nu, and that is called the mass energy
tensor, that is the presence of mass and energy at a point in the universe.
So this says right at a point in the universe where the mass energy is described by this
T, then the geometry of space time is described by this G.
And you might say, well, this is not too hard an equation, it's just one simple equation
relating two things, just directly proportional.
But those mu's and nu's can each take values from one to four, they can take four values
for the four space time dimensions, and so there are 16 possible combinations, and it
turns out that only 10 of those are independent.
So this is really 10 equations, sometimes called the Einstein field equations.
We're not going to go into details, but what it's telling you is how the geometry of space
time arises from the presence of mass and energy.
And then the second part of the, not the equation, but the second part of the description of
gravity is that objects then move in the straightest possible paths in curved space
time.
And let me give you a diagram and then a quick demonstration of that.
So here's an example, this is called an embedding diagram, don't take it too literally, but what
it shows is a massive object, maybe a star, and it shows what you can think of as kind
of a rubber sheet that's been deformed by the presence of that star, that's like four-dimensional
space time.
But this is only a two-dimensional analogy, so it's not a great analogy.
And here you see a particle that's moving pretty fast, coming whizzing in from the left,
and moving along a path that gets slightly curved because it dips a little bit near that
curved space time, and its path gets influenced, and that is the straightest possible path
in that curved space time.
It's not a straight line, but it's the straightest possible path in that curved space time.
And here you see another particle which is deeper in that, if you will, gravitational
well, that distorted part of space time, and it's actually moving around and around and
around in a circular orbit around that star.
And that's the general relativistic description of both things.
The massive star is warping the space time in its vicinity, the closer you are to it,
the more warped it is, and that warped space time, that curved space time, is affecting
the trajectories of particles.
Let's look at a more commonplace analogy for that.
Here's a globe of planet Earth, and if I want to go somewhere on this globe, if I want to
fly, say, from Egypt, which I've marked on here, to Texas, which is over here, I'm going
to follow the shortest possible path, and the shortest possible path is what looks like a
straight line, but it isn't really a straight line because it's curved with the curvature
of the Earth.
In fact, it's what we call a great circle.
It's part of a circumference of the Earth with its center in the center of the Earth,
and that's the shortest possible path, and that's how airplanes, of course, fly long
international distances, and you'll see, even though Egypt and Texas are not that far north,
this path has taken us right off the tip of Greenland.
That's the shortest possible path or straightest possible path in curved space time, and general
relativity in curved space, in this case, the flat, the round surface of the Earth being
the curved two-dimensional space.
The analogy in general relativity is moving in the straightest possible path in a curved
space time.
Okay, so there is the description of gravity and general relativity.
Let's move on to some quick examples of that, some applications of general relativity.
General relativity was really obscure through the first two-thirds of the 20th century.
It was thought to be right.
There were a few tests that suggested it was right, but it wasn't really widely used by
physicists.
All that changed in roughly the year 19, no, 1960 to 1970, and today general relativity
has become really the workhorse of modern high-energy astrophysics and cosmology.
Let me give you a few examples.
So some consequences and predictions of GR, and what I'm going to do here is give you
a sort of old classic, not classical, but an old example, one of the early ones that
helped us confirm general relativity and then talk about what we do with it today.
So one of the first ones was that crack in classical physics.
Here we are fixing a second crack, the procession of Mercury's orbit.
When you do the calculations of what one body going in orbit around another should look
like in general relativity, it turns out the orbit processes, and it explains very nicely
the anomaly of Mercury's 43 seconds of arc per century, and almost as soon as he published
general relativity, Einstein demonstrated that indeed that was the case, and so that
crack was gone.
Today we have binary pulsars, which are very collapsed stars consisting basically of huge
balls of neutrons a few miles in diameter with a mass as much of that as the sun or more,
and they're in very tight orbits around each other, and gravity is very strong, and binary
pulsars typically will process at several degrees per year, and that's very easy for
us to measure astrophysically.
So orbital procession is one consequence and prediction of general relativity confirmed
by Mercury's anomalous orbit, and today used to explain the orbits of massive objects
in very tight objects where the procession is quite easy to observe, quite large.
The bending of light.
Light travels in the straightest possible paths, but they too are not straight.
Light follows the geometry of space-time, and light is in fact bent as it goes near
massive objects.
So here's a diagram that shows a star that is some ways away from Earth, and in between
the star and the Earth comes the sun, and the light from the star that is actually getting
to Earth is light that headed out in a different direction than toward Earth because it was
bent going around the sun.
And that phenomenon was observed in 1919, it had to be done during an eclipse because
if you want to look at stars, and you want the sun between you and the stars, that's
a definition of daytime.
Well, so you've got to have an eclipse so you can still see the stars.
There was a famous eclipse in 1919, the bending of light, which by the way, Newton's theory
of gravity also predicts, but there's a factor of two difference in the amount of bending.
The bending of light, according to general relativity, was predicted, and it was that,
not the publication of special relativity in 1905 that really threw Einstein into world
fame.
A headline read, light's a gog in the heavens, and Einstein was proved right.
Verified by that 1919 eclipse, today gravitational lensing, as it's called, the bending of light
has become a tool of astrophysicists for all kinds of processes.
The picture you see here shows some distant quasars and distant galaxies that are being,
having their light bent, and in fact bent in such a way that they form multiple images
or distort the images of the galaxies into these curved arcs you can see, and that's
happening because of a more massive cluster of galaxies between us and them.
This gravitational lensing tells us something about the intermediate mass, it tells us something
about the distant universe.
In fact, these gravitational lenses can act as giant cosmic telescopes to allow us to
see objects much fainter and more distant than we would have been able to see without
them.
Gravitational lensing, so-called micro-lensing, can be used to detect planets as they pass
in front of a star.
They can be used to detect all kinds of passages of one massive object in front of another
by the bending of light and temporary brightening of the light as the light is literally brought
to a focus by this so-called gravitational lens.
Gravitational lensing is a real workhorse, again, of modern astrophysics.
Another example is the so-called gravitational redshift.
As light leaves the surface of a massive object, it's like throwing a ball up in the air.
The ball slows down and turns around, but light can't slow down.
But it does lose energy, and the way it loses energy is by getting to longer wavelengths.
So if you have, say, a blue light source on the surface of a very, very massive object
and you look at it from far away, you will see the light shifted toward the red.
Or even further, maybe into the infrared, maybe into the radio, depending on how massive
an object this thing has to climb away from.
And another way of looking at that gravitational redshift is it's actually a kind of time dilation,
a gravitational time dilation.
Clocks' time itself runs slower when they're deep down in a strong gravitational potential,
in a strong gravitational field.
That was verified by a 1959 experiment.
A very delicate experiment was done at Tower at Harvard University.
And today collapsed stars, black holes, neutron stars, even white dwarf stars, which aren't
quite so collapsed, all illustrate very clearly this phenomenon of gravitational redshift.
Another much more down-to-earth thing that demonstrates gravitational redshift is the
GPS satellite system.
The GPS satellite system works by timing the passage of radio signals from four or more
satellites that are in your field of view to your GPS receiver that's in your smartphone
or in your car, wherever it is, and by timing those signals very carefully and triangulating
it knows exactly where you are to within, if we're good, centimeters on the surface
of the Earth.
But because those satellites are up higher in a different strength of gravitational field,
if we didn't take gravitational redshift into account, GPS would be off by miles at
the end of each day.
So we actually have to use general relativity for GPS.
Some other consequences and predictions.
General relativity predicts ripples in space and time, which we call gravitational waves.
We haven't observed them yet directly.
But we're searching them for them with giant interferometers that are like massive, lengthy
versions of the Michelson-Morley experiment, basically, and here we see one in Louisiana,
which has a companion in Washington state, and they're looking for coincidences of gravitational
radiation as slight difference in those path lengths occur as these ripples in space time
come through.
We have sort of seen these gravitational waves associated with energy loss in binary pulsar
systems where the system is radiating gravitational waves.
We haven't detected the waves, but the loss in the energy as the orbits change is consistent
with what we think the radiation of gravitational waves should be.
Another consequence that everyone's heard of are black holes.
Black holes actually arise from a mathematical singularity in the solution to Einstein's
equations when you worry about what does the gravitation look like around a spherically
symmetric object.
And if you try to write out something like that delta S squared, that space time interval
that I talked about in the lecture on invariance, you find that there are a number of terms
in it, but one of the terms involves the radial distance, and it's divided by this one minus
r sub s over r.
And that r sub s is a constant associated with the mass of an object, and if that quantity
in the denominator, if the radius gets small enough that that quantity becomes zero, there's
a singularity.
The equation blows up, and we want to understand what that means, but that's where black holes
originate, and I'll have a little more to say about that.
Today black holes are everywhere.
They're in collapsed stars, they're in galactic centers.
We know almost all galaxies have collapsed black holes at their centers, including our
own Milky Way, and there may even be micro-black holes that were formed at the beginning of
the universe.
So those are some consequences of general relativity for black holes.
We'll say a little bit more about black holes in a bit.
The whole universe.
The cosmic expansion that was discovered by Edwin Hubble in the 1920s has now been replaced
with the large-scale structure of the universe and our general relativistic studies of it,
and here's an example of a paper which is called Confirmation of General Relativity.
It's a 2010 paper, and it's done by gravitational lensing.
So GR is now what we use, general relativity described the large-scale structure of the
universe.
We even think we have echoes of gravitational waves in the very early universe, and we see
them in something called the cosmic-microid background, which I'll talk about more a little
bit later.
And finally, there's a possibility that dark energy is, in fact, something that could
originate from Einstein's equation with an extra term that you see here on the right-hand
side of the equal sign, and that term is a term that Einstein first introduced because
he thought the universe should be static, it shouldn't be expanding or contracting,
so he stuck in this sort of fudge term to make it not expand or contract.
Then when Hubble discovered it was expanding, Einstein said, that's my greatest blunder,
and he took that term out.
And now with the accelerated expansion of the universe that I'll be talking about in
subsequent lectures, we think maybe Einstein's term belongs back in there.
So those are some consequences and predictions of general relativity.
Let me summarize and then leave you with a challenge.
Special relativity is incompatible with Newtonian gravity.
We need a new theory of gravity.
That new theory of gravity can't involve instantaneous action at a distance.
It can't involve this confusion of acceleration and gravity, or it has to exploit it in a
helpful way.
That's what the principle of equivalence does for us.
Gravity and acceleration are locally indistinguishable, but they are distinguishable in large regions
of space-time.
The generalization of special relativity that results becomes a theory about gravity, and
the essence of general relativity is this idea that mass-energy curves space-time and
matter moves on the straightest possible paths in curved space-time.
We've seen a lot of applications, precession, bending of light, gravitational redshift,
gravitational waves, black holes, and the structure of the universe.
Okay, let's end with a little challenge here.
The mass of the observable universe, the part of the universe we can see, is estimated to
be about 9 times 10 to the 52 kilograms.
Find the corresponding Schwarzschild radius, the radius in that equation where things kind
of blew up in that general relativistic description of the space-time interval, and compare it
with the actual radius of the observable universe, which is about 14 billion light-years.
I have to tell you something about this Schwarzschild radius.
It's the radius at which the escape speed would become the speed of light.
If you go back to lecture 13 and look up the escape speed and then calculate what the radius
would have to be, if the escape speed is the speed of light, you will find that that radius,
the Schwarzschild radius, the radius at which that term blows up in that equation, the radius
at which you have what's called the horizon of a black hole out of which nothing can escape
because the escape speed has become c.
You find that that's 2 gm over c squared g being the gravitational constant from Newton's
times 6.67 times 10 to the minus 11 in SI units.
C of course is 3 times 10 to the 8th meters per second.
Let's work that out to gm over c squared 1.33 times 10 to the 26 meters.
Let's work that out.
We're going to figure out what that is in light-years.
That's 1.33 times 10 to the 26 meters divided by 365 days in a year, 86,400 seconds in a
day, and the speed of light c 3 times 10 to the 8 meters per second.
That gives us 14 times 10 to the 9 light-years, 14 billion light-years, the same as the in
fact observable radius of the universe.
Whoa!
What does that mean?
Does it mean we're in a black hole?
Well, not exactly, but it does mean there's some kind of horizon beyond which we cannot
see because at that point the expanding universe is expanding away from us at faster than the
speed of light.
Whoa!
Is that possible?
We're talking about large regions of space time and the special relativistic restrictions
don't apply, so we're kind of trapped in a horizon, somewhat like a black hole horizon,
but not exactly, and that thing has a radius of 14 billion light-years and we aren't able
to see beyond that.
We aren't able to know what's outside of that.
