Welcome to lecture 50, the lecture in which you will for the first time meet the quantum,
the second of the really big new ideas of modern physics, an idea that grew not out of
the mind of one person as did relativity, but out of the minds and work and different
approaches of quite a number of physicists through the early part of the 20th century
culminating in a pretty much firmly established theory of quantum physics by around the year
1930, late 1920s to 1930, ideas that continued to grow though throughout the remainder of
the 20th century and indeed continue to grow today into the 21st century.
But we're going to look here in this lecture at the very basic idea of the quantum and
in doing so we will manage to check off two more of those cracks in classical physics
that I introduced back in lecture 44.
So let's begin and take a look at where we've been already in terms of classical physics
and these cracks, these problems we had with classical physics.
First we had issues with the ether, these quandaries about trying to detect Earth's
motion relative to the ether.
We've resolved those.
We resolved them with special relativity.
We resolved the quandary of Mercury's orbit, that anomalous procession of Mercury's orbit,
that 43 seconds of arc per century.
We resolved that with general relativity.
Both of those theories do essentially completely to Albert Einstein.
Today we're going to look at glowing objects and electrons and light and we will reserve
the atoms for a later lecture.
So let's move on and look at these cracks in classical physics.
We're going to resolve all three of the remaining ones with quantum physics, but today again
we'll look first at glowing objects, electrons and light.
So let me remind you of the ultraviolet catastrophe.
The ultraviolet catastrophe was one of those problems in classical physics.
It was the prediction of classical physics that there should be infinite energy emitted
as you go to shorter and shorter wavelengths by any hot glowing object.
And so it didn't really matter whether I turned the current up or down or what, as long as
the object was above absolute zero, it should be putting out infinite energy and most of
that energy should be in the shortest wavelengths, which at the time were known to be ultraviolet.
Clearly a contradiction with what actually happens.
The observation is that the energy peaks, as we said before, at a temperature dependent
wavelength.
So if I make the temperature hotter, not only do we produce more energy, but not an infinite
amount, but we also produce an energy whose dominant wavelengths tends to be toward the
shorter wavelengths.
Here we have a yellow-white, here we have a kind of orange-yellow, here we have a kind
of dull-red.
Those are the observations.
The theory is at strongly contrasting odds with the observations.
So how do we resolve this?
Well the resolution came in 1900 by Max Planck.
And Max Planck was a German physicist.
He was quite conservative in his approach to physics and he really didn't quite embrace
the revolutionary idea he put forth here.
But here was Planck's resolution.
The classical prediction based on classical electrodynamics and classical thermodynamics
suggested that the radiance, the amount of power emitted per unit wavelength interval
by a hot glowing object should depend on the temperature and it should go as the inverse
fourth power of the wavelength.
And there's where that ultraviolet catastrophe is coming from because if you make the wavelength
lambda, the thing in the denominator here, again the Greek lambda is our symbol for wavelength.
You'll remember that from the lecture 18 on waves.
If you make lambda smaller and smaller, that radiance just goes up and up and up toward
infinity as lambda goes toward zero and that's clearly not what happens.
If you look at the actual curves here for the 6000 kelvin and 4000 kelvin glowing objects,
you find that the radiance goes up, it peaks, and then it drops down to zero at zero wavelength.
Planck had to figure out how to make that happen.
And he figured out how to do it mathematically.
So he had to somehow get rid of that blowing up as the wavelength goes to zero.
Well he came up with a different formula and his formula looks a lot more complicated and
I'm not going to prove this, but in fact for long wavelengths, large lambdas, it reduces
to the classical formula.
That may not look obvious, but for those of you who know a little bit about expanding
functions, if you expand that exponential, you will get a term with a lambda that cancels
the lambda to the fifth or one over lambda that cancels that lambda to the fifth and
you will get a lambda to the fourth in the denominator and it will end up looking just
like the classical formula.
But as you go to shorter wavelengths, Planck's formula deviates from the classical prediction.
Now I want to emphasize, Planck is making up a formula that he is trying to get to fit
those actual observed curves of radiance versus wavelength.
You'll notice something important in this formula.
There's a constant in there which is designated H, it's now called Planck's constant, and
it is the fundamental thing about quantum physics.
If Planck's constant were zero, if we lived in a universe where Planck's constant were
zero, this formula would reduce to the classical one and we would have no quantum effects at
all.
Planck's constant is the constant that tells us our world is quantized.
What Planck did was simply adjust the value of that constant, which you'll notice appears
in two places in his equation, in that exponential and also in the numerator.
He adjusted it so the observed curves were fit and he found the value of that constant
had to be very small value in SI units, it's 6.63 times 10 to the minus 34 and its units
are joules times seconds, which happen to be the units of something called action.
They also happen to be the units as we'll see of angular momentum.
So it's a constant, a fundamental constant of nature, a new fundamental constant of nature
like C or like the Coulomb constant K or the magnetic constant mu naught or the gravitational
constant big G.
H is a new constant of nature that gets introduced with Planck's resolution.
Now let's look at the implications of Planck's resolution.
Right now it's just a mathematical exercise.
Let's make up a formula, says Planck, that will fit the observed distribution of radiation
with wavelength and that will reduce to the classical prediction at long wavelengths
away from the ultraviolet catastrophe.
So he makes up this formula, he finds it, he puts a new constant in it, he adjusts the
value of the constant for the theta, he finds that the value of the constant is 6.63 times
10 to the minus 34 joules seconds.
What are the implications of this work?
Well, the mathematical implication is that there is a term now in the denominator that
has E, the base of natural logarithms, the basis of the exponential function.
It's being exponentiated to a power that involves some constants here.
You can see the constants include Planck's constant and the speed of light.
Down in the denominator is lambda and as lambda goes to 0, or gets smaller and smaller,
that exponent gets bigger and bigger, E to a big number is really huge and that term
blows up exponentially as lambda goes towards 0.
And even though we've got a lambda to the fifth outside of that parentheses in the denominator
and the lambda to the fifth is going to 0, you might say that's going to make the whole
expression go to infinity, in fact the exponential blows up so much faster than that lambda to
the fifth goes to 0 that the whole denominator goes to infinity and that reduces the radiance
to 0.
So the mathematical implication, the reason this works is that the radiance is then reduced
to 0 at small wavelengths and that's exactly what you see in the observations and that
resolves the ultraviolet catastrophe.
Our light bulb glows calmly with whatever radiance it's supposed to have for its given
temperature and it doesn't produce infinite energy and it doesn't produce most of its
energy at short wavelengths because this formula mathematically takes that down to 0.
That's the mathematical implication.
What about the physics implication?
Because we're about physics here, not just about mathematics.
The physics implication, this is the one that Planck had trouble accepting.
What this implies is that the energy of the atomic and molecular vibrations, which after
all are what are causing a hot glowing object to radiate energy, back again to our study
of heat and thermodynamics, we know that the internal energy associated with temperature
and heat is the energy of random motions of atoms and molecules vibrating in place in
a solid or whizzing around in a gas or liquid and we know from electrodynamics, from studying
electromagnetism particularly in lecture 40, that the source of electromagnetic radiation
is accelerated electric charge so these atoms and molecules whizzing around and they do
have electric charges in them, they're the source of the energy that gets radiated away.
The implication of Planck's constant is that the energy of those vibrations is quantized
and it comes in multiples of a certain fundamental amount and that fundamental amount turns out
to be Planck's constant times the frequency of the vibrations in question.
I'll say a little bit more about that just a moment but let me simply point out how this
solves the ultraviolet catastrophe for us.
It means that the minimum amount of energy at very high frequencies which correspond
to very short wavelengths because frequency times wavelength is the speed of light C,
very high frequencies the minimum amount of energy is so large that you're very unlikely
to have any atom with that amount of energy and so you simply get no radiation at very
short wavelengths and that's physically how quantization, the idea that the amount of
energy at a given frequency of vibration comes only in multiples of a certain minimum
amount, that idea solves the ultraviolet catastrophe physically in the way and it's related to
the mathematical way in which this new term involving Planck's constant solved the problem
mathematically.
So those are the implications of Planck's formula and the big form, we're not going
to worry about Planck's formula much more here but we are going to worry about that
little formula at the bottom and let's take a look at that formula, let's do an anatomy
of an equation like we like to do, this is a pretty simple formula, we're going to do
two anatomies of it in this lecture, it says E equals HF, what does that mean?
F is the frequency of an oscillatory process, in this case the frequency of atomic and molecular
vibrations that are taking place in a hot glowing object, E is the quantum of energy
at that frequency meaning E is the minimum amount of vibrational energy these objects
can have.
It's a very non-classical idea, in classical physics I put a mass on a spring which would
be the analogy of a vibrating atom or molecule and I can give it any amount of vibration
I want, it has a certain frequency set by the spring and the mass but I can give it
any amplitude I want, this formula says no you can't, it says you really can only give
it certain multiples, you can give it any energy that's a multiple of this fundamental
amount that comes from multiplying Planck's constant by the frequency.
Now for a macroscopic mass spring system like I might make here in the laboratory, H is
so small that I don't notice that fundamental quantum although I'm going to show you a little
bit later an example where an almost macroscopic object has been made to vibrate and the quantum
of its oscillatory vibration is actually evident.
Anyway, quantum of energy for frequency has the minimum amount of energy you can have
in a vibration at that frequency is on the left, on the right is the frequency and the
proportionality constant again is this Planck's constant, 6.63 x 10 to the minus 34 joule seconds.
So Planck has resolved for us the ultraviolet catastrophe, no more ultraviolet catastrophe
but in doing so he's had to introduce a great big new idea, the idea of quantization and
in this case what's quantized is the vibrational energies of oscillatory processes like atomic
and molecular vibrations and I'm being a little bit vague in describing that for reasons
that you'll see in just a moment because what we would like to do next is move on and look
at another one of those cracks in classical physics, this one involving the interaction
of electrons and light and we're going to see that the resolution of that is also going
to involve quantization.
So let me remind you of that one which was a little bit more complicated, it involved
this interaction of light with electrons where we had metal plates in a sealed evacuated tube,
we shine light on those metal plates, electrons are ejected from the metal by the energy of
the light and we hook up a battery and a meter and we're able to attract electrons if the
left hand side of the battery as shown here is positive so it's connected to that left
hand plate, the electrons are ejected from the right hand plate, electrons are negative
so they come flying out and go toward the left hand plate and there's a little meter
registering that an electric current is flowing through this complete circuit and as we argued
in lecture 44, it should take a while for the electrons to be ejected because it takes
time for them to absorb enough energy from the light wave where the energy is spread
out all across this extended wave, increasing the light intensity should shorten that time
because it takes less time because there's more energy available, the electron energy
shouldn't depend on the light's wavelength, those are things we thought should happen
on the basis of classical physics.
What in fact happened as I pointed out in lecture 44 was that the electrons were ejected
immediately, the electron energy did depend on wavelength, in fact it increased with decreasing
wavelength and there was in fact a cutoff wavelength, a longest wavelength, longer than
which you could simply not get electrons to be ejected at all.
So the actual observations of this photoelectric effect, the interaction of light photo with
electrons, photoelectric effect is a complete contract with classical physics.
By the way, the photoelectric effect provided the first example of a kind of electronic
light detector, so-called electric eye, and in the old days, early part of the 20th century,
when you walk through an automatic door that opened seeing your presence, you were interrupting
a light beam that was falling on something like this photoelectric cell.
That's long since been replaced by all kinds of solid state electronic devices, but this
was an early way of detecting light electronically using the photoelectric effect.
Well how do we look at this photoelectric effect, how do we understand it, how do we
realize what's going on?
Well let's take a look first at some data here.
So I've plotted a graph here that shows on the horizontal axis the light frequency in
units of 10 to the 14 hertz, so we're going from about 4 to 12 times 10 to the 14 hertz,
and up at the top I've plotted the corresponding wavelength, which goes from about 700 nanometers,
700 billionths of a meter, down to about 300 billionths of a meter, we're spanning
from the infrared to the visible to the ultraviolet across this graph, and you'll notice now in
the lower right diagram I've reversed the battery, so the negative is now to the left,
and that means that left hand electrode in that tube is going to repel the electrons
that are coming out of that electrode, that are being ejected by the light.
But if those electrons are ejected with enough energy, they may still be able to overcome
that repulsion and make it to that electrode, and there will still be a little bit of current.
And in fact, if I crank up the battery voltage, then that repulsion will get bigger and it
will, I will repel the electrons more, and so there will come for any amount of light
coming in, any color of light coming in, any wavelength of light, there will be some voltage
that I can apply with that battery that will stop the electrons, will stop the current that
will keep the electrons from reaching that plate, and that's called the stopping potential.
And so that stopping potential becomes a measure of the energy with which the electrons were
ejected from that plate.
And so in this graph what you're seeing is the stopping potential on the vertical axis
versus the light frequency on the horizontal, or equivalently the wavelength on the top
horizontal axis, the stopping potential is measured in volts.
And what you see is down at the lower left there's a cutoff, there is a place at which
the stopping potential is zero.
Electrons, even at zero voltage, even not trying to repel them, they don't come out
of the metal.
So that's that cutoff frequency, or cutoff wavelength, below which frequency, above
which wavelength, no electrons are ejected.
We need to explain that.
And then as the frequency of the light goes up, the stopping potential that you need to
stop those electrons, and therefore the energy with which they're being ejected, increases
linearly.
And we need to explain that.
Now these experiments, again, were done in the late 1800s through into the 1900s.
It was in 1905 that Albert Einstein explained these results.
What is the resolution?
Einstein's 1905, another one of his famous papers, the one that was named most prominently
in his Nobel citation.
He says, let's consider that light consists not necessarily of waves, but now of little
bundles of energy.
The energy is bundled in little discrete particle-like bundles called photons.
Big idea in physics, the photon, a light particle, if you will.
The photon energy, same formula that Planck had, is E equals HF.
How does that explain the photoelectric effect?
Well, there's a minimum energy needed to eject an electron to get it out of the metal, because
the metal is holding onto it with electrostatic forces.
And so there is a minimum frequency required because the photon energy is directly proportional
to frequency, minimum light frequency.
That corresponds to the cutoff wavelength.
The electron energy increases with increasing frequency because the photon energy increases
with increasing frequency.
The energy of these light bundles of energy that are coming in to eject the electrons.
The current depends on the intensity, but the electron energy doesn't depend on the
intensity because the current gives us the number of these photons.
And the electrons are ejected immediately because instead of this being an interaction
where it takes a long time to absorb energy from a wave whose energy is all spread out,
in fact, the interaction is with a little bundle-like concentrated lump of energy that
hits an electron and ejects it almost immediately, regardless of how intense or not intense the
light is.
And so we have the same equation again.
E equals HF applied now to something different, to light rather than atomic vibration.
So we're going to do the anatomy of this one, and it's very similar.
HF is a frequency, except in this case it's a frequency of light, which is C over lambda
if you want to express it in terms of wavelength.
So that's a frequency.
This is an energy.
In this case, it's not the energy of a molecular vibration, but the energy of a photon, one
of these little bundles, these particle-like bundles of light energy.
And H, again, is Planck's constant, 6.63 times 10 to the minus 34 joule seconds.
Let's do an example, since we're quantitative in this course.
Let's do an example where we look at this photon energy.
So let's go over to our big screen.
So let's take a look at what this concept of the photon and the photon's energy being
proportional to its frequency means.
What do we mean by the frequency of a particle, by the way?
We'll get to that more in subsequent lectures.
So here's a problem I'm posing.
Photon energy.
Find the photon energy and find the number of photons emitted each second by three things.
A one-watt AM radio transmitter, the AM radio band, spans about 0.550 to 1,500 kilohertz,
0.5 to about 1.5 megahertz.
So we're sort of right in the middle of the AM radio band with a frequency of 1 megahertz,
10 to the 6 hertz, a million cycles per second.
A one-watt LED night light, such as you might plug into your hallway so you can have a little
bit of light at night.
One-watt LED is a lady-meeting diode.
We'll see a little bit later how they work.
They're a quantum device.
And their frequency is the frequency in the visible light range, about 5 times 10 to the
14 hertz.
That is consistent with the frequencies I showed you on that data from the photoelectric effect.
And finally, a dental X-ray machine producing a watt of X-ray power.
Typical X-ray frequency is on the order of 10 to the 19 hertz.
So we want to find two things.
We want to find the photon energy, and then we want to find the number of photons emitted
each second by each of these three devices.
Notice they all have the same power.
That is, they emit the same amount of energy every second.
But they're going to have different photon energies because they have different frequencies.
So here's our big, massive idea here.
The quantization of the energy of light, if you will, the vibrations of the light waves
of light, somehow result in these quantized bundles of energy whose energy is proportional
to their frequency, E equals HF, just like Planck said, the quantized vibrations of the
atoms and molecules resulted in these basic measures of energy that you could have for
those vibrations.
So any kind of vibration or oscillatory process, that's why I use that vague term oscillatory
process.
So E equals HF for our photons.
Let's do the numbers.
For the radio wave, or the radio photon, I should call it, it's Planck's constant, 6.63
times 10 to the minus 34 dual seconds times 10 to the 6 hertz.
And by the way, hertz is an inverse time.
It's a per second.
So that hertz cancels the seconds.
And we have 6.6, I'm rounding it off here a little bit, times 10 to the minus 28.
We got minus 34 and plus 6, that gives us 10 to the minus 28, and I just lopped off the
three to keep two significant figures.
So each photon in that radio beam has a tiny, tiny amount of energy, about 10 to the minus
27 joules, 6.6 times 10 to the minus 28 joules.
Do the numbers for the light.
Well, it's the same calculation.
We can do arithmetic at 6.63 times 10 to the minus 34 joules, that can times 10 now to
the 5 times 10 to the 14, we get 3.3 times 10 to the minus 19 joules.
That's a lot more.
That's nine orders of magnitude bigger, approximately.
And we do it for the x-ray, and it's 6.6 times 10 to the minus 15 joules.
Now those are the energies of the individual photons.
So clearly to get the same rate of energy, we're going to need a lot fewer x-ray photons
than we are radio photons.
Power is energy per time, that's what that one watt is, one watt is one joule per second.
So the number of photons per time is the amount of energy per time, the power, divided by
the photon energy.
So for the radio photon, it's one watt, that's one joule per second, divided by that energy,
which was 6.63 times 10 to the minus 28 joules per photon.
And that comes out 1.5 times 10 to the 27 photons per second.
So in that very weak one watt radio signal, we've got 10 to the 27 photons coming by every
second.
Light it's less, it's only 3 times 10 to the 18 photons per second, and x-ray is even
less, it's about 1.5 times 10 to the 14 photons per second.
Now I want to make an important point based on this.
I recently got a question actually from a viewer of one of my other great courses saying,
oh is it the case that for frequencies below this everything is a wave and above this everything
is a particle?
I said, not quite that simple.
At very low frequencies, like the frequencies associated with radio waves a million times
a second, that's a low frequency as frequencies go, it takes so many photons to make up any
appreciable beam with any appreciable power that you don't notice the discreteness of
the energy bundled into these photons, but as the frequency goes up, it takes fewer and
fewer photons to carry the same power, and so you notice the quantization much more.
That's why we tend to notice quantum effects with x-rays when we don't notice them with
radio waves very much, and visible light is somewhere in between.
Sometimes we see quantum effects and sometimes we don't.
You can actually in a very darkened room detect slight fluctuations in the light level which
are statistical fluctuations in the number of photons.
So at low frequencies we need lots of photons to get a given power, at high frequencies we
need fewer.
Okay, let's move on and look at one more example.
This is also electrons interacting with light, it's not one we talked about before, but it's
going to reinforce this photon idea.
Here's the idea.
How does light interact with electrons?
Well, classically here's what we would predict.
We would predict that electromagnetic waves are coming in and now I'm going to picture
an electron that's just sitting there sort of stationary free electron, it might be
bound loosely to an atom or something, but in come these electromagnetic waves, they're
incident on the electron, the electric field of the electromagnetic wave, electrons respond
with their charge to the electric field and they oscillate back and forth.
And they oscillate at the same frequency as the electromagnetic wave because that's what
causing them to oscillate.
And we know that accelerated charge and an oscillating charge is certainly accelerated
as velocity is changing, accelerated charge is the source of electromagnetic radiation
and so that electron emits electromagnetic waves in basically all directions, not quite
it doesn't emit it right along the direction of acceleration.
But here's the crucial point, those waves are emitted with the same frequency and this
is a simplified description of the process of an electromagnetic wave scattering off
electrons.
If you had a region where there's a lot of electrons around, the light waves would scatter
off and light would go off in all directions.
And the key thing is it would go off with the same frequency it came in with.
That's not in fact what happens.
Instead what happens is something called the Compton effect which was discovered by Compton
in 1923 and the Compton effect really provides a reality for these photons.
In the Compton effect, a photon collides with an electron so that yellow particle coming
in as a photon, it hits the electron, the electron recoils, the photon bounces off and
because the electron has picked up some energy, just like a collision of two billiard balls,
although it's a collision you have to handle with relativistic mechanics because the photon
is moving at the speed of light.
You have given some energy to the electron and the photon goes off with less energy and
that means it has a lower frequency by E equals HF and therefore it has a longer wavelength.
So the fact that when you do one of these scattering experiments you observe a longer
wavelength coming out is a really good clue that the interaction between the light and
the electron is particle like rather than wave like.
Now it turns out that just looking at say visible light isn't going to show that to
you because it takes really short wavelength, high energy photons to make this possible.
Because the Compton shift in wavelength turns out to be on the order of Planck's constant
divided by the mass of the particle that's getting hit, in this case the electron, times
the speed of light and that's very small number.
It's about two picometers, two times ten to the minus twelve meters.
Let's do a quick calculation that shows us how that works.
So here we are at our big screen again.
At what wavelength and frequency will this Compton shift be readily measurable?
Let's say five percent of the original wavelength and let's ask where is this in the electromagnetic
spectrum?
So we know the wavelength shift is about 2.43 picometers, by the way that quantity is called
the Compton wavelength of the electron.
The shift depends on at what angle you're looking but it's on that order.
And we want to know the wavelength of which that's five percent.
So 2.43 picometers is going to be 0.05 times some unknown wavelength lambda that we're
going to solve for.
So lambda becomes 2.43 picometers divided by 0.05, do that out, you get 49 picometers,
4.9 times ten to the minus eleven meters, f is c over lambda because frequency times
wavelength is the speed of wave, that comes out six times ten to the eighteen hertz.
And where is that?
So here's our electromagnetic spectrum that we saw back in lecture 40 and if you look
at where that lies, that frequency of six times ten to the eighteen hertz or equivalently
that wavelength of 49 picometers, it's here well into the X-ray region.
So you are not going to see the Compton effect with visible light, you might barely see it
with ultraviolet but you, and you're not going to see it with radio and TV and microwaves
and infrared, you're not going to see it with visible but you will see it with X-rays and
you will see it with gamma rays.
By the way, the Compton effect works in reverse too.
If you have a high energy electron and it interacts with a photon, the electron will
give up some of its energy to the photon and you will shift the photon frequency upward
and that's one way that nature makes high energy gamma rays.
Astrophysicists are now beginning to look with gamma ray telescopes above the atmosphere
and they're seeing gamma ray sources that are resulting for the so-called inverse Compton
effect where the electron with high energy gives its energy to the photon and the photon
energy increases and medical practitioners or medical technology people are now beginning
to exploit that effect to make high energy beams of gamma rays for so-called gamma cameras
and other medical diagnostics that involves gamma imaging.
So the Compton effect is actually something useful but for our purposes it's something
that convinces us that photons are real, that light interacts in a particle like way and
that that's more prominent at these high frequencies.
Okay, well let's wrap up.
Our summary consists of a big fat formula, E equals HF, the quantization of any kind
of vibrational oscillatory process, whether it's an electromagnetic wave or atomic and
molecular vibrations in a hot glowing object, it's quantized according to this formula.
The minimum amount of energy you can possibly have in such a system is its frequency times
that tiny Planck's constant.
By the way, notice that all energies are allowed because all frequencies are allowed
but given a frequency of vibration of an electromagnetic wave, you're stuck with a minimum amount of
energy you can have.
Atoms and molecules, that's verified by black body radiation, the radiation from hot glowing
objects, light and other electromagnetic waves, it's verified by the photoelectric and Compton
effects and we have inherent here a very new fundamental constant of nature, Planck's
constant H, 6.63 times 10 to the minus 34 joule seconds and a way of thinking of Planck's
constant is it's establishing for us a kind of graininess of nature at the smallest scales.
Nature is not continuous but has a discreetness at the smallest scales, a graininess and that's
what quantization is all about.
