Welcome to lecture 51 in which we're going to take a first stab at quantizing the atom,
which probably poses some of the thorniest problems for physics around the turn of the
20th century.
Let's take a look again at those cracks in classical physics that I introduced back
in lecture 44, the aether quandaries.
We've taken care of those with special relativity, Mercury's orbital procession, we've taken
care of that with general relativity.
Glowing objects we looked at in the previous lecture and we took care of them with quantization,
Planck's idea that the energies of molecular and atomic vibrations were quantized according
to this formula that the minimum possible energy in a vibration of frequency f is Planck's
constant times that frequency.
We also took care of electrons in light and we did those with the same quantization formula.
So quantization has resolved two of those cracks and now we're turning to atoms and
we're going to see that quantization will take care of them too, but it's a slightly
more complicated quantization.
Remember the problem with atoms, first of all they shouldn't exist.
They shouldn't exist because the electron going around the proton in a hydrogen atom
or the electrons whizzing around in other more complicated atoms are accelerated charges
They should radiate electromagnetic waves.
The energy for those waves should come at the expense of the electrons kinetic energy
and they should spiral into the nucleus in a short time and atoms and physicists and
people and video discs and all the rest should not exist.
The other problem with atoms a little more subtly is that they emit discrete wavelengths
of light instead of continuous spectra of all colors.
They emit only certain discrete frequencies and we need to explain both those phenomena.
So let's take a quick look at a history of atoms.
Brief history of atoms, very brief.
The whole idea of the atom may originate with democratism may actually have originated earlier
but we think it originated with the ancient Greek philosopher democratist and he pointed
out that he thought matter consisted ultimately of indivisible particles.
Skip to Newton in 1704 with his wonderful quote, God in the beginning, former matter
in solid, massy, hard, impenetrable, movable particles.
The particle idea and the idea that there are indivisible particles at the root of nature.
Newton in 1704 echoing what democratists had already said.
Fast forward to 1897 when J.J. Thompson discovers the electron.
The first clue that the atom is not indivisible but there may be smaller parts making up the
atom.
J. Pierre Curie in the years around 1900 discovered a whole bunch of subatomic particles because
they were working with radioactive elements that emitted these particles and so clearly
pieces of atoms were coming off and atoms were no longer indivisible.
And finally, Rutherford's discovery which I've mentioned earlier in 1911, the discovery
of the atomic nucleus, the discovery that there is a tiny massive center which contains
nearly all the mass and the positive charge of the atom.
So there's a brief history of the atom and keeping that history in mind, we now want
to look a little bit more about these quandaries that the atom poses for physicists around
the turn of the 20th century.
The picture we have of the atom at this point is this sort of classical picture you commonly
see.
Here's an atom which sort of stylized atom at the center is the nucleus and coming around
it are the individual electrons and this is again a very stylized picture but it's a
very common picture.
It's what you think of perhaps when you see an atom.
By the way, it's not at all to scale.
The nucleus occupies about one one hundred thousandths to one ten thousandths of the diameter
of the atom so it is truly tiny and yet it contains virtually all the mass of the atom.
The atom is mostly empty space.
But this picture as we'll see is not correct either.
So let's look at the simplest atom.
The simplest atom is hydrogen and in the classical picture of hydrogen there is a single electron
orbiting a single proton that's why it's the simplest atom.
You can't make a simpler nucleus than just one proton.
So there's the electron going around in a circular orbit and we know how to describe
forces in circular motion and things like that so we could describe this with classical
physics.
It's bound by the electric force so it's not gravitationally bound like the earth is
to the sun or a satellite is to the earth.
It's bound by the electric force, the attractive force between the positive proton and the
negative electron and any orbit should be possible.
Just like we can put a satellite at 150 miles up or 151 miles up or 343 miles up we ought
to be able to put the electron in any orbit around the atom, around the nucleus.
Here's the observation though and the observation of these individual spectral lines which had
been known for a long time, Ballmer, a Swiss school teacher in 1884 came up with an empirical
formula, didn't derive it from any theory or anything, he said look if you look at these
wavelengths for hydrogen they fit a simple pattern and they fit this pattern.
The inverse of the wavelength lambda, so that's why I thought 1 over lambda on the left side
is proportional to 1 over 4 but he's writing the 4 as 2 squared for a reason that will
become obvious, minus 1 over n squared where n is a number bigger than 2, an integer number
bigger than 2 and there's some proportionality constant called the Rydberg constant r sub
h there.
And if you take n equals 3 that corresponds to the wavelength of that red light emitted
by hydrogen, if you take n equals 4 it's that green light, if you take n equals 5 it's
that blue light, if you take n equals 6 it's that purple light.
The Rydberg constant he works out empirically has the value of 1.1 times 10 to the 7 meters
to the minus 1, it's in inverse meters.
There are actually many series of lines and you can generalize by changing that 1 over
2 squared, that 1 over 4 to 1 over some n2 squared, I'll call it n2, and then you're
subtracting 1 over some n1 squared and as long as the n1 is bigger than 2 and you've
got this formula.
The formula with n equals 2 is called the Ballmer series and with the first number being 2 is
called the Ballmer series after Johann's bomber and the other series some of them have names
and these are all just for hydrogen, things get more complicated for other atoms.
So we're still just going to try to explain hydrogen here.
So hydrogen is the simplest atom.
How do we explain what's going on with hydrogen?
How do we explain this fairly complicated and yet obviously patterned distribution of these
spectral lines, these individual colors of light that hydrogen emits?
Well in 1912, Andrew Neal's Bohr, the great Danish physicist on the scene, and Bohr proposes
what's called the Bohr atom, the Bohr atomic model in 1913.
He gets it finalized.
He says, the electron is in a circular orbit, a classical circular orbit around the proton.
It doesn't radiate electromagnetic waves.
Why not?
Don't ask me.
It just doesn't.
And only certain orbits are allowed.
And what orbits are allowed?
The orbits that are allowed, Bohr says, are those in which the angular momentum is quantized
in integer multiples of Planck's constant divided by 2 pi.
2 pi, well, because it's a circle.
That quantity, h over 2 pi, by the way, is given the name h bar, because it comes up
so frequently.
It's h with a little bar through it.
We'll see it again and again.
And says Bohr, the atoms are allowed to radiate electromagnetic waves or photons, but only
when the electrons jump between a loud orbit.
So when an electron is in a higher energy orbit, it jumps to a lower energy orbit.
It radiates electromagnetic energy then.
It radiates the energy difference between the two orbits.
And the energy comes out in the form of a single photon with that much energy.
And since energy is E, we can calculate the corresponding frequency.
Hf is the energy, so we can get the frequency f or the wavelength lambda out of that.
So the Bohr atom has some ad hoc assumptions in it.
It says, hey, electrons are still going around in circles, but for some reason they aren't
radiating.
But they do radiate when they jump between these allowed orbits.
And the allowed orbits are only certain discrete orbits where the angular momentum is quantized.
Now let's come to understand exactly how Bohr's theory explains the atom.
Because you know enough classical physics, including enough quantitative classical physics,
that we can apply what we know from several different lectures back in the mechanics section
and come to understand how Bohr's idea of quantized angular momentum works.
I have to disappoint you a little bit at the beginning, though, because I'm going to tell
you that in the end, our picture of the hydrogen atom is more sophisticated than Bohr would
suggest, and in fact some of the simplest hydrogen states don't have any angular momentum
at all.
But Bohr nevertheless gives us a model that's somewhere between classical physics and the
full quantum description of the atom, and it gets us into the idea of quantization.
So I've got to start with a math alert, because we're going to have some pretty heavy math,
and it's going to be drawing on a number of earlier lectures, mostly in classical physics,
but it's going to give us valuable insights about physical reality.
So let's take a look at the Bohr model of the atom.
So here we are.
We've got the Bohr atom, and Bohr's assumption is that in the Bohr atom, in the atom, the
hydrogen atom, we have circular orbits, and they have angular momentum, L is the symbol
for angular momentum, back from our lectures on circular motion and so on, and Bohr says
that angular momentum is an integer n, multiple of Planck's constant over 2 pi.
So again, a quantization, but now the quantization is the quantization of angular momentum, and
H over 2 pi, as I mentioned, is called H bar.
That's the little bar across the H there, so that symbol means Planck's constant divided
by 2 pi.
So that's Bohr's assumption.
Now let me remind you from Lecture 15, which was our lecture about rotational motion and
so on, that we defined angular momentum in analogy with linear momentum.
Linear momentum was the product of mass with velocity p equals mv.
Angular momentum is the product of the rotational analog of mass, that is rotational inertia
i, with the rotational analog of velocity, that is angular velocity omega measured in
radians per second as something goes around in a circle.
For a single particle of mass m moving in a circle of radius r, we had a rather simple
expression for the rotational inertial, it was the mass times the square of the radius.
And finally, there's a relationship between the angular velocity omega and the regular
speed velocity, linear velocity v, and the relationship is omega is v divided by r.
So those things come at us from Lecture 15 on rotational motion.
And if we put those all together, we have i is mr squared, so l is mr squared omega,
but omega is v over r, that takes out one of the r's, the r downstairs with the r upstairs,
and we end up with l being mvr for a single particle of mass m in a circular path of radius
r, and that's what we have in the Bohr atom, we have an electron of mass m, an electron
mass in a circular orbit of radius r.
We don't know what that radius is yet, but we're going to find out because we've got
this quantization condition also.
So that by Bohr's condition is NH bar, so this is all classical physics for an object
going around something in a circular path.
This is Bohr's quantization condition, this is something new, this is bringing the idea
of the quantum now to the atom.
Now in Lecture 13, which was about what?
It was about gravity.
We talked a lot about circular orbits, and we discovered that the total energy in a circular
orbit, not just any arbitrary orbit, but a circular orbit, a strictly simple orbit, is
related to the potential energy u and kinetic energy k by e is a half u, and that's minus
k.
You're going to see a bunch of minus signs in here.
Remember when you have a bound system, two objects bound together, the potential energy
is negative, at least when we define the potential energy to be zero at infinite separation.
That's why you're going to see negative signs in here.
We're talking about bound systems, a planet bound to the sun, an electron bound to the
proton.
You might say, wait a minute, Lecture 13 was about gravity.
Why are we taking results from there?
Because gravity obeys the inverse square law.
The gravitational force is g times mass 1 times mass 2 over the square of the distance
between those masses.
The electric force, it's a different force physically, but mathematically it's identical.
The electric force between two charges is k times q1, the first charge, q2, the second
charge, divided by r squared, and the inverse square law is the same for both of them, and
so any mathematical conclusion we draw from gravity, we can immediately apply to the comparable
electrical system, and that's what the hydrogen atom, according to Bohr, is.
It's an electron in a circular orbit bound by an inverse square force to the proton at
the center, in this case the electric force.
By the way, the proton is so massive, just like the sun is so massive, we can think of
it as being fixed.
It isn't quite, but it's approximately fixed.
There's results from Lecture 15.
There are results from Lecture 13.
Now, in Lecture 31, we learned about electric potential energy, and we learned that the
electric potential energy is the Coulomb constant k times the product of the two charges divided
by the distance between the two charges.
We would have had to do calculus to actually figure that all out, but we sort of bunched
our way through that, looking at the area under the force versus position curve.
So we know something from Lecture 31, and that implies that in this case, where we have
two charges, a proton and an electron, they have opposite signs, so there's going to be
a minus sign, because one of them, the electron, is negative, and its charge is negative e,
where e is the elementary charge.
The proton's charge is positive e, where it's the positive elementary charge.
The proton and electron, very different particles, mysteriously, nevertheless, have exactly
the same magnitude of charge, but the electrons is negative, the protons is positive.
So this expression, when one of the q's is plus e, and one is minus e, becomes minus
k e squared over r.
So Lecture 15, Lecture 13, Lecture 31, all coming in here.
So the electron's total energy, e is a half u, u is minus k e squared over r, again,
the minus telling us it's a bound system, I'll just stick the 2 in there, because in
a circular orbit, the total energy is a half u.
And I can solve that for r, and r is then minus k e squared over 2e, and if you're worried
about a negative radius, a negative size, don't, because the energy is negative also,
and that negative sign's going to cancel.
The electron's kinetic energy, which is always a half mv squared, is also minus the total
energy.
That's minus e, I just swing that minus sign over there, so the electron's total energy
is e, the electron's kinetic energy is minus the total energy in the special case of a
circular orbit, and I can solve that expression for v, v is squared on the left there, so
it's going to involve a square root.
So there's v.
So now I have three things.
I have an equation involving the mass, the velocity, and the radius, and its Bohr's
quantization condition.
I have an equation for the radius r, and I have an equation for the velocity v, and I
have some unknowns here.
I don't know the radius, I don't know the velocity, I don't know the energy, but I've
got enough equations to solve for those.
So I'm now going to take those three equations I've worked out here and put them right up
here and work with them.
Again, we're dealing with circular orbits with this quantized angular momentum, and
I'm going to stick v and r from those equations I just developed in Bohr's quantization condition.
And when I do that, I have m times v times r equals n times h bar, this reduced Planck's
constant h bar.
And if I work that out, I can square everything, that'll square the n, it'll take the square
root off, it'll make that a k squared and e to the fourth, it'll make the two a four
and an e squared and an n squared and an h bar squared.
Hey, that n squared is looking good if you think of that Ballmer formula.
Work that through a little bit, just do some algebra on this so we can cancel some things,
and there we are with still a fairly messy looking expression.
But now I can solve that for the energy, and I'm going to put a little subscript on the
energy because I'm talking about the energy associated with that number n.
How many units of h bar of angular momentum do we have?
We might have one, we might have two, we might have three, that's what that n tells us.
And we'll have a corresponding energy, the nth energy level, and look at that, it goes
like one over n squared.
And we're going to simplify this just a little bit, we're going to define something called
the Bohr radius, a fundamental quantity in atomic physics, it's h bar squared over m
k e squared, and you see h bar squared down, you've got two, we've got four e's up there,
two of them we'll put into that, one of those we'll put into that, and so on.
And so that Bohr radius is about 0.0529 nanometers, about half an angstrom unit for those of you
who grew up on old fashioned angstrom units, and there we go, that's a fundamental unit
in atomic physics, and it's about the size of a hydrogen atom.
So we can solve for e, and it gets a little simpler, we've got this a sub zero, the Bohr
radius in here instead of a lot of those constants, and I'm going to define yet another constant,
the ground state energy, the lowest energy of the hydrogen atom according to Bohr is
minus k e squared over 2a zero, how do I get that?
I get that by putting n equals to one, and so I'm going to call that e1, and e1 happens
to be about two times ten to the minus nineteen joules, or actually minus that, or minus 13.6
electron volts, in other words, it would take 13.6 electron volts to separate the electron
and proton to infinity in a hydrogen atom, and that's called the ionization of hydrogen,
and that's the correct answer, Bohr's got that right.
So a simpler way of writing the nth energy level in hydrogen is it's minus e1 divided
by n squared.
Now we've done a lot of math here, but we've got some really serious physical results out
of all of them already, one of them being the energy it would take to ionize hydrogen,
and Bohr has got that right.
Let's see what else he's got right.
Electron volt, by the way, is about 1.6 times ten to the minus nineteen joules.
So here's what we've got, we've got circular orbits with quantized angular momentum, we've
got an expression for the nth energy level, e1 is about minus 13.6 electron volts, and
then the energy levels get smaller in absolute magnitude, they get closer to zero, but they're
coming up from negative.
So here's e1 at minus 13.6 electron volts, this is an energy level diagram, get used
to it because you're going to see a lot of them in quantum physics.
There's a quantized energy level, the lowest possible energy, that's the ground state,
that's where hydrogen usually lives.
You can excite it to this next energy level, e1 over 2 squared, e1 over 4, it's minus
3.4 electron volts, e1 over 9, and keep going, and there are actually infinitely many of
them going up towards zero.
You could also have zero energy, that would be a completely separate hydrogen, a proton,
and electron, it wouldn't be an atom anymore, and you can actually have any level above
that, an electron that isn't bound to hydrogen can have any level, it's called the continuum.
We're interested in atoms where those two particles are bound together, and so we've
got this infinity of energy levels.
Let's look at what we can learn from this.
So there they are, and let's ask now about transitions among energy levels.
Let's ask what happens if we go from one energy level, call it N2, to another level, call
it N1.
For example, we might go from the N equals 3 level, and drop down to the N equals 2 level,
and Bohr says, hey, that's when the electron is going to radiate electromagnetic waves.
So let's calculate that energy.
It's E3 minus E2, it's minus 1.5 electron volts, minus a minus 3.4 electron volts.
Work that out, that's 1.9 electron volts positive, and what Bohr says is a photon of that energy
is going to be emitted when hydrogen atom jumps from level 3 to level 2, that's about
3 times 10 to the minus 19 joules.
So there's that energy transition.
Let's take that transition and ask what photon wavelength, frequency and wavelength does
it correspond to?
Delta E is Hf, that's the photon energy, delta E in this case, because it corresponds to
this difference, but it's the same E that we talked about in E equals Hf.
We can solve that for F, we get the frequency delta E over H, that's 3 times 10 to the minus
19 joules over Planck's constant, not H bar, but H this time.
That's about 4.5 times 10 to the 14 hertz.
We can use F lambda equals C, the product of frequency and wavelength is the speed of
a wave to get the wavelength, and we divide, and that comes out, 660 nanometers.
Now that's the color of a deep red light, and in fact that 660 nanometers is precisely
the color of the first line in the bomber series, the red line in the bomber series,
it's a very famous color, a very famous spectral line astrophysicists use it all the time because
it comes from hydrogen processes in the universe, and hydrogen is the dominant element in the
universe, that is the hydrogen-balmer-alpha line, it's called a hydrogen-alpha, very famous
wavelength, and it corresponds to a transition between n equals 3 and n equals 2 in the Bohr
atom.
The other bomber series lines correspond to n equals 4 to n equals 2 for the green line,
n equals 5 to n equals 2 for the purple line, for the blue line, n equals 6 to n equals
2 for the purple line, and there are infinitely more lines in the bomber series, but the rest
of them are off the visible and into the ultraviolet.
So there is Bohr's explanation, basically, of what's going on with the spectrum of the
hydrogen atom, and we can generalize delta E to any pair of levels, and if we do that
we find that the inverse of the wavelength of that transition is proportional to the
frequency via f lambda equals c, that's proportional to the energy via our quantization condition,
and that's proportional via what Bohr's worked out here, what we've worked out, to one over
one level squared minus one over the other level squared, and if you compare that with
Bohr's empirical formula it's the same.
So the Bohr atom explains atomic spectra and explains it beautifully.
By the way, there are plenty of other series, here's the Lyman series, the Lyman series
and hydrogen are the transitions that end at n equals 1, you might think they're simplest
and why didn't we sort of talk about them first and discover them first, but you'll
see they have much bigger energies, the bomber series, the first four lines were in the visible
but these lines are all in the ultraviolet, so it's harder to find them.
That's the Bohr atom's explanation, the Bohr model's explanation of the hydrogen atom,
and it's a pretty good, complete explanation of what's going on there.
Well, pretty good, not perfect.
Let's move on.
Let's just take a quick look at our cracks now, we had special relativity, general relativity
and then quantization solving two of the cracks, now quantization of angular momentum has solved
that last crack, and Bohr's hypothesis that they don't radiate unless they jump between
particular energy levels.
So we got all the cracks resolved, two of them by Einstein's relativity theories, three
of them now by quantization, the big idea that's going to govern most of the rest of
the lectures in this course.
I have to introduce one other idea, a very brilliant, profoundly philosophical idea introduced
by Louis de Broglie, who was a French prince, he was working on his PhD dissertation, and
in 1923 he recognized, as Einstein had, that light has both wave and particle aspects.
We've understood light as an electromagnetic wave in this course since lecture 40.
Now we've come to understand, in the previous lecture from Einstein's idea, that light also
comes in these particle-like bundles.
It has both these aspects, and we're going to be exploring in the next lecture how to
reconcile that, but for now let's just hold that idea.
E m waves per Maxwell, photons per Einstein.
We know about photon wavelength.
We know that F lambda is C, we know that E equals H F, and something I talked about
in relativity, I remember I raised the question, what if we look at the moment energy for a
massless particle?
What if light, I said, consisted of massless particles, then it would have this relationship,
energy is momentum times the speed of light.
That would be the simple relationship for a massless particle, which is what a photon
is.
It's a particle, it's a particle of light energy.
If you put those things all together, you find that the wavelength can be written as
Planck's constant over the momentum for a photon.
Just follow us from things we've already seen.
So why not, says De Broglie, why not a dual nature for matter also?
And De Broglie's hypothesis is this, if a particle with momentum P has associated with
it then, a wave whose wavelength is given by this same formula, lambda equals H over
P. And he says, what about a dual nature for matter
2?
What about the possibility of matter waves?
So this is De Broglie's idea.
It's a big philosophical idea because it takes solid hard matter and makes it into something
with a wave-like nature.
What does that mean?
Well we don't even know yet what it means for light to have both a wave-matte nature
and a particle nature.
We thought it was just a wave, now it's got this photon that's to it.
Well we thought of matter as this stuff made of hard solid particles and no waviness there
and yet now De Broglie is saying, what if it has a wave nature too?
So that's De Broglie's hypothesis.
How does De Broglie's hypothesis explain the hydrogen atom?
Well, it talks about the allowed orbits and it says, these are the orbits that can accommodate
an integer number of wavelengths.
So here's a kind of picture of trying to fit some waves around a circular orbit.
And if you want to fit an integer number of wavelengths, you're going to have the condition
that n times lambda fits in the circumference of that circle and the circumference is 2 pi
r.
And if you work that out using the fact that lambda is h over p, that was De Broglie's hypothesis,
a particle of momentum p has associated waviness of wavelength h over p, then you work that
out.
You get n h over classical momentum is mv and that's supposed to be 2 pi r, work through
that a little bit more.
You get mvr equals n h over 2 pi equals n h bar and that's exactly Bohr's quantization
condition that we worked with in doing all that mathematics on the big screen.
So De Broglie's idea explains the Bohr atom physically by saying the allowed orbits are
those orbits that can accommodate an integer number of wavelengths.
So Bohr just posed this angular momentum quantization condition, which we used as kind of a mathematical
condition, but now we see physically why it works.
Okay I have a little demonstration here, classical physics demonstration that will illustrate
this idea of quantized orbits.
So what I have here is something that I actually used in earlier lectures when I was first
talking about waves.
I've got a driver that vibrates back and forth and it's connected now to a thin wire loop,
a flexible wire, and I'm going to drive it at certain frequencies by turning on a generator
here that's going to generate sine wave electricity that's going to go into that driver.
So let me get the amplitude up a little bit and I'm going to start adjusting the frequency
and I'd like you to see what happens.
You see it's vibrating already a little bit as I change the frequency those vibrations
get smaller or larger as I bring the frequency up and it's now about 28 hertz, 29 hertz,
30 hertz.
Whoa!
You see a very large vibration.
Why?
Because the frequency of that vibration in this case corresponds to a wavelength that
fits an integer multiple of wavelengths around that loop.
And in fact you can see one, two, three big node-like structures around that loop.
So that would correspond to an allowed orbit in the Bohr model of the atom because we've
got a resonance.
We've got a situation where we can fit those waves around the circle and therefore we have
a condition where that wave can exist like a standing wave, just like a standing wave
on a violin string that I talked about back in lecture 18.
It's the same thing except it's on a closed violin string and this mechanical analog
corresponds to what's going on with the electron orbits in the Bohr atom.
So let's wrap up.
Let's talk about what the Bohr atom has now got us.
It's got us a lot.
It's got us a really good description of hydrogen but it only works accurately for hydrogen
and other one electron ions.
So if you strip all but one of the electrons off some other kind of atom and it becomes
ionized you can still use this theory.
You have to change the charge on the nucleus.
It's got some applicability to simple atoms with a single valence outer electron, things
like lithium and sodium, the alkali metals.
It works a little bit for them.
It can't handle interactions among multiple electrons so it can't handle most complicated
atoms.
It can't explain the spectrum of, for example, two electron helium, which is the next simplest
atom.
It doesn't explain the fine structure in the hydrogen spectrum, details in which spectral
lines are actually split into several lines and we'll see why that happens later.
And the most important thing about the Bohr atom that I need to say is that it isn't correct.
The assumption of quantized angular momentum just isn't right because that assumption is
based on the idea that electrons are going still in nice classical circular orbits and
it turns out that in most cases they aren't.
Nevertheless the Bohr atom has bought us a lot in terms of explaining atoms.
Let's wrap up.
We had some atomic quandaries.
We find the atoms exist when they're not supposed to exist.
We find that they radiate discrete wavelengths.
The Bohr atomic model takes care of all that with its circular orbits, its orbital angular
momentum being quantized.
There's no radiation except when you jump between allowed orbits and that gives us
the quantized energy levels which correspond to the spectra we actually observed.
The atoms emit photons when they jump between these levels and the Bohr model agrees nicely
with the observed spectrum of hydrogen.
We've got de Broglie's matter waves and they explain more physically by fitting the standing
waves onto these circular orbits.
So there we are with now a pretty good explanation of the hydrogen atom and it relies on quantization.
Let me give those of you who like to do math just one quick exercise before we end.
What's the orbital radius for the electron in the nth Bohr orbit?
Well the total energy in a circular orbit is E. It's a half U. It's minus K E squared
over 2R as we found on the big screen.
We'll solve that for R. We get K E squared over 2E with that minus sign.
The Bohr energy levels go like 1 over n squared and we can substitute in and we find that
R sub n, the nth orbital radius is n squared times A0.
So when n is 1 and we're in the ground state, Bohr says the electron is in orbit unambiguously
at 1 Bohr radius out.
In level 2 it's already n squared for Bohr radii out and so on.
And in fact astrophysicists are occasionally observing atoms in the universe that get bumped
up into enormous orbits where they're as big as a living cell, for example.
These are called Rydberg atoms and some scientists are actually studying these in the laboratory.
These are the allowed levels, the allowed orbital sizes according to Bohr for the hydrogen
atom.
We'll see that isn't quite right, but there's a grain of truth in it.
