Welcome to lecture 54 in which I'm going to go deeply using Schrodinger's ideas into
the physics of the hydrogen atom and then into atoms in general.
So you really come out of this one with an understanding for how atoms work using the
full glory of quantum physics.
There's going to be a lot of math here that I can't really go into in detail but I want
to show you in a few places what the equations look like.
So you'll appreciate how involved they are and how they bring out all these subtle features
of the atom, much more subtle features than we were able to get out of Bohr's simple
atomic model I might add.
So let me begin by looking at some potential energy functions because you'll remember
in Schrodinger's equation we had the kinetic energy operator, the potential energy operator
and the total energy and of course it's the different potential energies that determine
the way a system behaves.
So we looked at the one dimensional box, the particle in the box, the infinite square well
it's also called the rigid barrier box.
We also looked at the harmonic oscillator and in both those cases we found that the
mathematics of the Schrodinger equation, we showed this rigorously in the one dimensional
box.
I told it to you but you saw how it came about in the harmonic oscillator resulted in these
quantized energy levels, these different energy levels that were available to the system and
they were discrete quantized levels.
Now let's move to another system, the system that we want to talk about here, the system
that's the atom.
And we can think of the atom as consisting of two point charges plus E the proton minus
E the electron for the simplest atom, hydrogen.
And we know that the potential energy of two charges, two point charges is kq1q2 over
r.
In this case q1 is plus E, q2 is minus E and so we get minus kE squared over r.
That's the potential energy function we want to put in the Schrodinger equation.
If I took a cut of that function along the x-axis I would get something that looks like
this picture at the lower right, energy as a function of position, it goes to negative
infinity as you get very close to the particle, it goes to zero as the two particles get very
far apart and that's what it looks like in a cut along the axis.
And the main point I want to make here is that that diagram sort of shows a confining
potential just like the square well has a confining potential and the harmonic oscillator
has a confining potential and so we shouldn't be surprised that we also get quantized energy
levels in the case of the atom and they look something like that.
We've already seen that in Bohr theory but we're going to go far beyond Bohr theory in
this lecture.
So I want to show you how the Schrodinger equation leads to something like what I've
shown here, namely the quantized energy levels for the atom.
Bohr already gave us an answer.
He gave us an answer based on quantization of angular momentum.
We're going to see that his answer, although it produced the right energy levels, isn't
quite right.
So we're going to look at these potential energy functions and particularly now that
potential energy function for the hydrogen atom.
So we're going to assume there's a proton fixed at r equals 0, radial position 0 and
the electron is going to be bound by the electric force that we know about and there's going
to be that Coulomb potential minus K e squared over r squared in the Schrodinger equation.
We need to use spherical coordinates here.
X, Y, Z would be very, very cumbersome to work with mathematically because the hydrogen
atom has a kind of spherical symmetry because the Coulomb potential, the electrostatic potential,
the electrostatic force has this radial symmetry about it from the point chart.
And so we're going to use spherical coordinates.
Spherical coordinates are used to describe the position of a point in terms of its radial
distance r from some origin and then two angles theta which describes its orientation relative
to some axis and phi which describes its orientation around that axis.
Theta is sort of like, it's called the polar angle and it's the complement of the latitude
if you will and it's thinking of the earth as a spherical system and phi is like longitude.
So three numbers to describe position in three dimensional space except instead of being
X, Y, Z there are theta and phi and they have rather different mathematical manifestations
as a result.
And with that out of the way I'm simply going to write the Schrodinger equation in spherical
coordinates.
Ugg.
But we're not going to do much with it but I want you to appreciate that this is the
Schrodinger equation written in spherical coordinates for the hydrogen atom.
What do we have here?
Well, the whole first three terms comprise the kinetic energy.
That's what we had before with the Schrodinger equation.
We formulated the Schrodinger equation by saying kinetic energy plus potential energy
equals total energy, a simple classical physics idea.
Now the kinetic energy operator looks much more complicated, we're not doing it in just
one dimension and furthermore we're doing it in a three dimensional coordinate system
where the different coordinates behave differently.
So we have a lot of ugliness here.
There's the potential energy term minus K e squared over r, that one's easy.
That's the potential energy of the two point charges and that's supposed to equal the total
energy acting on the wave function.
These individual terms, the three terms in the kinetic energy are how the wave function
depends on r, ultimately that funny squiggly d, it's not quite a d and it's telling you
we're dealing with a function of more than one variable, how it depends on r, how it
depends on the angle theta and how it depends on the angle phi.
Whoa, that's complicated.
Well we can look at simple cases, like for example the case where it doesn't happen to
depend on angle but we can also look at the whole thing.
And this equation is in fact solvable and sort of in a sophomore level physics major
course for the first time you would see the full mathematical glory of the solutions to
that equation.
I'm not going to solve the equation the way you would solve it in a physics course.
I'm going to talk about how I actually tried to solve it on a computer because I want to
show you where quantization comes from.
So I'm going to look first at spherically symmetric states of the hydrogen atom.
Spherically symmetric means nothing depends on where you are in angle.
So all those variations with theta, the angle and phi, the longitudinal angle, they're
going to be gone.
And so the Schrodinger equation becomes simpler because there's no dependence on angular position.
There it is.
Just that first term in the energy operator, then the potential energy which is negative
here by the minus sign and then equals e psi.
Now here's what I did to solve this.
On a computer I started out at r equals zero or actually very close to zero because things
blow up at r equals zero.
And I asked the computer to step forward in space and solve that equation for just an
arbitrary energy e that I guessed.
My first guess was minus 14.1 electron volts.
I knew what I was doing.
I know that's close to the ground state energy of hydrogen.
And what happened is the function behaved as I kind of expected.
There was a high probability of finding the electron fairly near the proton, which is what
that relatively high value at the left means.
And then it began to decrease and everything was fine for a while.
But after a while it began going way up toward infinity.
That can't be because that represents a function for which I can never find that normalization
constant I mentioned last time.
I can never make that function have a probability of one of finding the particle somewhere in
the infinite space available to it.
So that 14.1 or minus 14.1 electron volts just didn't cut it.
So I guessed something else.
Solving for various energy z, I'm going to guess minus 13.1 electron volts instead of
minus 14.1.
And the same thing happened.
I got a function that behaved pretty well at first.
But as I went along, after a great distance it diverged downward to minus infinity.
And that told me that was not an acceptable solution too.
However, the fact that one of these diverged up and one diverged down suggested there's
some value right in between where it's going to work just right.
And that's the minus 13.6 EV.
That is where quantization comes from in the mathematics of solving the Schrodinger equation
for the hydrogen atom.
There are only some energies that give you functions that are so-called well-behaved
that go to zero at large distances and stay zero at large distances, which is what they
have to do to make that probability of finding the atom somewhere be finite and normalizable
to one.
That's sort of a mathematics of where quantization comes from in the hydrogen atom.
Physically, if you want to think about it, it comes from more in a confining potential
just like we were with the square box or the quantum harmonic oscillator.
But here's how we get to it mathematically.
And here's how we can actually find those energies.
And this problem I just solved here actually gives me one of the energies.
It happens to be the ground state energy, the lowest energy, and it happens to agree
with Bohr's theory because Bohr got it right and it also happens to agree with observations.
That's the energy it would take to take the electron entirely away from a hydrogen atom.
Let's look at that hydrogen ground state a little bit more, that lowest possible energy
for the hydrogen atom.
The energy of that hydrogen atom in this ground state is minus 13.6 electron volts.
Can't be zero.
It's minus 13.6.
Well, it could be zero relative to that, but it can't be, the electron's got to have
some motion.
It's going on in this circular Bohr orbit.
In Bohr's view, in our view, it's going to be doing something entirely different.
The wave function turns out to be a simple exponential decay with radial position.
And the exponent is not radial position itself, r, but radial position in units of that Bohr
radius a0.
And so on the right here, I have shown a graph of the wave function psi versus distance.
And it tells us something very bizarre that you might not be, you'd be very surprised
to find out.
If you ask the question of all the points in space, where is the electron in hydrogen
in the ground state most likely to be found, the answer is where that psi function is biggest
and that's at r equals zero, right inside the nucleus, inside the proton.
Whoa, how can that be?
And yet that's what quantum physics is telling us.
That is a very unclassical result at this very low n, n equals 1, the lowest energy state.
Now there's a slightly more meaningful question we should really ask, and that's the question
is, how far from the proton am I most likely to find the electron?
And that's a different question because the first question was out of all the points in
space, where might I find it, the single point where it's most likely to be is right in the
center of the proton.
But if you ask at what radial distance from the proton, I'm most likely to find it, the
further out you go, the more points there are available in spheres at that radius.
And so that weights in and you get a so-called radial probability distribution that's shown
in the lower right curve here.
And that radial probability distribution shows that the place you're most likely to find
the electron in the hydrogen gown state is 1 Bohr radius from the nucleus.
But it's not the Bohr orbit with circular orbit with radius of 1 Bohr radius, it's simply
the most probable distance.
You might find it 2 Bohr radii away, and there's still quite a good probability of that.
You might find it 3 or 4, you're unlikely to find it beyond about 4, but you could.
You might find it inside 1 Bohr radius, but as you go toward the nucleus, that quantity
drops down.
So our picture of the atom is evolving here.
It's no longer a classical miniature solar system with the electrons in circular orbits.
It's this fuzzy probability cloud.
And there's the probability cloud for that situation, thinking of the probability just
in terms of all points in the universe.
Where is it most likely to be?
There it is with that upper graph right at the nucleus.
Now let's look at some other states the hydrogen atom can be in.
That was the ground state.
There are other states that are similar to the ground state except they have higher energies.
But they all share something important with the ground state.
Because they had no angular dependence, it turns out they have no angular momentum either.
So here's an example of the higher states.
The higher states have the same energy that Bohr theory gave, and it came from observations
of spectra minus the ground state energy divided by n squared.
The psi 2 wave function happens to have this slightly more complicated form, a simple 2
minus r measured in terms of the Bohr radius times this exponential.
And lo and behold, it has these two humps.
You're most likely to find the electron about 5 Bohr radii from the nucleus, but there's
also another peak of probability in a lot closer.
The atom is becoming a really funny thing.
These states I've described here, as I said, have no angular momentum.
But this funny distribution means we're done with the classical atom.
The electron in an atom is simply not a point particle moving around in a nice well-defined
orbit.
Gone is that picture.
Instead, the electron is some kind of fuzzy cloud of probability.
And here's a picture of it for this psi 2 state in which you see a fairly big probability
quite a ways out.
And you can see just barely a very slight ring of probability associated with that inner
peak.
So these are simply the spherically symmetric states, the states that don't have any angular
momentum.
And by the way, you can see from these states that Bohr is completely wrong in his theory,
not completely, but he's wrong on one important point.
There is no angular momentum in these states, and yet he developed his theory on the idea
of quantized angular momentum.
On the other hand, electrons can have angular momentum.
And there's another quantum number that describes their angular momentum.
So this n we've been talking about that gives the energy, e sub n is minus 13.6 electron
volts over n squared.
That's called the principal quantum number, and that describes the energy.
For a given n, it turns out there are n possible values for what's called in quotes the electrons
orbital angular momentum.
If it were a classical particle, that would be the angular momentum associated with its
orbit.
They're described by a quantum number L, the lower case L, the actual angular momentum
is capital L.
The values of that lower case L range from 0 to n, and you calculate the actual angular
momentum with this formula, square root of L times L plus 1 in the square root times
h bar, and that formula is going to come up again and again in this lecture.
That's how you quantize angular momentum.
Notice that if L is 0, and that's one of the allowed states, that gives those spherically
symmetric s states that have no angular momentum.
And if you were to try to picture those as classical orbits, which you really shouldn't
do, but if you were to try to, you would picture the electron moving in a straight line back
and forth through the nucleus, because it has no angular momentum relative to the nucleus.
But try not to think of electrons as classical billiard multi-particles anymore, because
they just aren't.
If you've ever taken chemistry or even physics, so-called spectroscopic notation designates
these L values by s, that's why those were s states, s is L equals 0, p is L equals 1,
d is L equals 2, f is L equals 3, lower case for individual electrons, upper case describe
entire atoms with hydrogen, it's basically the same thing.
And so far then we have two quantum numbers, we're going to need three, because we're
in three dimensions, the two numbers are n and L, and now there is another quantization
that goes on here, it's called space quantization, and remember angular momentum is a vector,
and the direction of the angular momentum also turns out to be quantized.
And that quantization is described by something called the magnetic quantum number m sub l.
It's called magnetic, because you don't observe this quantization unless you have something
in your system that gives a preferred direction, and the most common thing to have in that
case is a magnetic field.
For a given L, m can take on any of these values, minus L, minus L plus 1, blah blah
blah, to 0, 1, 2, all the way up to L. And here's a kind of a picture, you have any chosen
axis maybe established by a magnetic field, and the component of L becomes this m sub
l times again h bar.
So here's a picture that suggests what would happen for an L equals 1 state.
An L equals 1 state can have ML values from minus L, that's minus 1, by integers up to
plus L, that's plus 1, so there's three possible states, minus 1, 0, and plus 1, and in this
diagram, which again you shouldn't take too seriously because it's a kind of semi-classical
diagram, you see the directions of the angular momentum vector, they could be at a certain
angle to the axis which comes from calculating that component, they could be perpendicular
to that axis, or they could be down at that angle, and I've shown those cone-like things
because there's an uncertainty in the azimuthal orientation of that, which is ultimately associated
with an uncertainty principle involving angular momentum.
So now we have three quantum numbers, and they describe the state of the electron in
hydrogen almost fully, the principal quantum number n, the orbital quantum number l, and
the magnetic quantum number m sub l, those are the electron states.
Here is a diagram showing some of the values of n, l, and m, l, pick any triple of those
values, and that determines a state of hydrogen which determines a particular one of the solutions
to the Schrodinger equation that you're dealing with, and these pictures are those probability
clouds for where you are likely to find the wave function, and you can see that as soon
as you get away from the spherically symmetric states, and I think you can pick out there
are three spherically symmetric states in this diagram, look and see if you can pick
them out, as soon as you get away from the spherically symmetric s states into the states
that have angular momentum, you get all kinds of crazy patterns, not at all spherically
symmetric, and depending on how l and m vary, they can take on all kinds of strange forms,
so there are pictorial diagrams in terms of these clouds of the hydrogen wave functions.
Now we're not quite there because there's one other quantum number I need to introduce,
and it comes from that idea from the last lecture when you tried a couple quantum mechanics
with relativity that electrons have an intrinsic angular momentum, it's part of what it means
to be an electron, its actual value is a half square roots of 3 h bar, but it's often called
half integer spin because the projection of that angular momentum, the component on a
given axis is in fact plus or minus a half h bar, so there are two possible spin states,
so in addition to all those other states specified by the three quantum numbers, a given electron
can have spin up or spin down as it's called, it's spin relative to some particular axis.
Now something interesting happens, the interesting thing that happens is you've got this electron
going around the proton or moving about the proton in some complicated way that we really
can't talk about classically, but as long as it has some angular momentum, it sees the
proton moving relative to it in a way that makes it look like there's a magnetic field
from the moving charged proton.
And the spin and the orbital angular momentum together couple to give the total angular
momentum of the electron, and because of that interaction without apparent magnetic field,
the energy levels of the different states are slightly, slightly different when normally
they would be perfectly the same.
So the magnetic fields originating from that interaction of the electron's orbital motion
and spin give you slightly altered energy levels, and they give rise to fine structure
in spectra that simply could not be explained using something even as sophisticated as Bohr's
atomic theory.
And here's an example, in spectroscopist's notation, I might designate a state as 2p
sub 1 half, and what that means is 2 is the principal quantum number, that's the n state
that determines the energy, p is the orbital quantum number, s is 0, p is 1, so this is
a state with l equals 1, and then the 1 half is the total angular momentum quantum number
in this particular situation.
So here are two states in the energy level diagram for hydrogen, the ground state n equals
1, the n equals 2 state, and the ground state is designated 1, because it's n equals 1,
s because it has no angular momentum, it can't, there's no l value other than 0 allowed,
and it's this particular one is the 1 s 1 half state with this spin in one particular
of its two possible orientations.
The n equals 2 state has 2p 3 halfs and 2p 1 half, and they have slightly different
energies because again of this spin orbit interaction and the apparent magnetic field
that the electron with angular momentum sees.
And that splits the n equals 2 level slightly, and that means a transition from the 2p 3
half state to the 1 s 1 half state to the ground state has more energy than a transition
from the 2p 1 half state down to the ground state does, and consequently there are two
slightly different frequencies, energies, and wavelengths of photons emitted in those
two transitions.
And consequently if you look carefully you will see splitting of the spectral line, one
of the most famous examples of that is the so called sodium D doublet, which occurs in
a slightly more complicated situation in the sodium diagram, but you can see here on this
spectrum two very closely spaced lines that are at about 589 nanometers, and they constitute
by the way most of the light from those garish glowing sodium lamps you see, which is why
they have that kind of ghastly orange yellow color, but there they are, that's the splitting
due to the sodium doublet.
Astrophysicists like to look at the splitting shown here on this diagram of the hydrogen
atom, because it might be a universal communication frequency throughout the cosmos, so people
interested in extraterrestrial life and so on sometimes like to monitor this frequency,
responsible for the fine structure in spectra.
Okay, now let's look at something that neither we in this course nor even physicists with
their analytical mathematical methods can really solve in detail, and that is the structure
of multi-electron atoms.
We can't find explicit solutions to the Schrodinger equation, I can't write down functions that
describe the solutions.
The shell structure idea of S and P and D and F for the angular momentum shells and
so on, and the M sub L's, these are sometimes called shells and sub shells and orbitals.
That structure still holds, but it's more complicated because of the interaction of multiple electrons.
The electrons are still classified with these quantum numbers, there are still two spin
states, and what that means is when we have multiple electrons, that poly exclusion principle
that I mentioned before that says no two fermions, which includes electrons, particles
with half integer spin, can be in the same state.
Well, the two spin states are different states, so give me a triple NL and ML, we're allowed
to have two electrons with those same quantum numbers, because one can be in spin up and
one can be in spin down, so they're still in separate states.
So that's an important factor in multi-electron atoms that doesn't apply in the hydrogen atoms,
shells, sub shells, orbitals is the notation we use for these things.
And they tend to fill from lowest to highest energy because nature likes to populate lowest
energy states first.
If I drop something, it's going to end up on the ground, not on the ceiling.
And it's the outermost electrons of an atom that determine its chemistry.
So we're going to get a little bit into chemistry here.
Here's the electronic structure of atoms if you try to sort of write it down using this
notation I've been talking about.
So atomic number one is the simplest element hydrogen.
This electronic configuration has one electron.
The one electron is an s-electron that is in the ground state in its lowest energy state.
It's the n equals one electron, and it's in the s-state, which means there's no angular
momentum.
The angular momentum is zero, and there is one such electron, which is what that superscript
means.
The second most simplest element is helium, Hg.
Its ground state is one.
The electrons, there are two of them, are in the one state.
They're in the s-state.
They have no angular momentum, but you can populate two electrons there, and that gives
us two possible electrons.
And by the way, it's the fact that that outermost state is full.
That outermost shell is full in helium, which makes it unreactive chemically.
Helium is one of the inert or noble gases that very, very rarely engages in chemical reactions.
That's why.
It's the structure of the outermost electrons.
This comes lithium.
It's got the same structure as helium inside.
It's got two 1s electrons, two electrons in the lowest energy level, and then they have
different spin states, and so that's what populates that level.
That's full.
There's no more room for any more electrons because of the exclusion principle, so the
next electron has to go into the n equals two state, and it has no angular momentum
either, and there's one electron, so it's in the two s-state, and there's one such electron.
This cousin sodium will catch fire spontaneously in air because they're so reactive because
of that one electron dangling around out there, eager to interact with other things.
Beryllium has got two s-two, but the s-state, the two-state, has many more angular momentum
states available to it, so after beryllium comes boron, and it's populated those two
s-twos, but now there's the two p-states available, and there's one electron in the two p-state.
And then carbon has an electron, has two electrons in the two p-state, and so on up the list here,
and we end up at the bottom here with sodium, which is again like lithium, has that one
dangling electron in its outermost state, and that's what determines its chemistry.
And if we were to look even further at this process, this is what gives rise to the periodic
table of the elements.
There's hydrogen at the top left, jumping immediately the helium at the top right, but
then as we're able to fill these p-states, these states that have angular momentum, we
fill in lithium, beryllium, boron, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, fluorine, end up with neon,
another noble gas.
We do the same thing for the next row, and then funny things begin to happen because
of the interactions of the multiple electrons.
We actually get some higher states filling before lower states do because of changes
in the energy levels, and so we get these longer rows of the periodic table, and away
we go.
The level of chemistry is determined ultimately by this Pauli exclusion principle and the
way you can fit electrons into the different levels with the different quantum numbers.
Periodic table of the elements.
Well, let me wrap up with a couple more comments about all this.
One is how do we get to atomic spectra?
Well, atomic spectra are caused by transitions, as we've seen, between these energy levels,
but for multiple electron atoms, these become very complicated.
We get transitions when outer electrons undergo downward transitions to unpopulated energy
levels if there are any, if you boost electrons up to higher energy levels, and they'll emit
photons of precise wavelengths.
There's an energy level diagram for sodium, which is much more complicated than anything
we saw for hydrogen because it involves all these multiple electrons and all the multiple
levels that are available, and there's a visible spectrum of a different element, neon, and
you can see there's an awful lot of spectral lines in the kind of orange-yellow, which
is why neon signs have that bright orange-ish, reddish kind of glow that you see because
neon is undergoing all those transitions.
So there are some examples of transitions and atomic spectra.
What causes these transitions to occur?
Well, if I have an electron, say, in the ground state of an atom, and along comes a photon
with just the right energy to boost it to the next level, the atom can absorb that photon
and up will go the electron into a higher level.
That's called stimulated absorption.
It's stimulated because the electron was stimulated by this photon.
The photon got absorbed and its energy became the energy of the higher energy state in the
atom.
There are other mechanisms that will do this also.
For example, in a state where atoms are colliding a lot, they can give each other energy in
the collisions and those can excite electrons to higher levels.
But there are ways to get electrons up to higher levels.
Normally they're in the lowest levels available to them, but they can be boosted up.
This emission that occurs, and in atoms it occurs on time scales that are much shorter
than a millionth of a second, but along by some physics process standards.
So an atom is sitting there and it's excited state, and pretty soon it's going to de-excite,
the electron is going to drop down to a lower level if there's one available, and it's
going to emit a photon.
There is a third possibility, which is interesting, and that third possibility was recognized
by Albert Einstein, and it's called stimulated emission.
It works like this.
If the electron is in a upper state where it could drop to a lower state, there's a
lower state available, if a photon comes by which happens to have an energy equal to the
energy difference between those two states, it will stimulate the upper electron to drop
to that lower level and emit another photon, and the other photon will have the same energy.
And remember that photons are bosons.
Photons are particles that do not obey the exclusion principle.
They're particles with integer spin.
And you can have many, many photons in the same state.
And this bottom picture is the idea behind the laser.
What's happening in the laser is you get a whole lot of atoms in an excited state, and
as soon as one of them drops to the de-excited state, the photon it emits goes by other
atoms and they emit more photons, and all these photons are coherent.
They come out with the same wavelengths, with their waves all in step, because they're
bosons and they can do that, and you get an enormous, intense, concentrated beam of
energy.
And that's what I have over here.
I have a laser.
It's like any other laser, except it's got a visible vacuum tube.
We can see what's going on.
If I turn on the laser, you will notice, first of all, the bright spot on the wall, which
is the laser beam hitting the wall.
But more importantly, look inside here and you see a bright orange glow.
In that tube, that's the region where atoms have been excited by an electric discharge
to high energy levels.
They're falling back to their ground state and giving off light energy, but they're not
just giving off random light energy because that emission is stimulated emission, stimulated
by other photons from other atoms in that tube.
That light goes bouncing back and forth, and it comes out of what's actually a half-silvered
or a partially-silvered mirror.
It's actually only about 99% silvered, and only a tiny fraction of the light that's inside
that tube actually emerges.
But that's how the laser works.
And so we can credit Einstein in part with the idea, this idea of stimulated emission,
that led to the laser.
OK, well let's wrap up.
I've seen a lot here.
The Schrodinger equation, we've seen at least sort of steps in the way to the Schrodinger
solution for hydrogen.
We've seen that there's this confinement by the electric potential that results ultimately
in energy quantization.
We've seen that spherically symmetric S states that have no angular momentum, and we've
looked fairly closely at them mathematically.
There's the n equals 1 and there's the n equals 2 state.
We found that there are three quantum numbers, n, l and m, to describe the state of the atom.
More complicated states have l not equal to 0, they have angular momentum.
There's an example of 1 and that's n equals 3, l equals 2, m, l equals 0.
You can picture an atom as kind of an electron having an electron probability cloud around
it.
You can't think of the electron as moving in a prescribed orbit.
Spin and spin orbit coupling lead to even more complicated structure in the energy level.
And you can apply this all to multi-electron atoms, look up their electron, figure out
their electron configurations.
From that you can begin to understand how the periodic table works and how we get light
out of atoms, including stimulated emission, giving us this coherent bright light of the
laser.
