Welcome to lecture 55, where we'll be looking at molecules first and then at solids formed
of many, many atoms put together.
In principle, both of these things are governed by the Schrodinger equation and you ought
to be able to solve the Schrodinger equation to determine the structure of molecules and
structure of solids.
But you certainly can't do that analytically, that is, you can't do pencil and paper and
find functions that describe the wave functions of molecules.
Increasingly you can do it with computer programs and 20 years ago, if I were teaching this
course, I probably would have said, well, we really can't understand molecules in terms
of the Schrodinger equation, but now we can because we do increasingly complex molecules
by computer simulation.
In fact, you could argue that the entire world is a solution to the Schrodinger equation
if only we knew how to solve it.
And we're at the point where we can do those solutions for molecules.
Here's an example.
This is a computer simulation of the structure of a complex molecule, namely aspirin.
And what you're seeing here are yellow circles, which represent carbon, red circles, which
represent oxygen, and blue circles, which represent hydrogen.
And you see the web-like pattern around the whole thing, which represents the cloud of
electron probability that surrounds this complicated molecule.
So just like we were talking about atoms having electron probability clouds, so do molecules.
And this is a computer simulation calculating what the structure of the aspirin molecule
ought to be.
That's a complicated structure.
Well, how would you make a molecule?
Let's take a look.
Let's start imagining starting with just a simple molecule consisting of two atoms,
a so-called diatomic molecule.
And we're going to start with the two atoms widely separated.
We're going to hold one fixed, and we're going to bring the other one in, and we're
going to ask, what's the potential energy of this situation when we dealt with potential
energy curves way back in the mechanics lectures, so we understand potential energy curves.
And we're going to start with the zero of potential energy taken when these two things
are very far apart.
And as I bring them together, they begin to feel slight attractive forces.
Why?
Because although these atoms may be electrically neutral, they have different distributions
of positive and negative charge, and as they come together, those distributions of charge
induce dipole moments, remember the electric dipole in each other, and there's a very
weak dipole-dipole attractive force, and that causes an attraction.
Another source of attraction is quantum mechanical.
Because of that pairing of spins in opposite directions, that pairing is energetically
preferable.
As these atoms come together, there's a slight attractive force associated with opposite
spin electrons.
So there are two attractive forces, and that causes the potential energy to drop from zero,
telling us we're in a bound state where the two atoms have been attracted, where it would
take energy to separate them further.
So as this process continues, the attractive force decreases the potential energy, and we're
plotting the potential energy curve as that atom moves in.
So we're plotting it as a function of the atomic separation, and those attractive forces
get stronger as the atoms get closer together, so the potential energy goes down and down
and down.
But when we reach a certain point, we begin to feel repulsive forces as well.
What's the origin of the repulsive forces?
Two things.
One is the ordinary Coulomb repulsion, the electrical repulsion associated with the positive
charges of their nuclei as they get close enough together for the nuclei to experience
each other's repulsive electrical force.
We begin to feel repulsive forces.
Another repulsive force is quantum mechanical.
We have electrons in these atoms.
Originally the atoms are entirely independent, but as they become close together, the electrons
sort of know about each other and their wave functions, and the exclusion principle says
they can't be in exactly the same state, so they end up being slightly higher energy states,
and that causes a repulsive force.
And so eventually we bottom out, and then as the atoms get very close together, the
refulsion would grow very greatly, and there is a minimum potential energy, and that minimum
potential energy represents the equilibrium separation of a stable molecule.
By the way, at that equilibrium, as is almost always the case of the equilibrium in a potential
energy curve, the curve is essentially parabolic, and that tells us that small deviations from
that equilibrium will result in simple harmonic motion and simple harmonic oscillation, so
that happens for molecules as well as for large mechanical systems.
So there's how we've made a molecule.
Now that's just sort of symbolic.
There are actually several different ways that molecules can bond together.
Let's look at some of them.
For example, there's something called an ionic bond.
In an ionic bond, one atom that is prone to giving up an electron, and another atom that's
prone to receiving an electron come together, and the one atom, it becomes energetically
preferable for the one atom to lose its electron to the other, and now we have two charged particles,
and they're bound very tightly together, and they produce things like salt, sodium chloride
here, ordinary table salt, is a very tightly bound crystal.
It's tightly bound because of that ionic bonding.
That's what gives it, by the way, its very high melting point.
There's a very common kind of bond called a covalent bond.
A covalent bond is a bond in which atoms share electrons among themselves, and it's the sharing
of the electrons that gives rise to a lower energy state that represents the binding together.
The electrons pair with opposite spins, and they're in a single molecular orbital state,
but because they have opposite spins, they can still obey the exclusion principle, and
here's a kind of picture of the electron probability cloud in a simple diatomic molecule like hydrogen
H2, oxygen O2, nitrogen N2, the second two molecules making up the bulk of the atmosphere.
H2O water is also covalently bond, and a very common bond.
Another example of a covalent bond is the bond that holds together C60 buckminster fullerene,
the wonderful soccer ball-shaped molecule discovered only a few decades ago and named
after the famous buckminster fuller.
So there's a covalent bond.
There are hydrogen bonds, which occur as the tiny, tiny nucleus of hydrogen, which is just
a single proton, is able to nestle down close to other structures.
Hydrogen bonds are fairly weak.
They bond ice crystals together.
They bond the water molecules to form ice.
They also bond the DNA helix into its double helix structure.
They don't bond the individual atoms that make up DNA, but they bond the helix with
this relatively weak bond, so there's the ice crystal.
There's a van der Waals bond, which is, again, that very weak bond associated with the dipole-dipole
interaction.
It's a very weak bond, but it's another form of molecular bond.
So chemists worrying about molecules think about all these different types of bonds.
And finally, there's the metallic bond, which is the bond that holds metal atoms together
in a large chunk of metal, and it's a bond that's forged by all those free electrons,
which you'll remember from the electricity and electric current lectures, are free to
roam throughout the metal, and they exert a bonding effect that holds the metal all
together, basically an electrical bond, so the free electrons act as a glue.
We can't get too quantitative in this lecture, but let's get a little bit quantitative and
talk about quantization in molecules.
Molecules can rotate, and because they can rotate, they have angular momentum.
The angular momentum is i omega, and it turns out to be quantized by that same kind of formula
I introduced last time for quantization of angular momentum.
There is a quantum number, which can be 0, 1, 2, 3, or so on, associated with the angular
momentum.
It's an integer, and the actual angular momentum is the square root of L times L plus 1, multiplying
h bar.
That's the actual angular momentum in a rotational state.
That leads to energy quantization, because the rotational energy is the analog of a half
mv squared, it's a half i omega squared, and if you work that out using the quantized angular
momentum above, you get L, L plus 1 times h bar over 2 times the rotational inertia of
the particular molecule, so energy, if molecular rotation, ends up being quantized.
There's also the possibility of molecular vibration.
We saw that the molecule is sitting on average at its lowest point in its potential energy
curve, and because that curve is parabolic shaped, it can undergo simple harmonic vibrations
about that equilibrium.
We already looked at the simple harmonic oscillator in quantum physics, and we found it had these
energy levels given by n plus a half times h times the frequency of the vibration, or
n plus a half h bar omega, you can express it either way.
The lowest energy state has a half hf of energy, and they go up in steps by hf there.
The levels are separated by delta E equals hf, so that tells you that transitions among
vibrational energy levels in an atom are going to carry photons, are going to involve photons
of energy hf.
The spectrum of a molecule is actually somewhat complicated, and what I've shown here in this
diagram at the upper right is the n equals zero vibrational level of a particular molecule,
and above it is the n equals one level, and there'd be higher levels up, although you
get up very much higher, and quickly you lose that parabolic simple harmonic energy, simple
harmonic oscillation kind of energy relationship.
Here we have the n equals zero and the n equals one vibrational levels, and each of those
has many possible rotational states.
If you look back at the rotational energies, they were quantized by l times l plus one,
so there's an l squared in there, and they aren't evenly spaced, so you see them not
evenly spaced.
It turns out the transitions between these levels require a delta l, a change in that
angular momentum quantum number of plus or minus one, it can't be zero, and you've got
to have delta n of plus or minus one, so there are a whole host of transitions possible between
energy states in rotating and vibrating molecules, and it leads to evenly spaced spectral lines
because of that simple harmonic nature of it, and also the way these different levels,
these different transitions go from different levels according to those rules, delta l equals
plus minus one, and delta n equals plus minus one.
Turns out that molecules are a little heavier than atoms, and their vibrational frequencies
are therefore a little bit lower in their rotational frequencies and so on, and so they
turn out to involve mostly infrared photons, so molecular spectra tend to be in the infrared
region of the spectrum.
Here's an example, this is an infrared absorption spectrum chlorine, this was taken by a colleague
of mine at Middlebury College using an infrared spectrophotometer, a device that measures
the absorption of infrared, and the wavelength in now micrometers rather than nanometers
at the bottom, where at wavelengths they're about five, six, seven, eight times that of
visible light, so these are much longer wavelengths, lower frequencies, infrared, and you see spikes.
On the left you see a series of spikes.
Those spikes correspond to the transitions that are shown in the left hand part of the
diagram at the top, and then you see another series of spikes at the right, and they correspond
to transitions which are shown in the right hand half of the energy level diagram of the
right.
There's a couple other interesting features of this diagram, one is you see that most
of the spikes are actually double, and that's a result of the fact that chlorine, unlike
most common substances, has two isotopes, which we'll talk about in our nuclear lecture
shortly, two isotopes with different masses, they're still both chlorine, they have the
same number of protons, but they have different numbers of neutrons in their nucleus, and
you're seeing the slightly different masses that result in slightly different rotational
inertias, and therefore slightly different energies.
I should say one other thing about this rather abstract looking diagram, this is the reason
for one of the biggest environmental problems of our time, namely global warming, not with
chlorine, but with the molecular vibrational and rotational spectra, particularly of slightly
more complicated molecules, H2O and CO2 particularly, the infrared absorption by those molecules
undergoing transitions among different rotational and vibrational states is what leads to the
absorption of outgoing infrared radiation, the trapping of heat in Earth's atmosphere,
and to global warming, and as we put more of those gases, particularly CO2 in the atmosphere,
that effect increases, and one thing you'll notice in this spectrum of chlorine is that
there are lots of closely spaced spectral lines, lots of closely spaced energies, there's
almost a band of energies, and CO2 and O2 and H2O and other gases in the atmosphere,
but particularly CO2 and H2O have these bands of almost continuous wavelengths where they
strongly absorb infrared radiation, and that's the ultimate cause of global warming and the
greenhouse effect and so on.
So there's as much as we can do in terms of quantization in molecules, we've been able
to quantize the vibrational energies and the rotational energies, but we can't go much
further with that.
Let's go on to solids, a really hot topic in contemporary physics and microelectronics.
Used to be called solid state physics, we tend to call it more condensed matter physics
to reflect a wider array of kinds of matter that are in this condensed state where atoms
are close together, and condensed matter physics is usually described in solid state physics
by what's called band structure, and I want to show you here where band structure arises,
and then I want to give you some practical applications of this, particularly in contemporary
electronics.
So let's consider what happens when we bring atoms together.
We start with two atoms and they're initially completely separated, so in this diagram
the horizontal axis is molecular separation, and way off at the right you see these two
different states of the atoms, we see the 1s state and the 2s state, states that we talked
about last time in describing atoms, but as the atoms come closer and closer together,
their electrons begin to overlap, and then they begin to have to worry if I can anthropomorphize
them a little bit, they have to worry about that exclusion principle that says two electrons
can't be in the same state.
Now when the atoms were way far apart, two electrons could be in the 1s state, and they're
completely independent atoms, that's okay, but as the atoms come together and those electrons
sort of sense each other and begin to be shared, they can't both be in exactly the same state,
and so the energy level has to split, and there have to become two different energy levels.
As we move these atoms closer together, you see this splitting of the energy level, you
see that dip that represents a kind of equilibrium configuration, both these energy levels have
split when we bring two atoms together.
What happens if we bring more atoms together?
If we bring five atoms together, what has to happen is each of those energy levels splits
into five.
Now solids as opposed to molecules are not made of a few atoms, they're made of zillions
of atoms, a typical macroscopic sized object like a grain of salt or a brick or something
that has somewhere on the order of 10 to the 23 or a few more orders of magnitude number
of atoms in it.
So when we bring that many atoms close together, we get many, many, many, many, many, many
levels of these splitting, and we get basically a band of available energy states that are
available to the electrons in that solid.
It shows just a continuous band shaded in gray, and I've marked the equilibrium separation,
which marks the point of lowest energy in that lower state, in the upper state, and that
is where this particular solid will want to sit with that particular inter-atomic spacing,
and then these bands of energy is available, and you'll notice between those two bands
there's what's called an energy gap.
No electron is allowed to have an energy in that gap, for the same reason that no electron
was allowed to have an energy between the allowed orbits in the Bohr model or better,
the allowed orbits that are allowed by the solutions to the Schrodinger equation for
that particular atom.
That's the origin of this band structure that we talk about in solids.
Now this band structure is going to explain for us a great deal of the difference between
different kinds of materials, in particular their different electrical properties.
Let's take a look at that.
Here's the band structure of a many atom solid at its equilibrium separation, and I'm just
showing the bands associated with the outermost electrons in that solid.
There may be lots of other electrons further in.
Their bands are really not very interesting to us because nothing much happens.
They are full of electrons, and nothing interesting happens.
But in this case I've drawn a 1s band and a 2s band, but there really could be higher
and there could be lower bands further down.
The energy is going up on the left, and I'm not drawing any shape to this.
The horizontal axis doesn't mean anything because I'm drawing a picture at the equilibrium
separation for that solid, the bottom of the curve in the previous band level diagram.
There's what the band structure of a solid looks like, and there's this energy gap.
No electron states, no allowed states, no allowed energies in that gap.
If a material is an electrical insulator, it's a material in which the states in that
lower of these two outermost bands are completely occupied by electrons, and the other state
is completely unoccupied.
Sometimes we call the lower one the valence band and the upper one because it's the valence
electrons that participate in bonding with other atoms, and the upper one is called the
conduction band.
In this case there's no conduction occurring because we've got an insulator.
The reason we've got an insulator is because if you apply a little bit of energy to one
of the electrons in that lower band, near the top of that lower band, all the energy
levels are occupied.
There's no nearby energy level to promote it into.
To get it to where it's free to move around, where it has other energies available, you've
got to bump it all the way up into that higher state, and you've got to cross that energy
gap, and under typical conditions of electric fields applied by batteries and generators
or a lot of thermal activity or even photons coming in or something, there isn't enough
energy to do that because the energy gap is too big.
So that's an electrical insulator.
An electrical conductor, on the other hand, is a material in which the outermost band
that has electrons in it normally is only partially full.
For example, an alkali metal like sodium has only one electron in its outermost shell.
It could have two, and that means when you put a bunch of sodium atoms together to make
metallic sodium, you end up with only half that band being full.
What that means is if I apply a slight electric field to this material or give one of those
electrons in that uppermost band just a tiny bit more energy, there are plenty of unoccupied
energy states, allowed energy states available to it, and with a very little bit of energy,
a very weak electric field, I can promote it into a higher energy state where it's free
to move about.
And consequently, this material is an electrical conductor, and that's a rather more sophisticated
look than we did back in the electricity chapters.
It's a quantum mechanical look at the difference between electrical insulators and electrical
conductors.
Electrical insulators have completely occupied bands and then an energy gap before there
were any unoccupied states, and it takes a large amount of energy to promote electrons
into the unoccupied states and make it conduct.
You could do it, but by the time you did it, you'd probably have enough energy to destroy
the material or wreak havoc on it in other ways, whereas in a conductor, it takes very
little energy to promote an electron to a new unoccupied state, and so you get conductivity
very easily in conductors.
Now the interesting thing, and here's where the rest of this lecture is going to get into
something more practical than most of the recent lectures have been, is if we look at materials
called semiconductors, and materials called semiconductors are materials in which they're
actually insulators.
They're perfect insulators at absolute zero, and so here I have a picture of a semiconductor
at absolute zero, and it looks just like my picture of the insulator.
It's got a fully occupied lower band, a fully unoccupied upper band, and it's got this energy
gap.
It's not like a conductor.
However, if I go to a temperature greater than absolute zero, that gap is so small that
random thermal vibrations can promote occasional electrons into the conduction band.
The only real difference between an insulator and a semiconductor is the semiconductor has
a much, much smaller band gap, and thermal energy at, say, normal temperatures like room
temperature promotes electrons into the conduction band, and we get some conduction.
Semiconductors are not great conductors just intrinsically by themselves, but they're
okay.
They do conduct electricity.
More importantly, semiconductors are at the heart of modern electronics because we can
manipulate their electrical properties by manipulating their band structure, and I want
to show you how we do that, and then I want to show you a couple of devices that work
on that principle.
We dope semiconductors.
We add very small quantities and purities, typically at the level of about one part in
0.10 million or so.
Very small amounts of impurities, and here's what they do.
First of all, make the material become a good conductor, and we can do that in two different
ways, so we make them good conductors in two different ways.
If we add extra electrons, we have what's called an n-type semiconductor.
Here's an example.
I've got a crystal of silicon.
Each silicon atom bonds to four other silicon atoms.
It really happens in three dimensions, but I've reduced it to two dimensions here to
show it to you.
There are these bonding electrons taking part in that bond.
If I introduce a phosphorus atom, it has five valence, five bonding electrons, and if I put
it into this crystal structure, it'll fit uncomfortably in there, but one electron will
go wandering free through the material.
Therefore, I'll have suddenly a lot more free electrons, even if I put a small level of
this dopant, and this material becomes a good conductor, and it conducts by the movement
of free electrons.
By the way, there's a very common misunderstanding about that n designation.
People say, oh, it's negative.
It's not negative.
The phosphorus atom is neutral.
What it does have is free electrons, free negative charge carriers.
The things it can carry current are negative, but to say a material is n-type is not to
say it's negatively charged.
In fact, as we'll see, it's sometimes positively charged.
The conduction in this n-type material is by electrons.
If we look at the band structure of this, we get these new levels.
They're called donor levels, and they're near the conduction band.
Since they're very near the conduction band, it's very easy for small amounts of energy
to promote these electrons into the conduction band and cause a lot more free electrons to
be there, and so a lot more conduction.
Here's the band structure diagram for an n-type semiconductor.
We can do something else.
We can add a material, like in this case boron, that only has three conduction electrons
and a three valence electrons, and that's too few.
It still nudges into the semiconductor structure, into the crystal structure, but we're missing
one of those electrons that forms a bond, and instead there's a hole, a place where an electron
is missing.
This is a funny idea, but a nearby electron that's still bound in that structure can fall
into that hole, and then the hole has effectively moved, and the hole, although it's nothing
but the absence of an electron in the crystal structure, can nevertheless move through the
crystal structure and cause conduction.
We have conduction by holes and electrons.
Two types of semiconductor material, and the band structure shows that we have these so-called
acceptor levels down near the valence band, and it becomes easy to promote charge carriers
into those bands.
We have two kinds of semiconductors, and one of the biggest and most important things in
today's contemporary physics, at the heart of most electronic devices, is to put a piece
of P and n-type material together.
If you do that, there's a lot of free electrons in the n-type, and so they diffuse across
that junction and end up some of them in the P-type, actually making it negatively charged.
There's a lot of holes, positive charges, in the P-type, and they diffuse across the
junction into the n-type, and the result is we have positive on the right, negative on
the left, and as a result, there is a zone where there are very few free charges because
the positive holes combine with the negative electrons, the negative electrons combine with
the positive holes on the left, and we have a region where there are very few free charges,
and so we don't conduct electricity very easily.
We also have a big electric field pointing from plus to minus.
That's what a P-n junction looks like, and there's a band diagram for P-n junction associated
with that electric field is a rise in the potential energy of electrons.
Remember electrons are negative, they like to go against the electric field, so for them
to go with the electric field requires that they gain energy, that you give them more
energy, so that's what the band structure looks like.
If we put a battery across that junction with its positive connected to the n-type, we only
make that electric field bigger, and we make it even harder for electrons to get through,
and so that device does not conduct electricity in that direction.
But on the other hand, if we reverse the battery and put the positive to the P-type, we reduce
that electric field, we reduce that rise in the band structure, and therefore we make
it relatively easy for current to flow through that device, and the P-n junction turns on.
So the P-n junction acts like a switch.
It conducts electricity in one direction, but not the other, or like a one-way valve.
It's on in one direction, but not in the other direction, and that whole idea, that whole
concept is at the heart of almost all modern electronic devices, including the transistors,
which are the ubiquitous devices that do the on-off switching in our computers, that helps
store information in our computer memories, that amplify audio signals in our stereo systems,
and so on.
And I want to look just briefly at two devices that use that P-n junction.
Here's one example.
Here's a photovoltaic cell.
A photovoltaic cell is a P-n junction with a very thin n-type layer at the top, so thin
that it's basically transparent and light can get through it.
And what happens is light comes in in the form of photons.
The photons can give up their energy if the photon energy is roughly comparable to the
band gap, give up their energy and form an electron-hole pair, and that electron-hole
pair ultimately drives a current of electrons through an external load, and that's how you
make electricity with no moving parts from nothing but sunlight, which by the way provides
99.98 percent of all the energy coming to planet Earth, a great way to make electricity
if only it were a little bit more economical.
So there's a P-n junction.
The opposite of a P-n junction being used for a photovoltaic cell is a P-n junction,
which again has a band gap carefully engineered to give off photons in roughly the visible
region, or maybe the infrared, or maybe some other region of the spectrum, but mostly infrared
or visible.
When you forward bias that diode, that is you connect a positive terminal of the battery
to the P-type material, you drive a current through it, and as electron-hole pairs recombine,
they give off photons with energy equal to the band gap, energy, and out comes visible
light.
And if you design the thing carefully with mirrors on the end, you don't just get light,
you get a laser.
So all the things you have with LEDs, and in a few years that will be every light source
as we phase out incandescent lights because they're so inefficient, and then get rid
of those slightly awkward compact fluorescence, they will be LED sources, light emitting diodes,
and this is how a light emitting diode works.
Well, let me wrap up with two other examples of solid matter, which I want to get into
just briefly, just mention them.
One is superconductors.
In superconductors, these are materials that below a certain temperature have mentioned
them before, they conduct electricity with absolutely no resistance.
And the way that works is, in the superconductor, two widely separated electrons, they may
be a million electrons in between them, but nevertheless, they're quantum mechanically
paired in that they essentially share a common wave function, and that pairing is mediated
by the effect the electrons have on slight disturbances of the crystal lattice.
It's a rather complicated mechanism, but that kind of solid has zero electrical resistance.
That's a superconductor.
Another remarkable kind of solid is what's called degenerate matter.
Degenerate matter is great big bulks of matter that are so tightly crammed together that
basically all their particles are sort of acting as one, and so just as we got those
bands in the solids, now we get energy levels completely full to lowest level, higher and
higher and higher, and more and more electrons, they have to go into higher and higher energy
levels, they can't all be in the ground state.
And an example of this degenerate matter, several examples, are the matter that makes
some neutron stars, balls of neutrons with as much mass as the sun crammed into a few
miles, and white dwarf stars in which the atoms are completely collapsed on themselves,
and so they're basically all in one state, and so this form of degenerate matter has
very high energies associated with its electrons, not because they're hot or something, but
because they simply can't lose any more energy because they can't drop down any lower.
So those are two examples of unusual quantum solids.
Well let's wrap up. We've looked at molecular binding mechanisms, ionic, covalent, hydrogen
bonds, van der Waals, etc. We've looked at molecular quantization of angular momentum
and of energy, rotational and vibrational both. We've looked at solids, we've studied how
atomic energy levels become bands, we've seen insulators, conductors and semiconductors,
we've looked at doping, we've looked at some applications of semiconductors using this
idea of the P.N. junction, and finally we took a brief look at degenerate matter and
superconductors. Well let me end with a practical engineering challenge. The challenge is about
blu-ray. If you've got a blu-ray player or you've worked with blu-ray discs, they're
fairly recent inventions, and the reason they're fairly recent inventions is that that technology
was enabled by the development of a laser, P.N. junction laser, emitting blue light at
405 nanometers wavelength. That's very near the blue end of the visible spectrum, which
ends at about 350 nanometers. It is not easy to make very short wavelength P.N. junction
lasers. You need a big band gap because there's a big photon energy associated with them.
So this device had to be engineered and it took a while in the history of electronics
to do that, and that's why blu-ray is a fairly recent invention. It's blu-ray because this
laser is emitting blue light as opposed to the redder light that's used to read conventional
DVDs and even redder light that's used to read CDs. So the question is what's the energy
gap of this semiconductor? If you were the semiconductor engineer, what energy gap would
you have to give it? Well, let's look at a solution for this problem. We know that
the energy gap, this delta E, is HF, where F is the frequency of the light associated
with the photons we want to emit that have energy delta E. F is C over lambda. We're
told lambda is 405 nanometers, so we'll do the calculation. H times the speed of light
over 405 billionths of a meter, 10 to the minus 9 meters. Answer is 4.9 times 10 to the
minus 19 joules, or about three electron volts. So it was the engineering of a three electron
volt gap semiconductor material that enables blu-ray technology.
