Welcome to lecture 56, the first of two lectures on nuclear physics.
This one will take a look at basic nuclear physics and in the next lecture we'll try
to understand how we get energy out of the nucleus.
Nuclear physics, more perhaps than any other area of physics, is deeply entwined with history,
with international politics, and indeed with the fate of the world.
There are still thousands of nuclear weapons enabled by our knowledge of nuclear physics,
and they pose a threat to the very existence of human civilization.
So whenever I'm thinking about nuclear physics, that threat is not far from my mind, along
with other worrisome aspects of nuclear physics, for example nuclear reactor accidents.
So let's plunge right into the nucleus, and let's look first at how it was discovered.
So the discovery of the nucleus begins in about 1896 with Henri Becquerel discovering
quite inadvertently the phenomenon of radioactivity.
He had some photographic film in a drawer, and the drawer was containing uranium compounds,
uranium salts, and he found that these uranium salts fogged the photographic film.
J.J. Thompson in 1897 discovers the electron, recognizing that atoms are not indivisible,
and out of Thompson's discovery comes what's called the plum-putting model of the atom in
which the atom consists of a sort of pudding of positive charge with individual electrons
within it.
Marie and Pierre Curie discovered the radioactive elements radium and polonium, polonium named
after Poland, Marie Curie's homeland, and Marie Curie was the first to coin the term radioactivity
to describe these elements, and the significance of the Curie's discovery is that the high-energy
particles coming out of these radioactive materials gave us tools to probe the nature
of the nucleus, and Rutherford Marsden and Geiger, Marsden was an undergraduate by the
way, Geiger of Geiger counter fame, did a series of experiments in 1909 to 1911 in which they
bombarded a thin foil with some of these high-energy particles from radioactive radium, and by seeing
how the particles recoiled they were able to conclude that the atom consisted of a very
tiny massive center, the nucleus, surrounded by mostly empty space in which the electrons
were orbiting, and from that came the classic solar system model of the atom, and we've
already seen in study in quantum physics that this model is not quite correct, but it certainly
still is correct to think of the nucleus as a tiny but very massive particle at the center
of the atom, and the last step in this discovery is Chadwick's discovery of the neutron in
1932, and at that point we came to understand that the nucleus consists of protons and
neutrons, I'm going to represent neutrons in gray and protons in red, and so here for
example is a helium nucleus. Now what does it mean to be an atom of a particular element?
Well, when we have a nucleus the nucleus is positive and the nucleus attracts electrons,
and in a neutral atom the number of electrons equals the number of protons, but it's the
electrons that determine an atom's chemical properties, remember that's those outermost
electrons that participate in the chemical bonding that makes atoms join into molecules
and so on. So the number of electrons determines the chemical properties, but the number of
electrons is determined by the number of protons, so the number of protons in the nucleus determines
the chemical properties of a particular atom. We call that number of protons the atomic number
and we give it the symbol z, there's another use for a so don't get confused, z is the
atomic number, it's the number of protons, and all atoms with the same atomic number
belong to the same chemical species because they have the same number of protons in their
nucleus and therefore they have the same number of electrons surrounding them and therefore
they have the same chemistry, they are atoms of the same chemical element. So that's what
makes an element, you tell me atomic number z equals two and I know I've got helium, helium
is synonymous with z equals two, carbon is synonymous with z equals six, those things
mean the same thing, however the number of neutrons in a nucleus is not determined by
anything chemical, it doesn't matter chemically, you could add or take away a neutron and you'd
still have the same number of protons, the same number of electrons, and the same chemistry,
and so it's possible to have atoms of the same element which have different numbers
of neutrons and we call those different isotopes of the same element, they have different numbers
of neutrons. They have the same atomic number z so they're chemically similar, they're
not absolutely identical because they have slightly different masses and that makes them
behave slightly differently in ways that are interesting but not really significant for
our purposes here. They have different mass numbers however and the mass number which
we designate by A is the total number of nucleons where a nucleon means either a proton
or a neutron, so you add up all the protons and neutrons and you get the mass number and
the mass number by the way is approximately but not exactly the mass of the nucleus, it's
not exactly the mass of the nucleus in atomic mass units because of the energy that is involved
in binding the nucleus together and the E equals MC squared energy changes associated
with that mass, so the mass number provides a rough indication but not an exact indication
of the mass of a nucleus, so here for example is helium 4, that goes common kind of helium,
two protons, two neutrons. Here's helium 3, it's still helium because it's got two protons
but it's only got one neutron, it's actually a very rare isotope of helium, very important
in some low energy physics studies. These two behave similarly chemically, that is helium
is an inert gas, it doesn't participate in chemical reactions but they behave quite
different physically because of their different masses and because one's a boson and one's
a fermion, so we give them the symbol 4HE2 or 2HE4, read it from the bottom 2HE3 where
a nuclear symbol looks something like this, here's the anatomy of a nuclear symbol, the
element symbol is typically a one or two letter combination, here it's three letters S Y M
for symbol, the atomic number appears as a subscript before it and the mass number appears
as a superscript above it, before it also. So there's an atomic symbol and I will be
using atomic symbols like this throughout nuclear symbols. Some other isotopes, again
protons in red, neutrons in gray, hydrogen, the most simplest element, just a proton but
there's also deuterium, a heavier isotope of hydrogen, a stable isotope which comprises
about one in 6500 hydrogens and then there is an unstable isotope, one that's radioactive
called tritium, you'll hear about tritium whenever a nuclear accident happens, tritium
is commonly released. So those are three isotopes of hydrogen, oxygen has actually three stable
isotopes, oxygen 16, 8 protons, 8 neutrons is by far the most common but oxygen 18, there's
a little bit of that which has two more neutrons, 10 neutrons and 8 protons and the isotopes
of uranium are particularly important to us, uranium 235 has 92 protons and 143 neutrons
and uranium 238 has 92 protons, that's what makes it uranium and 146 neutrons and although
those behave very similar chemically and have almost the same mass, they are very different
in their nuclear properties and uranium 235 comprises only 7 tenths of a percent of natural
uranium which is actually a very good thing for the world for reasons we'll get into later.
How do we make nuclei out of neutrons and protons? Well there are two forces involved
in building a nucleus, there's an electric force that we've already encountered that
acts repulsively between protons and it tends to tear the nucleus apart, the electric force
is weak but it extends over fairly long distances as we know from our study of electricity it
falls off like 1 over r squared, then there's a nuclear force and the nuclear force acts
attractively between all the nucleons, it acts between protons and protons, protons
and neutrons, neutrons and neutrons, as you'll see in lecture 58 it's actually a kind of
residual effect of a strong force that binds the quarks together to make protons and neutrons.
So the nuclear force is very strong but it's also very short range, it falls off approximately
exponentially and the consequence of this is that larger nuclei need more neutrons than
they have protons. Here's why, here's a picture of a large nucleus, there's a proton and a
neutron being bound together by the nuclear force, there's a couple of neutrons being
bound together, there's a couple of protons being bound together by the nuclear force
but there are two widely spaced protons that are being pushed apart by the relatively
long range electric force but they don't have any compensating nuclear attraction and so
to compensate for that repulsion of distant protons in a big nucleus, the nucleus has
to have more neutrons to comprise a kind of nuclear glue that holds the whole thing together.
And if you were to plot on a graph on the horizontal axis here the number of neutrons
is n, the mass number minus the number of protons, so n is a minus z, versus the number
of protons on the vertical axis, you would find that smaller nuclei, lighter nuclei tend
to have equal numbers of protons and neutrons. Normal carbon, carbon 12 has six protons
and six neutrons, normal oxygen, oxygen 16 has eight protons and eight neutrons, normal
helium has two protons and two neutrons. And that's reflected in this graph by the line
going up essentially diagonally, all the little dots on this graph are known nuclei. And pay
attention particularly to the black dots, those are nuclei that are stable, that can
exist forever without flying apart by radioactive decay. But as we get up in numbers of nucleons,
you see that curve bending over a bit, that curve is bending over because there become
more neutrons than protons. So more massive nuclei tend to have more neutrons than protons
in order for them to be stable. By the way, this curve as we'll see in the next lecture
has a lot to do with why there was so much worry after the Fukushima nuclear accident
in Japan about the overheating of nuclear fuel, even though the reactors had shut down
during the earthquake that was the original cause of that accident. So this is the chart
of the nuclei, it shows all the existing nuclei, there aren't any nuclei way up to the
upper left because they would have too many protons, they would be unstable because the
electric force would drive them apart. There are also no stable nuclei down in this lower
right region because they would have too many neutrons and it turns out that the neutron
itself is an unstable particle as you'll see and it would decay. And contained within
a nucleus, a stable nucleus, it doesn't decay but otherwise it would or if there are too
many neutrons it will decay and so instability also results down there. So this fairly narrow
band contains the stable isotopes and some of the other isotopes that aren't stable
but last long enough for us to measure them and understand them and know their properties.
That's the chart of the nucleides. What happens to nuclei that are not stable? Well eventually
and later in this lecture I'll clarify exactly what I mean by eventually, they decay. That
is they spew out some particles and turn into something else. One mode of decay, the mode
favored by proton rich nuclei, the ones that have too many protons is to emit what's called
an alpha particle and an alpha particle is just the name for a helium 4 nucleus. When
I say helium 4, I mean the version of helium with 4 nucleons total, mass number 4, helium
3 would be the version with 3 nucleons. And here's the reaction written for the decay
of uranium 238, the most common kind of uranium. It starts with uranium 238, goes to thorium
234 and spews out an alpha particle. Let's take a little closer look at that reaction
before we look at other radioactive decays. So here's an anatomy of a nuclear reaction.
Uranium 238, 92 protons, 238 total nucleons, decays to 234, thorium 234 and helium 4. The
original nucleus is on our left, the first nucleus on the right is called the daughter
nucleus, and then out comes what's really nuclear radiation, a high energy particle.
So that's the anatomy of a nuclear reaction. And if we want to make sure we've got it
right, we check the numbers, we had 238 mass numbers on the left, we have 234 plus 4 on
the right, yep, 238. We've got 92 protons worth of electric charge is basically what
we're looking at here, and on the right we've got 90 plus 292, so that's good. So let's
go on and look at the rest of the nuclear reactions that we'll be considering, radioactive
decays here. We've got alpha decay, here's beta decay, beta decay takes place in nuclei
that typically have too many neutrons. The neutron decays to a proton and electron, and
one of these elusive particles that's charge-less and almost massless called a neutrino. It's
called beta decay because the high energy electron that comes out is a beta particle.
It's called a beta particle. So here on the left I have carbon 14, this happens to be
the reaction used in radio carbon dating, we'll get to that a little bit later. Decays
into normal nitrogen, nitrogen 14, an electron with atomic number minus 1 because it has
one negative charge, it's so light it has no mass number, and out comes the neutrino,
also that new, which is in fact actually an anti-neutrino. There's another kind of beta
decay in which a proton becomes a neutron and emits a positron and a neutrino, and that
takes the atomic number down one instead of up one as with ordinary beta decay. Here's
the decay of oxygen 15, a radioactive isotopes that's used in PET scanning, positron emission
tomography. Gamma decay occurs when a nucleus gets excited in a way analogous to the way
an atom can get excited by its electrons rising to higher energy levels. The excited nucleus
drops to a lower energy level emitting a high energy photon, also called a gamma ray. The
nucleus itself hasn't changed, all it's done is shed some energy, so it's written on the
left with a star to show it's excited, and on the right without the star, and this is
the decay of technetium 99, which is widely used in medical radioisotope imaging for example.
So that's radioactive decay. So where do we get these radioactive isotopes? Some of them
we make by nuclear reactions in particle accelerators and nuclear reactors, but others exist in
nature. How do they exist in nature if they're radioactive and decay away? Well here's an
example, this is the decay series of uranium, uranium 238, it starts out and it decays by
the first reaction I showed you by an alpha decay to thorium 234, then it undergoes a
sequence of beta and alpha decays that produce a whole host of other radioactive elements.
Among them is radium 226, which was the isotope Marie Curie discovered. Among them also is
radon 222, which is a very short lived radioactive gas which seeps into your basement from the
decay of natural uranium in rocks and concrete and can build up significant levels of radiation
in basements. This sequence goes on until it finally ends with a stable isotope, which
is lead 206 and lead 206 is formed ultimately from uranium. So there's a decay series for
uranium. To see that we understand these radioactive decays, let's take a look at another decay
series on our big screen monitor here. Here's the decay of thorium 232, atomic number 90,
mass number 232, symbol TH. It begins with one alpha decay, it's followed by two beta
decays, then a bunch more decays, but my question is what's the daughter nucleus at the end
of these first three decays? Now we know about alpha decay that sends out an alpha particle,
a helium 4 nucleus, so that reduces the mass number by 4, and the helium nucleus has two
protons so that reduces the atomic number, equivalently the electric charge by 2. So
A is going down to A minus 4, Z is going to Z minus 2. So the first reaction looks
like this. We start with thorium 232, we go down to some daughter nucleus, I'll just
call it D1, I'm not even being asked about it. It has atomic number 88 and mass number
228, and it spews out that helium nucleus to HE4. Then there's a beta decay. The beta
decay keeps the mass number the same because it sends out an electron and an electron is
so light it essentially has almost no mass for these accounting purposes. But it does
raise the atomic number, raises the electric charge by 1 because it sent out a negative
charge. So those are the changes from the beta decay. So now we've got daughter 1, 88,
228, whatever it is, goes to same mass number 228, but up one atomic number 89, that's
daughter 2, and out comes the electron and also the anti-neutrino. The next reaction
is also a beta decay. So daughter 2, 89, 228, daughter 2 goes to 90, up one again, 228,
that's daughter 3, that's the one we're being asked about, and the electron comes out and
the anti-neutrino. And you'll notice we have 90 for daughter 3. We started out with thorium
90. That's what makes it thorium, the number of protons in the nucleus, the atomic number.
So this is thorium 228. So that's our answer, thorium 228. So the thorium is decayed through
three decays and bin thorium again. If you want to know what the others are, you just
look at a chunk of the periodic table and you can see that daughter 1 is radium 228 and
daughter 2 is actinium 228. Those are both here on the periodic table. So that was a
decay series. Now, I've been beating around the bush with this question of how rapidly
do these radioactive materials decay? And the answer is there is a certain time in which
roughly half the nuclei in a given sample will decay. That's called the half-life. I
can't give you anything more precise than that because it's a kind of a statistical
thing. But if I start with 1,000 nuclei after one half-life, I might have 495 or 503 or
something like that, but I'll have something on the average of about 500. And the more
I have, the more accurate that becomes. These half-lives range from fractions of a second
to billions of years, and the number of nuclei after a given time is described by the number
n sub 0 you started with times 2 raised to the power minus t over the half-life, minus
t is the time. Number of nuclei at time t, initial number of nuclei, and the half-life.
And if we plotted a graph with time on the horizontal axis in half-lives and number of
nuclei, and we start with 100%, one, I'm just calling it after one half-life, we're down
to half as many as we had, after two half-lives, we're down to a quarter as many, after three
and eighth as many and so on. Just to give you some examples of elements that have interesting
in half-lives and are isotopes that are interesting to us. Uranium 238, the naturally
occurring most dominant isotope of uranium, has a half-life of 4.5 billion years. That's
why it's been around since the Earth's existence. It's the dominant isotope in natural uranium.
Uranium 235, the one that we use to make nuclear power, the fissile isotope in weapons and
reactors, that has a half-life of 700 million years, still quite large. Radon 222, that
product of the uranium decay that seeps into your basement, 3.8 days. Iodine 131, you probably
heard a lot about that in connection with nuclear accidents, particularly at Fukushima.
That's a iodine isotope, and so it collects in your thyroid gland. It causes thyroid cancer.
It's abundant in products of nuclear fission, so it's abundant at nuclear accidents and
has a half-life of eight days. Carbon 14, about 5,700 years. It's formed in the atmosphere
by cosmic rays, and as we'll see in a moment, it's used in radiocarbon dating. And a few
others here, plutonium 239, hydrogen 3 tritium at 12 years, cesium 137, another important
isotope in nuclear accidents. With its 30-year lifetime, it takes a long time to go away,
and land contamination around Fukushima and Chernobyl is due, in large part, to cesium
137. Oxygen 15, I mentioned, used in PET scans. Potassium 40 is a long-lived isotope, 1.25
billion years, and it's naturally occurring, and there's a lot of it in your body. Eat bananas.
They got lots of potassium. You're slightly radioactive from potassium. It's a significant
source of radiation to you, so those are some half-lives. Well, let's see if we understand
half-lives by doing another calculation here on our monitor. So I'm going to talk about
radiocarbon dating, the process of using radioisotopes to date ancient objects. In particular, archaeologists
like carbon 14, which is formed, as I say, in the atmosphere by cosmic rays, taken up
by plants and then by animals, which plants take carbon out of the atmosphere. And this
particular sample has 9.5 percent the carbon of contemporary bone. How old is this bone?
We can give a quick answer, because 9.5 percent is less than 1-8. 1-8 would be 12.5 percent,
about 1 over 2 to the cubed power, 2 to the 3 power, that's 1-8. But it's more than a
16th, which is 1 over 2 to the fourth, and that's enough to tell us the ages between
3 and 4 half-lives. The half-life is about 5,700 years, so go figure it somewhere up
near 20,000 years, but not quite. That's a quick answer. A better answer comes from
our formula and is the initial number times 2 to the minus t over t to the 1-half. So
the ratio and the original number, which we're told is 0.095, 9.5 percent, is 2 to the minus
t over that half-life, t 1-half. How do we deal with that? We take the logarithm of
both sides. Logarithm of 0.095 is the logarithm of 2 to the minus t over t 1-half, and there's
an identity you learned back in high school when you worked with logarithms, and it says
the logarithm of something to the nth power is n times the logarithm of the thing itself.
So here I have 2 to some power, so I can rewrite this as logarithm, this is the natural logarithm,
of 0.095 is simply that exponent with the minus sign times the log of 2. And let's calculate
it, t is t 1-half, log 0.095 over log 2, work that out, the half-life is 5,730 years, there
is the ratio 19,430 years as we guessed approximately with our quick thing. That's radiocarbon
dating, that is a very powerful technique, and it works up to about 50,000 years out.
There are some subtleties with it, we can incidentally use uranium and potassium isotopes
to date things back billions of years, and that's what we do geologists use, for example,
to date rocks.
Well, I've talked a lot here about radioactivity, there are a lot of uses for radioactivity,
dating as I just mentioned, isotope ratios tell us about, or isotopes in the decay of
them tells us about the ages of things, medical diagnostics, all kinds of medical diagnostic
procedures, some of which I've alluded to use radioactivity, medical treatment uses
radioactivity, particularly to kill cancer, we use radioactive tracers to see where things
are going, you're building a better car engine and you want to know how it wears, you incorporate
some radioactive material into the bearings, and then you watch where that radioactive
material goes, because it's easy to detect. Some so-called activation analysis makes ordinary
materials briefly radioactive, and by detecting the signature of the radiation, you can tell
what kind of materials there are.
Radiation analysis is used, among other things, in some high-tech security scanners at airports
to look for explosives. Insect control, you can use radiation to sterilize insects and
you can wipe out whole populations when they mate with sterile insects. Food preservation,
a number of food products are preserved by radiation, which kills bacteria, fire safety,
smoke alarms, non-electric exit signs, use radioactive materials, radioactivity is with
us everywhere, and doing a lot of useful things for us, as well as a lot of harmful things.
To talk about those harmful things, we've got to figure out a little bit how to measure
radioactivity. The SI unit of radioactivity is called the Becquerel, after Becquerel,
who discovered radioactivity, BQ, and a Becquerel is simply a unit of the rate at which radioactive
material is decaying. One Becquerel means you've got a bunch of stuff in which one decay is
happening every second. An older unit is the Curie, which you may have heard of, a Curie
is roughly the radioactivity of a gram of radium 226. It's about 3.7 times 10 to the
10 decays per second. You probably heard about Becquerels in connection with nuclear accidents.
They're simply a measure of how much activity there is. More significant is the radiation
dose. A gray is a unit of radiation dose. One gray means a material exposed to radiation
has absorbed one joule of energy from the radiation. The older unit, the rad, comparable
to a gray but equal to a hundredth of a gray. But what you probably have heard of is the
Sievert, abbreviation SV, or symbol SV. That's the measure of biological radiation dose.
It means the same thing as the gray. One Sievert is one joule per kilogram, but it's been adjusted
for biological effectiveness of different kinds of radiation. An older unit is the Rem,
which is 0.01 Sieverts. So those are units you've heard about. During the Fukushima accident,
for example, there were reports on how many Sieverts per hour there were at this distance
from the nuclear plant inside the reactor building. How many Sieverts, or mightnally
Sieverts, or whatever, were they getting? What happened to the guys who stepped in highly
radioactive water? They got a few Sieverts of radiation. So we can try to figure out
what the effects are of these biological doses. The lethal dose for biological radiation,
and this is a statistical thing, it's called the LD50, half of people exposed to four Sieverts,
a short dose of four Sieverts die. So a few Sieverts is lethal. Your lifetime cancer risk
goes up by about one part in a thousand, a tenth of a percent. If you get exposed to
10 to the minus two Sieverts, that's 10 milli Sieverts. That's not a big increase because
your lifetime cancer risk from all causes is 42%. 42% of us are going to die of cancer.
And so it's very, very hard to say a given cancer was caused by radiation, especially
low radiation doses. You fly from New York to Hong Kong, you get exposed to cosmic rays,
you get about 10 to the minus four Sieverts, about a tenth of a milli Sievert. Do that,
I guess, a hundred times and you've got your cancer risk up by one part in a thousand.
Chest X-ray is about same, 10 to the minus four Sieverts. If you were a neighbor of the
Three Mile Island accident and you stayed put, you would pick up an extra dose of about
10 to the minus five Sieverts, about 0.01 milli Sieverts. At the Fukushima plant boundary
during the height of that nuclear accident, the radiation dose was about 1.9 milli Sieverts
per hour. So that's how much you'd pick up if you stood at the boundary of the plant.
If you went inside, it would have gotten worse. U.S. annual average radiation dose amounts
to about 3.6 milli Sieverts. And that comes from a lot of sources. About half of it comes
from radon in buildings. This gas is naturally there from the decay of natural uranium. Rocks
and soils contribute another about 8%. Cosmic rays, about 8%. Radiation from inside your
own body, mostly radioactive potassium, about 11%. Those are all natural sources. Medical
procedures contribute about 15% of our radiation dose. Consumer products like smoke alarms
and other things, about 3%. And finally, a little category that says other is less than
1%. That other category, by the way, includes the normal operation of nuclear power plants
and nuclear weapons testing. So that's actually a rather insignificant source of the radiation
we receive, about three quarters of which is natural. And most of the rest comes from
medical procedures. So those are radiation doses. Well, let's wrap this one up.
Neutrons and protons, they make up the atomic nucleus. They're held together by the strong
force, the nuclear force, and opposes the electric force, which is trying to tear them
apart. Nuclear are characterized by their atomic number Z, the number of protons, their
mass number A, the total number of nucleons. So there's helium 4, two protons, two nucleons
with its little symbol 2HE4. The chart of the nuclides shows us that their number of
neutrons and equal the mass number minus the number of protons is on the order of Z, the
number of protons for small nuclei, and it gets greater than Z for larger nuclei. And
there's the chart of the nuclides, which we'll return to in the next lecture. Unstable
nuclei undergo radioactive decay, alpha, beta, and gamma. We're the three modes of decay
as we considered. A typical decay is that alpha decay. The half-life characterizes the
amount of time a radioactive nucleus hangs around, and those half-lives vary from tiny
fractions of seconds to billions of years. There's the half-life decay curve. And we
looked at radiation, we looked at its uses, we looked at its measures, and we looked at
biological doses. So there's a summary. And I want to leave you with a challenge on this
one, a very significant challenge, because it's one that has real implications for human
health. Here's the challenge. After the Fukushima accident in 2011 in Japan, caused by an earthquake
and a tsunami that wiped out the cooling systems of the nuclear reactors at one power plant,
where there were six reactors, by the way, the levels of iodine 131, that isotope with
a half-life of 8.04 days in milk samples rose to 17 times Japan's safety standards.
How long would you have to hold that contaminated milk until it was considered safe to drink?
Would that be a practical thing to do? So let's solve that problem.
Here's the problem. Now, the activity of a radioactive sample, I haven't really talked
about how that decays, but that depends on the number of nuclei. So that half-life equation
applies to activity as well as to number of nuclei. So we want to know when the radioactivity
is going to have decayed by 217 to its original level. Well, that's exactly the same problem
we had when we did the radiocarbon dating there. We were worried about a very different
problem about the decay of radioactive carbon-14, but it's exactly the same math. N is N naught
2 to the minus t over t1-half. That gives us, in this case, N over N naught. We want
to be down to 117th of where we were. That's 0.0588. The rest of the math follows. We take
the logarithm of both sides. We solve for t and we get 33 days, you know, about four
half-lives, because four half-lives would take you down to 116th. We want to go down
to 117th, so not surprisingly, we're at a little bit more than four half-lives. Half-life
of about eight days, four half-lives is 32 days. You can't hold milk that long, fresh
milk anyway, so you'd have to dump that milk. So the answer to that question is, nope, the
milk would not be safe to drink before it's boiled.
