Welcome to lecture 57, continuing our exploration of the atomic nucleus, and in this lecture
looking particularly at how we extract energy from the nucleus.
I remind you again that nuclear physics remains intertwined with history, with international
policy.
It also is intertwined with environmental issues, particularly global warming, because
nuclear power affords a carbon free way to energy, on the other hand a way which is fraught
with a number of perils.
So let's begin by looking sort of theoretically at how we might extract energy from the nucleus,
and then we'll look at how we human beings here on Earth do that in practice.
So let me begin with a picture I showed in the previous lecture, a picture of a large
atomic nucleus, and the competing forces that both hold that nucleus together and tend to
drive it apart.
There's an electric force acting repulsively between all the protons in the nucleus, and
now I want to think about the energy with which that nucleus is bound together.
How tightly bound is that nucleus?
A quantity called binding energy measures that tightness.
And if we have protons repelling each other, that's tending to make the nucleus fly apart,
and that is decreasing this binding energy, making it less tightly bound.
The electric force is weak, but it extends again over long distances, as I pointed out
last time.
Then there's this attractive nuclear force acting in between all the nucleons, neutrons
and neutrons, protons and protons, protons and neutrons, it increases the binding energy
because it's holding the nucleus together, but its range is strong, but its range is
short.
And the conclusion we drew last time from this is that more massive nuclei tended to
have more neutrons than they did protons, whereas lighter nuclei tended to have equal
numbers of them.
Now we're going to draw a slightly different conclusion, related, but different, and that
is that the middle weight nuclei are the most tightly bound.
They're the most tightly bound because if you start adding more protons beyond about
the middle weight nuclei, you begin to lower that binding energy, lower the strength of
the binding because you've got more of that repulsive force.
Whereas if you start out with a very small nucleus and start adding nuclei, you get nucleons,
you get more and more of that nuclear binding when they're close together, and that increases
the binding energy, it's only when you start getting a big nucleus that the repulsive effect
of the protons lowers the binding energy.
And in consequence, there is a very famous graph called the curve of binding energy.
By the way, it was a subject of a book by the writer John McPhee.
And the curve of binding energy plots nuclei by weight along the bottom, starting with
hydrogen, the lightest to uranium, the heaviest naturally occurring nucleus.
On the vertical axis is the binding energy, not the total amount of it, but the binding
energy per nucleon.
So you take all the nuclei, all the nucleons in a nucleus, and you take the binding energy
and you divide by the number of nucleons, and you get a measure of how tightly bound
the individual nucleons are.
And that curve looks something like this for the reason I just said.
You start out with hydrogen, there's no other nucleons, so there's no binding energy.
You build up to successively more massive nuclei, and at first you increase the binding
energy because of that strong nuclear force, but when you get big enough, and it turns
out to be righted about where iron is located in this continuum of nuclei, then the repulsive
effects of the protons begins to lower the binding energy.
And what this all means is the following.
It means that there are two ways that you can combine or alter nuclei in order to release
energy.
One is to fuse very light nuclei, because if you take light nuclei which are not very
tightly bound because there isn't much nuclear force because there aren't many nucleons,
when you bind them together into a somewhat heavier nucleus, then energy will be released
as that heavier nucleus is more tightly bound.
One example, an important example is the fusion of hydrogen to make helium, that's what powers
the sun, more on that toward the end of the lecture.
So that's one way you can achieve energy release from nuclear interactions by fusing light
nuclei together.
You can also break heavy nuclei apart, that's the process of nuclear fission.
Nuclear fission takes heavy nuclei because they aren't quite as tightly bound as middle
weight nuclei, you break them apart into two middle weight nuclei and there's tighter binding
with the two middle weight nuclei, and so in the process you have released some energy.
So fission and fusion are two different distinct processes whereby we can release energy from
the atomic nucleus, and they come about because of the shape of this curve of binding energy,
and they both tend to move us toward middle weight nuclei in the vicinity of iron but
plenty of other middle weight nuclei.
Now in principle you can do these energy releasing reactions with any nuclei, in practice it's
difficult, in particular fission is very difficult to make happen under most circumstances with
just any random heavy nucleus, although in principle it can be done.
So that's the curve of binding energy, one of the crucial ideas in understanding how
we release energy from the nucleus.
Let's take a look at nuclear fission, but before we do I have to take a little diversion
into history because the history of nuclear fission is fascinating and like other nuclear
issues it's tightly intertwined with the history and the fate of human civilization.
Nuclear fission was discovered in the 1930s, in the very late 1930s.
Throughout the 1930s a number of physics labs around the world were doing experiments in
which they were bombarding nuclei with neutrons, which is a useful thing to do because neutrons
being uncharged aren't repelled by the positive nucleus and so they can go right into it and
they can cause nuclear reactions and you can study nuclei.
So a number of labs around the world were performing these experiments.
And in particular a lab in Germany with chemists Han and Strasmann were doing this experiment
and they were bombarding nuclei and in particular they chose to bombard uranium and they bombarded
uranium with neutrons and they discovered something very strange in their results.
They discovered that their final product after doing this bombardment was contaminated with
sort of middle weight nuclei, particularly barium which has atomic number 56.
Where on earth did the barium come from?
They were chemists, they were collaborating with a physicist, Lisa Meitner, and she had
had to leave Germany in 1938, things were uncomfortable for her, she fled to Sweden and she was in
Sweden at the time that these results were becoming known.
So she's on the other side of the divide that was building just before World War II and
in late 1938 she and her nephew Otto Frisch were on a walk in the Swedish countryside and
she suddenly realized what had happened.
She drew a picture showing uranium breaking into two equal sized pieces.
Before that all the nuclear reactions people had studied involved small chunks like alpha
particles coming out of a radioactive material.
Suddenly uranium seemed to have split in two and she and Frisch published a paper, they
coined the term fission for the first time and the paper was published in January of
1939 in Nature magazine and this is on the eve of World War II and the implications were
obvious because in that paper they calculated the energy that would be released.
They calculated in two ways, one by looking at the electrostatic repulsion of these two
nuclei that would be created and one by looking at the Einstein equals MC squared mass difference
and both ways they came up with a colossally large number for the energy that would be
released in this process and immediately it was understood that this had serious military
implications.
Rarely has a fundamental discovery gone so quickly to practical realization.
A few short months later we had a team of physicists going to meet Albert Einstein and telling
Einstein about this and saying Einstein write a letter to President Roosevelt telling him
about this new discovery and about how we have to get a program going to try to build
a weapon based on nuclear fission.
Einstein had nothing else to do with nuclear fission by the way but he used his great name,
signed that letter and that initiated the Manhattan Project.
By 1942 a team led by Enrico Fermi in Chicago at the University of Chicago had built the
first successful nuclear reactor and got it going, a critical chain reaction in 1942 and
of course in 1945 one nuclear weapons test followed by two nuclear weapons used against
Japanese cities.
So that's the history of nuclear fission, it's a very short abbreviated history and
there it is.
Let's look now at the physics of nuclear fission.
So there are two ways to make nuclear fission happen.
Sometimes it happens spontaneously, rarely a mass of nucleus will simply spontaneously
split in half.
Very rare, much more important for our purposes is neutron induced fission, that's the process
that Han and Strasman were studying where a fissionable isotope is bombarded with neutrons.
Fissionable isotopes are isotopes that will undergo fission when they're struck with
neutrons, sometimes with very high energy and they include uranium 235, uranium 238 and
most other heavy nuclei if you hit them with high enough energy neutrons, there's a very
common misconception here, the word fissionable is commonly misused to mean only uranium 235
and a couple of other isotopes which have a more important special property, those isotopes
are called fissile and they will undergo fission if they're struck by low energy neutrons and
they include uranium 233, uranium 235 and plutonium 239 and I want to maintain that
distinction, it's a really important distinction and it's a common misunderstanding.
So when I say fissionable isotope, I mean an isotope that can be made to fission if
you strike it with a neutron, maybe it has to be a very high energy neutron, when I say
a fissile isotope, I mean one that will undergo fission even if you strike it with quite a
low energy neutron, in fact in some cases it's more likely to undergo fission with a
low energy neutron, so that's the idea of nuclear fission.
How does neutron induced fission work, well here's a uranium 235 nucleus, in comes a neutron,
it's absorbed, delivers some energy to the nucleus, the nucleus becomes uranium 236 because
it's still uranium but it has picked up an extra neutron and it undergoes an oscillation,
it gets unstable, so here is the nucleus, I've colored it pink to remind you that it's
positively charged and I've shown the two positive charges there to show you that the
opposite ends of it are in particular positive charge and it tends to oscillate back and
forth and eventually that positive charge that's getting farther and farther apart is
tending to pull that nucleus apart and eventually it forms this dumbbell shape and then it breaks
apart into two roughly but not exactly equal sized pieces, two middle weight nuclei and
typically in neutron induced fission, outcome two or three neutrons, averages about two
point something, sometimes more sometimes less, there is no one reaction for nuclear
fission, there are many reactions but basically neutron comes in, uranium splits into two
roughly equal mass middle weight nuclei but slightly different masses and out comes some
neutrons, that's the process of neutron induced fission.
Here's what neutron induced fission looks like if we write it down as a reaction, in
this particular case in comes a neutron, charge zero, atomic number zero, mass number
one hits uranium 235, 92 U 235 forms X and Y where X and Y are those two so called fission
products, those middle weight nuclei and it also forms B where B is a number typically
between two and three of additional neutrons and that's going to be really crucial to understand
how fission occurs and how we maintain a fission chain reaction which we'll get to shortly.
So that's a formula for neutron induced fission.
Anything else comes out of fission as well as neutrons and these fission product nuclei,
that is fission energy, about 200 million electron volts per fission, now you probably
don't have a good feel for an electron volt but let me give you a good feel for what that
means, first of all here's how that energy is divided, most of it comes out as the kinetic
energy of those fission products, but a little bit of it comes out as the energy of neutrons,
some of it comes out as gamma rays, very high energy photons and some of it comes out as
beta radiation which is actually the result of extremely short lived fission products
decaying rather quickly.
Compare that with about four electron volts you get for the reaction carbon plus oxygen
gives CO2, that's the reaction of burning coal, 200 million electron volts from a nuclear
fission event, four electron volts from this particular chemical reaction, I call that
the nuclear difference, it's a factor of somewhere on the order of 10 to the 7, 10 million between
nuclear and chemical reactions, we can quibble about whether it's a million or 10 million
or 100 million it doesn't really matter, it's the nuclear difference, it's a colossal difference,
that's why nuclear fuels are such concentrated sources of energy, that's why you can carry
a bomb in a suitcase and blow up an entire city with it, that's why although we are
generating a lot of nuclear waste we don't know what to do with, we're generating a lot
less nuclear waste in volume than we are waste from coal burning power plants for example,
the nuclear difference explains all those distinctions, the nuclear difference is a
factor of about 10 million between nuclear reactions and chemical reactions and I would
argue that there is some level at which a difference that big ceases to be merely quantitative,
it becomes a qualitative difference between nuclear things and chemical things, nuclear
energy is a totally different kind of energy, it is just that much more concentrated by
a factor of about 10 million.
Let me give you one example, here's a picture that illustrates the nuclear difference, at
the top we see a power plant way in the distance, it's a coal burning power plant out in the
American Midwest and this particular power plant is fueled each week by 14 train loads
of coal each carrying 110 cars and those cars come in, the train comes in, the train stops
on a track, a big machine picks up each car, dumps the coal, the train shuttles on, next
car dumps the coal, train shuttles back to an open pit mine in Wyoming, next train comes
in, this goes on almost round the clock, two train loads a day, 14 train loads a week,
110 cars each train, the picture down at the right is the refueling operation for a typical
nuclear power plant, it gets a couple truck loads of nuclear fuel being shown, being unloaded
here as you see and that happens about every 18 months.
So that's the nuclear difference, what a colossal difference and it's due to that huge difference
in the energies that are released in nuclear versus chemical reactions.
Let's do a quick thing on our big screen to see if we get this process of nuclear fission.
So let's look at nuclear fission and I'm going to tell you a particular fission reaction
produces the isotope Krypton 92, by the way that's a inert gas, it's a very common nuclear
fission product but it isn't a particularly dangerous one because it's an inert gas that
doesn't react chemically and it goes off into the air and gets dispersed and this particular
reaction produces also three neutrons and so what is the other fission product, that's
our question.
So here's the fission reaction, fission reaction consists of a neutron coming in, hitting uranium
235, I'm going to skip the intermediate uranium 236 and we get out of this Krypton 92, Krypton's
atomic number is 36, this one's mass number is 92 and we get some other daughter nucleus
or some other fission product which I will call Y, I don't know what it is and I don't
know what its atomic number is and I don't know what its mass number is and I'm telling
you three neutrons also come out and a neutron again has no charge so no atomic number but
one mass unit.
So there's our fission reaction and we have to figure out what A and Z are and that will
let us identify what this product is, so let's do the numbers.
Well on the left we have one mass unit and 235 mass units, on the right we have 92 mass
units in the Krypton, three in the three neutrons and we don't know how many in this other product
Y but we can solve now and we get A equals 141.
So now we know the mass number of the product is 141, let's do the same thing for the atomic
number equivalently electric charge, the neutron is uncharged, the original uranium nucleus
has 92 protons, on the right we've got 36 protons in the Krypton, the neutrons have
no charge so that's zero and we have Z the unknown atomic number of the product, solve
for that Z is 56.
So we're almost there, we've got the numbers, that characterizes our isotope, take a look
at the periodic table, element with atomic number 56 is barium, in this case we have
a mass number 141 so the product is barium 141, that by the way is the barium that showed
up in Hahn and Strasmann's experiments when they bombarded uranium with neutrons and that
is the product that Lisa Meitner then explained in her description of the process of nuclear
fission, so that's how nuclear fission works and there we've identified one particular
fission product which is commonly found in the byproducts of nuclear fission.
Well let's move on, fission products it turns out are quite radioactive and I want to show
you why in a very fundamental way they're radioactive.
So here's a diagram I showed you in the previous lecture, it's the chart of the nuclides, it
plots neutron number along the bottom, proton number along the vertical axis for a while
proton and neutron numbers are equal but then this curve bends over for the reasons I described
before namely you need more neutrons to glue those heavier nuclei together against the
repulsive force of their distant protons.
Now let me take that curve and just draw a simple graph through the middle of it to show
you its general shape, that downward arching shape as it goes onward toward more heavy
nuclei, again at the top left we have nuclei with too many protons, they're unstable because
of the repulsive electric force, the bottom we have too many neutrons, they're unstable
because the neutron decays basically beta decay occurs, up here is uranium, the heaviest
naturally occurring isotope.
If I split uranium into two pieces, those pieces are going to have approximately the
same ratio of neutrons to protons as did the original uranium, it won't be quite exactly
the same because A they might not distribute exactly the same and B a few neutrons come
out right away but it's going to be close to the same ratio of neutrons to protons that
uranium has and that means the fission products are going to lie somewhere along that straight
dashed line from uranium going down to zero.
So there's somewhere in there and I've actually shown you these two blobs because what happens
is the fission products never come out exactly equal and they tend to distribute themselves
into two ranges on either side of exactly half the uranium nucleus of size.
So there are the fission products but the crucial point about this diagram is it is
fundamental to the nature of fission products that they lie below that curve of stable isotopes
and they have too many neutrons and so they undergo beta decay.
They are intensely radioactive, the fission products are intensely radioactive, that's
why after the accident at Fukushima in Japan the reactors shut down, they were stopping
producing nuclear energy by a chain reaction but they were continuing to produce nuclear
energy which manifested itself as heat.
By the decay of these highly, highly radioactive fission products, that's not a problem with
the design of the reactors or anything else, it's the nature of nuclear fission.
When you make nuclear fission happen you make highly, highly radioactive fission products.
Far more radioactive by the way than the original uranium with its 4.5 billion year half life
being hardly radioactive at all but these fission products have half lives from seconds to typically
tens of years or so, maybe centuries in one or two cases, they're pretty short and so
they must be intensely radioactive to decay that quickly.
So that is the origin of the radioactive fission products.
There are other radioactive materials produced in the fission process.
For example, when U238 absorbs a neutron, U238, not the isotope that fissions but U238,
it leads to plutonium and other so called transuranics which are heavier than uranium
nuclei that have short, half lives short enough that they don't tend to occur in nature.
They tend to have longer half lives in the tens to, thousands to tens of thousands of
years and longer and so they're a little more thorny to deal with but they're less radioactive
because they have longer half lives, they decay more slowly.
And one particular reaction is important and that's the reaction, neutron hitting U238
makes U239, U239 undergoes a beta decay, there's the electron coming out and becomes
neptunium 239, element 93 that decay at 24 minute half life, the neptunium decays by
another beta decay to element 94 which is plutonium, this is plutonium 239, there's
a half life of that decay of 2.4 days and then we're stuck with the plutonium because
it has a half life of about 25,000 years.
It can get hit by more neutrons and make other heavier isotopes of plutonium and other things
but if we get plutonium 239 we have relatively long isotope and like uranium 235, plutonium
239 is fissile, it can be quote burned in a reactor.
In fact one of the reactors at Fukushima, the one that was causing the most worry was
actually fueled by mixed uranium and plutonium fuel and because plutonium's 25,000 year
half life is much less than uranium's 4.5 billion year half life, plutonium is a lot
more dangerously radioactive so there was a lot of worry about that.
The other worry about plutonium is it can be used to make bombs and you can extract
it from a reactor and use it to make bombs so that's a bit of a problem.
Now how do we actually technically extract energy from nuclear reactions?
Well what we do is create what's called a chain reaction.
So I'm showing you here a bunch of fissile nuclei uranium 235 or plutonium 239, in comes
a neutron, it causes one, it strikes one of these fissile nuclei, causes it deficient
and out comes some more neutrons and neutrons are what cause fission.
So those neutrons cause more fission and more neutrons come out and more neutrons and so
on and pretty soon the whole mass of fissile stuff has undergone fission.
In fact if you just have a solid mass of plutonium or uranium it will fission in about a microsecond
and release the energy equivalent to thousands and thousands of tons of coal, that's a nuclear
fission bomb.
I'm not gonna say anymore about bombs here but I'm gonna point out that making a fission
reaction go out of control is not a terribly difficult thing to do unfortunately.
Now what's the likelihood of fission happening?
Well that depends on which isotope you're working with.
Uranium 235 is extremely likely to fission if it's hit by a slow neutron.
It will fission if it's hit by one of those fast neutrons coming out of a fission event
but it's less likely and it will fission for even faster neutrons.
Uranium 238 it's nearly impossible to make it fission with slow neutrons.
That's why it's not fissile.
It's even very unlikely for Uranium 238 to fission with fast neutrons coming out of the
fission process but very fast neutrons and by the way this happens in a so-called hydrogen
bomb which actually gets about half of its explosive yield from Uranium 238 because of
very intense neutron fluxes being generated by fusion.
It's probable that with very fast neutrons you can fission U238 but in our nuclear reactors
U238 does not get fissioned although some of it turns into plutonium 239 which does.
How do we sustain this chain reaction?
Well we have to ask the question if I have a fission to occur it gives out two or three
neutrons how many of those cause additional fission?
That's called the multiplication factor.
If it's less than one the reaction is subcritical and it fizzles out.
If it's more than one the reaction grows exponentially and you've got that explosion.
If it's exactly equal to one you get a steady power output and that's what we want in a
nuclear power reactor.
Well what happens to these neutrons?
Why don't they all cause fission?
Well they might, they might strike a U235 and cause fission much more likely if they're
slow neutrons.
They might escape the fuel altogether, they might strike something else and get absorbed
like a proton in water and make deuterium U238 and make plutonium, they might strike
fission products and be absorbed, they might strike substances that you put there intentionally
to absorb neutrons.
You may have heard after the Fukushima accident they were adding boron to the water, they
were pumping into the reactors because boron is a strong neutron absorber and that absorbs
the neutrons and inhibits the possibility of a chain reaction occurring.
But out of all this comes the possibility that there is a critical mass, a certain amount
of fissile material you need to get together in one place and exactly what the critical
mass is depends on the shape and the purity and what you're doing whether it's a reactor
or a bomb but we know that the critical masses are on the order of pounds for pure uranium
and plutonium which is a very scary fact because it means you can make bombs out of relatively
small amounts of these materials.
What are the implications of this critical mass and these other properties for nuclear
technologies?
Well one thing is we have to enrich uranium to make reactor fuel.
Small uranium is 99.3% uranium 238, only 0.7% uranium 235 so it's a tiny, tiny fraction
of U-235.
If you want to make reactor fuel you've got to bring it up to 3 to 4%.
If you want to make bomb fuel you've got to bring it up to about 80%.
If you have the technology to make reactor fuel you automatically have the technology
to make weapons also.
That's one of the reasons for great worry about the proliferation of enrichment technology
which is something the world is very much concerned about these days.
If you have nuclear power you would also like to slow those neutrons down because the slow
neutrons are more likely to cause fission and so you need something called a moderator
in a power reactor and it's typically water.
And with nuclear power you also want to control so you have some kind of neutron absorber
control rods that you can move in and out of the reactor.
And the end is most of our nuclear fission reactors in the world look something like
this.
Manium and fuel rods, they have control rods that can be moved in and out to absorb neutrons
and control the rate of reaction.
Cold water comes in and either hot water or steam depending on the design comes out and
makes a turbine spin and makes electricity.
That's a nuclear fission reactor.
Many designs throughout the world but the most common ones use ordinary water as both
the moderator and the coolant that carries the heat away from the fission reaction.
Let me just take a few minutes and end by talking about the other way of making nuclear
energy and that's fusion.
That fusion joins light nuclei to make heavier ones releasing energy in the process.
It's what powers the stars.
It's responsible for making most of the elements beyond hydrogen and helium.
As we'll see subsequently it is used in thermonuclear weapons but we haven't yet harnessed it for
energy generation here on earth.
Here's how the sun does it.
The sun fuses protons and makes a sequence of reactions which I'm showing here occur.
Those reactions occur and ultimately the net result is you've taken four protons, four
hydrogen nuclei, added them with two electrons and made a helium four nucleus and a lot of
energy about 27 million electron volts.
So that's how the sun does it and there's a kind of picture of that reaction.
We are in fact made of stardust because fusion in stars more massive than the sun continues.
The sun's going to stop with helium but more massive stars with greater pressure and higher
temperatures continue that process and they forge ever heavier elements up to iron.
So very massive stars have this ring like structure with elements like carbon and silicon and
oxygen in different rings and when those stars go supernova if they do they spew those elements
out into the interstellar medium and by the way during those supernova events some of
them even heavier elements like for example uranium get created and the supernova explosions
spew that material into interstellar space.
They also create these heavier elements and that forms new stars and planets and us.
So we are literally made of stardust.
We're made of materials, the carbon that's essential to life, the oxygen, the silicon,
the all the elements that make up our everyday world silicon is the most second most abundant
element in earth's crust.
These things were all forged in these fusion furnaces in the interiors of long dead massive
stars that went supernova.
We're stardust.
We're still trying to make fusion happen on earth.
The easiest way to make it happen is not with protons but with deuterium and tritium the
two heavier isotopes of hydrogen and we can join them to make helium and a neutron comes
out and a lot of energy and we're trying two ways of doing this.
Magnetic confinement would confine a plasma, a hot ionized gas and a hundred million kelvin's
temperature.
No material substance can maintain that in a so-called magnetic bottle.
We're building this item shown here.
It's called ETER.
It's being built in France and it may operate in about 2022 and if it operates successfully
it will produce more fusion energy than it was put in to make the fusion reactions happen.
But it won't be a fusion reactor or power plant yet.
Lawrence Livermore Laboratory in California.
We have this fusion, this inertial confinement device, a fusion device called the National
Ignition Facility and it blasts tiny deuterium pellets with 192 laser beams and tries to
produce fusion that way.
It's actually a little bit ahead of the game.
It's actually fired its lasers early in 2009 and 2010.
It got going.
It has not produced break-even fusion yet but it may get there before the magnetic confinement
device.
And by the way, we are studying nuclear bomb explosions because these are miniature explosions.
If we succeed in getting nuclear fusion to work, then one gallon of seawater based on
the 1 in 6,500 hydrogen atoms in this deuterium will be the equivalent of 350 gallons of gasoline
in its energy.
And we will have unlimited energy that will last for 25 billion years five times as long
as the sun is going to continue to shine.
So some physicists think this is a boondoggle, we'll never make it work, but it certainly
is an almost inexhaustible energy source if we could get it to work so I think we ought
to be pursuing it.
Well, let me wrap this all up with the summary of this lecture.
We saw the curve of binding energy, that important curve that establishes two ways of getting
energy out of the atomic nucleus, fission and fusion.
Nuclear fission we looked at in some detail, its chain reaction in U-235 and plutonium
239.
We looked at some constraints that the physics places on our nuclear technologies and then
we took a look at fusion in stars, possibly for terrestrial energy production and the
ultimate goal of getting really almost inexhaustible energy from seawater.
