Lecture 6.
Egyptian Creation Stories and Their Meaning
In the last lecture, we considered the beginnings of Egyptian civilization and some of its typical
depictions of the world of the gods.
All of Egyptian religion and its stories refer either directly or indirectly to the
three primary realities of life in ancient Egypt, the sun, the Nile, and the divine pharaoh.
This is particularly true of Egyptian creation stories.
These are as much stories about the establishment of divine order as they are about the creation
of the cosmos.
So in this lecture, we will consider several of the traditional Egyptian creation stories
to see what they have to tell us about the gods and humanity and the nature of the cosmos.
Creation stories tend to follow certain forms and patterns in all ancient religious cultures.
Creation stories fall under the category of cosmogony, that is, accounts of the origins
of the universe or cosmos, and these are not necessarily religious stories.
They may be scientific attempts to explain how things began or mythic attempts to explain
how things began.
Creation stories are clearly mythic accounts of the origins of all things because they
attribute the origins to the work of a god or to the work of several gods and usually
place these creations at some sort of earlier beginning time when conditions were different
and only gradually do things begin to assume the shape that they now take.
In a polytheistic religious culture with many gods, creation stories are usually also stories
about the origins of the gods themselves since the earliest gods are usually identified with
elements of the cosmos and the creation of that cosmic element is also the birth of the
god associated with that cosmic element.
And I would also like to note that the order in which the gods are created does not necessarily
reflect the importance of the gods involved.
In many religious cultures, the earliest elemental gods are of relatively little importance to
the average human being and the later gods are the gods of the political realm who directly
interact with and control human actions and human situations on earth.
This is because for the most part in ancient religious cultures, the initiative for creation
arises more or less spontaneously.
It is a result of certain interactions within pre-mortial matter and there is no particular
intention or direction driving creation, although Egyptian creation mythology is different in
that respect.
Now again, these stories tend to be similar across different religious traditions and within
these different ancient religious traditions in particular, there are four primary means
of creation, basically four ways that things come into being in these creation stories.
These classical mythic cosmogonies usually combine one or two or three, sometimes even
all four of these different forms of creation actions, and they include all different concepts
of the way that the gods exist and the way that creation exists.
The first means of creation is creation by making.
That is a god acting upon some sort of primordial matter in order to make it into the present
creation.
The god acts upon a primal matter that is undifferentiated, it's usually thought of as
being in a state of chaos, all of its elements are scattered and not in any particular order.
So the gods job is to sort out the various elements of matter and bring them into an
ordered creation.
The undifferentiated primordial matter is most often depicted as a sea, and this is
because of the various ancient civilizations we encounter, they generally regard the ocean
as a source of chaos, of the unexpected, of the unmanageable, only a few of the ancient
civilizations of the Mediterranean world were seagulling, and they always regarded
the ocean as a place of chaos, and therefore it makes sense that they think of primordial
chaos in terms of an ocean.
So in these stories where there is an ocean of matter in flux, in constant movement, in
no particular order, with no particular direction, it is the god who brings everything together
to form a stable creation. I suppose we can compare the god to a child with a huge box
of Legos. All the Legos are mixed together, all the different colors, and it's the job
of the child to bring them together to make buildings or trees or little cars or whatever
it is that he makes. In the same way, the creator god who makes creation does so by
bringing order to the chaos of primal matter, and these stories essentially have two components.
They think of the existence of the creator god, and the existence of this primordial
matter that the god uses to make the cosmos.
A second means of creation is creation through conflict, that is specifically conflict between
a creator god and some principle, some personification of chaos. And again, because of the association
of the sea with chaos, most often the chaos monster is some sort of sea monster, a sea
monster that the creator god must subdue and kill for the work of creation to begin. In
fact, what the creator god does is to kill the chaos monster and then somehow use the
body of the monster to create an ordered cosmos. And once again, we have the idea of
the divine power of the creator god imposing order on primal matter, except now thought
of as a monster rather than as an undifferentiated sea of chaos. These sorts of stories, of
course, then postulate a creator god and a chaos monster as primordial beings. They
exist before everything else comes into being.
The third sort of creation is creation through sexual generation. And here obviously a god
and a goddess engage in sexual intercourse, and the goddess subsequently gives birth to
the basic gods of the elements, the elemental gods that make up the basic portion of creation.
Obviously these stories postulate two gods, a god and a goddess. These are the primal parents,
and it is their sexual active generation that brings the rest of creation into being.
And this idea of creation seems to be a more or less inevitable result of conceiving of
the divine world in terms of multiple gods and goddesses who have human forms. If you
have gods and goddesses in human forms, obviously you're going to have gods and goddesses having
sexual intercourse. And if gods and goddesses have sexual intercourse, pretty soon you're
going to have a nursery full of little gods and goddesses running around. It's just the
way that things happen and apparently also happen in the divine world.
The final method of creation in ancient creation mythology and ancient cosmogonies is creation
by word. And this is based on the idea of the spoken word as a means of identifying and
therefore controlling the essence of all things that exist. Stories of creation by word or
by speaking of course require only a single god, a creator god. This creator god gives
voice to ideas that he has conceived in his mind and he brings them into existence by
speaking them. Now it's important to realize that the words breath, wind and spirit are
often conveyed by a single word in ancient languages. That's the case in Hebrew with
the word Ruach and it's the case in Greek with the word Tuma for example. So to the
extent that breath, wind and spirit are conveyed by a single word, we can talk about someone
breathing out a word and therefore giving it spirit and therefore giving it life, bringing
it into being. When the god breathes, he or she also gives divine spirit to what is spoken
and so makes it a substantial reality. So these are the four means of creation. Creation
by making, creation by combat, creation through sexual generation and creation by word. These
four means of creation appear to be common to all ancient Mediterranean religious cultures
and of course the different methods of creation reflect different attitudes towards the god's
creative work. Creation by sexual generation is the creative method that shows the least
intention to create on the god's part because of course they're not necessarily having sexual
intercourse in order to create. They might be doing it for more selfish reasons. Then
probably creation through conflict shows the least intention to create because the primary
concern is not to create but to end the threat imposed by the chaos monster. Both creation
by making and creation by word reveal a very clear intention to create on the part of the
creator god and really the only disagree about the means of creation and how many primordial
beings are involved. So if these are the standard forms of creation in ancient Mediterranean
religious cultures, this means that Egyptian religious culture presents a variation or
actually several variations on these basic ideas. But Egyptian creation mythology is
distinctive in seeing creation as the deliberate work of a god with the intention to create.
Not a spontaneous action, not something that arises by itself out of the inadvertent interaction
of matter as happens in some of the other cultures such as Mesopotamia and in Greece.
Egypt is notable for several different cosmogonies that posit a self-created or self-generated
god who initiates creation with the specific desire to create. Now I should also mention
that in Egypt there are three powers, or if you will, three abilities of the gods that
are necessary for the work of creation. And these three powers necessary for the work
of creation are who, divine utterance, hecca, magic, or divine energy, and sia, divine knowledge.
So in order for a god to do the work of creation that god must have at his or her disposal
who, divine utterance, hecca, magic, or divine energy, and sia, divine knowledge. These of
course are all possessions of the gods at all times. Now there are different methods
of creative action involved in the Heliopolis creation story. This is probably the best
known of the early Egyptian creation stories and focuses on the creator god Atum. Heliopolis
is the Greek name for an Egyptian city which is also known in the Bible as On. The Egyptian
name is Wonoa, I believe, and loosely translates I suppose as Sun City. This was the primary
cultic site for the worship of the sun god Atum as creator. Now before creation what
exists are the dark waters of the limitless depths. So in other words the sea of chaos
if you will. In this case the sea of chaos is known as Nun. It is the limitless depths
of the abyss. And it already exists from the very beginning as a principle of inertia,
of non-existence, of chaos, and all of these ideas are wrapped up together in the concept
of Nun. However, in the midst of Nun there arises the Ben-Ben. The Ben-Ben is a primeval
hill shaped like a pyramid that arises out of the dark waters of Nun. And on this mound
on the Ben-Ben stands the god Atum. Atum is himself self-generated which means that
his existence is dependent on nothing rather than his own self. In this story Atum, his
name means the all or the complete one, in this story Atum is the creative force who
contains within himself the life essence of every other deity that will ever come into
existence. Atum in some way releases the divine life essence within himself and allows it
to enter into Nun. Although how he releases the life essence within himself varies according
to the various different sources. For example, in the pyramid texts from the Old Kingdom,
the process is thought of as a process of spitting. It's a play on words in the Egyptian.
It is said that Atum sputtered out Shu, the god of the air, and spat out Tefnut, moisture.
So he sputters and spits and the god of air and the goddess of moisture come into being.
Elsewhere, the act of creation takes place when Atum commits an act of masturbation.
And this allows his semen to enter into the sea of Nun, the sea of chaos, and through the
matter of his semen he brings order into the inert order of Nun. The undifferentiated mass
of Nun is brought into order by his divine semen just as the undifferentiated mass of
the ovum and the woman is brought into order by the semen of the male.
Now the two elemental gods who are created in this way are Shu, the god of the air, and
Tefnut, the goddess of moisture. They are seen as the necessary elements, the necessary
conditions for all further creation. They are brother and sister, obviously, arising
from a single father, Atum. The brother and sister, Shu and Tefnut, have sexual intercourse,
and Tefnut gives birth to two children, Ged, the god of the earth, and Nut, the goddess
of the sky. In turn, Nut and Ged have sexual intercourse, and Nut gives birth to four children,
Osiris, Isis, Seth, and Nephthys. After she gives birth to these four children, she is
lifted off of her husband and held aloft by her father, Shu, at the command of Atum,
which is why there is air separating the earth, Ged, and the sky, Tefnut.
Now finally, the children of Ged and Nut, Osiris, Isis, Seth, and Nephthys are the gods
of the political order, the gods that have most to do with the situation of human beings
on earth, and they form a link between primeval creation, the cosmos, and the world of human
beings. So that is the story of Heliopolis that centers on creation by the god Atum.
Now we have another creation story, this from the city of Hermopolis, or Himnuah, the city
of Toth. Toth was the god of wisdom and the god of the moon, and this creation story comes
from the middle kingdom and the 12th dynasty. In the Hermopolis myth, the agents of creation
are called the Ogdoad. An Ogdoad is a group of eight. In this case, it is a group of eight
primeval gods who are divided into four pairs of one god and one goddess each. Now initially,
the Ogdoad appear to have existed as entities within the primordial sea, and as a result,
sometimes the gods and goddesses of the Ogdoad are presented as marine animals. You have
the four gods who are presented as frogs and the four goddesses who are presented as snakes.
In any event, the four couples of the Ogdoad are essentially male and female aspects of
the same principles, and their names are variations on each other. The male name and the female
names are variations on each other. So we have, for example, Amun and Almanet, and they represent
the principle of hiddenness or concealed divine power. Then we have the couple Ha and Haulhet,
who represent formlessness, the force of the flood. We have Cook and Kaouket, who represent
darkness. And then finally, Nun and Naunet, who represent the limitless depths of waters,
the abyss of the same principle represented by the primordial sea, Nun. These four couples
together produce an egg, and that egg contains the god who is responsible for the creation
of all other gods, all the other elements, all human beings, and all other creatures
that live on the earth. Originally, the god within the egg produced by the Ogdoad was
probably Toth, since the story comes from Hermopolis, the city of Toth. But in surviving
versions of this creation story, the god is Atum. So here, Atum becomes a part of the
process of creation, rather than the initiator or the instigator of the process of creation.
In some versions of this story, it is Toth, though, who stands on the Benben Mound and
creates the Ogdoad, thereby incorporating certain elements of the Heliopolitan story,
into the myth of Atum. So once again, we have a very similar story, except with some distinct
variations. Another interesting variation on Egyptian creation story comes from Thebes,
the capital of the 12th dynasty of the Middle Kingdom, and this one focuses on a different
god, the god Knoom. Now, Knoom is usually portrayed as a ram, or as a ram-headed man.
And Knoom appears throughout Egyptian mythology as a craftsman, as a builder of ferry boats
and ladders and various other useful things. In the Theben story, Knoom is responsible not
for the creation of the cosmos, like these other stories we've been talking about, but
he is responsible specifically for the creation of human beings. And human beings and their
creation are not really a concern of the other creation stories that we've looked at so far.
This is a topic that most other Egyptian creation stories ignore. In this story, Knoom creates
human beings on a potter's wheel, because he is a craftsman, and creates not only the
outer form of human beings, but also those intricate internal systems that make life
possible. So he takes a great deal of care, and devotes a great deal of attention to making
human beings as properly functioning organisms, as we would put it. So Knoom is in this way
intimately involved with human beings, and with the health of human beings. Incidentally,
Knoom is also a god of the cataract, and as such was believed to control the flooding
of the Nile, so he also is a benefactor of human beings, since it is the flooding of
the Nile that makes the fertility of the Nile Valley possible. In some stories from themes,
Knoom is also responsible for the individual creation of the pharaoh. That is, he makes
the pharaoh as a special individual creation, and does this under the direction of the god
Amun. Now Amun became the dominant god of Egypt during the 500 years of the New Kingdom,
and among his other attributes at that time, he became designated as the transcendent creator.
Now Amun was originally a sun god, but the growth of his cult's power and the influence
of his priests led to an unparalleled primacy of Amun over the other Egyptian gods. Amun's
name means the one who conceals himself, and he was believed to be not only the king of
the gods, but also the divine essence that is present in all the gods. Thereby he makes
all the gods essentially projections or manifestations of Amun himself. Not only is
he the creator of the gods, but he is manifested in all of the gods. Like Atum, Amun is believed
to be self-generated, and he is active in creation as the initiator of the first act,
as the impulse of creative energy that prompts the agdoad into action. And again, this indicates
the conservative nature of Egyptian religion. Amun can be incorporated into creation mythology
only by finding a place for him in an existing myth. Finally, we have an example of creation
by word, and this is found in the creation story of the god Ptah. Now Ptah was worshiped
from the very early dynastic era, but the distinctive character of Ptah as the patron
of artisans, craftsmen and builders only became evident in later history. Ptah was the chief
god of Memphis, and he came to a prominence that was second only to Amun and Rey in the
fourth dynasty, when Memphis became the capital of Egypt. Ptah was usually depicted as a mummified
figure who held a composite scepter that combined the symbols of life, stability and omnipotence,
giving a good indication of the nature of his divine character. In his creation story,
Ptah creates by speaking a word, giving breath and spirit to a divine intellectual process,
soothing what he has conceived into being, speaking his mind and making it a substantial
reality. So Ptah is responsible for the creation of all the other gods as well as their cause,
that is their creative intellectual capacity. So to the extent that the gods and other beings
exhibit creative intelligence, Ptah resides within them and they give voice to Ptah when
they use their creative intelligence. Now Ptah's act of creation is an act not only of the mouth,
but also of the heart. It is an act of the heart as the scene of intellect and the mouth and more
particularly the tongue as the organ of speech and communication. Ptah's mouth,
lips and teeth are identified in one version of this myth with the Ennead, the nine chief gods
who also appear in a cosmogony from Heliopolis. Atum, Shu, Tefnut, Geb, Nut, Osiris, Isis,
Seth and Nethis. Ptah creates Atum and the other gods by speaking their names and this places
him at the very beginning of the creative process. He is sometimes identified with the Ben-Ben mound
of creation where Atum stood to begin his creative work. So again we see how traditional stories
are reiterated and modified with the addition of a new chief creator god. They become agents of
creation only when a place may be found for them in an existing creation story. So despite the fact
that I've talked about several different kinds of Egyptian creation story, there appears to be a
master creation narrative that lies behind most of them, modified to accommodate the different
chief creator gods. So before creation there existed a primordial sea, the dark waters of the
Abyss of Nun. Out of the depths of the waters there arises a mound of earth, the Ben-Ben,
and from this mound the process of creation is initiated by an act of a god or by a group of gods.
The process of creation proceeds from the creation of the elemental gods Shuh and Tefnut
to their sexual generation of Ged and Nutt and the further generation of the gods of the political realm
Osiris, Isis, Seth and Nethis. These four divine couples together with a creator god such as Atum
or Amun form the Ennead, the nine principal gods of Egypt, although in some cases instead of a
creator god the ninth god is the son of Osiris and Isis, the sun god Horus. So the creation of the
cosmos is separated by three generations from the gods who have the most immediate sovereignty
over human beings. There are three generations from creation to the gods who are concerned with
the political and social order of the human world. Although in later versions the creator god is
also often considered the chief god over in the entire cosmos and therefore directly involved
with the doings of human beings and their welfare. You will notice however that within these creation
schemes human beings play little or no part. Most of the creation stories the dominant narrative
is concerned with the creation of the gods and of the elements of the cosmos and not with the
creation of human beings. It is not until the creation story of Canum and to a lesser extent
the creation story of Ptah that we find an interest in the welfare of human beings and
really it's rather strange that there is only this minor interest in human beings from the gods
who are responsible for the existence of all other things. Perhaps that gives us some insight
into the nature of the relationship between the cosmic gods and the vast mass of humanity.
Now in our next session we'll be looking in greater detail at the organization of the
Egyptian pantheon and of the hierarchy that is in place among the gods.
