In our last session, we consider the question, what is religion?
Our working definition includes the idea of the sacred, the systematic unity of both beliefs
and practices, and the community created through those common beliefs and practices.
In this session, we will look at early prehistoric religion and what actions were representative
of humanity's earliest forms of religious expression and behavior.
Of course, the primary problem in investigating prehistoric religion is what constitutes evidence.
We must depend on what is called material culture.
Material culture is the physical remains of prehistoric peoples that have survived to the
present day to be found and analyzed by paleontologists.
So material culture is our major form of evidence for our statements about prehistoric religious
culture, since there is no written documentation.
But still, our theories are largely guesswork.
At the same time, those theories are built to some extent on what we know about characteristic
forms of religious expression of the sort that we've already discussed in our definition
of religion.
We also have evidence for prehistoric religion provided by small groups of people in our
own time who are physically and culturally isolated from the rest of the world.
These are people who live in small, autonomous societies that are generally typified by relatively
unsophisticated technology.
And there was a lot of anthropological research among such groups during the 20th century.
Of course, there are far fewer of them today than there were then.
And this anthropological research has provided a lot of data, very rich data, that sheds
particular light on the primary religious concerns of such people and therefore on the
religious concerns of prehistoric people.
Because those who study prehistoric culture usually assume that isolated, non-agricultural
tribal societies of our own time resemble similar societies among prehistoric humanity
and therefore share similar religious ideas and similar religious behavior.
Now of course religious practice implies that human beings are not independent powers standing
apart from the world in which they live.
Human beings instead are part of the world and subject to the forces at work in the world.
So the religious point of view understands humanity as a part of its environment and
asserts that humanity must live in harmony with its environment.
And at the same time, religion presupposes, or perhaps asserts, that humanity lives in
self-conscious separation from nature, sees itself as somehow different than the nature
that surrounds it.
And this means that human beings may choose how they will relate to their surrounding environment.
And religious cultures assume that those human choices of how to relate to the surrounding
environment have consequences, consequences in terms of benefits or consequences in terms
of punishment.
In other words, human beings find themselves in nature, but distinct from nature.
And so human beings have to decide how to relate to nature in a way that will most benefit
them, that will bring them the greatest happiness, the greatest well-being in the human community.
So the reasoning that lies behind religious activity seems to require an intellectual
capacity more sophisticated than that needed to, say, make tools or to use fire to cook
things or to warm oneself.
The reasoning seems to require a higher intellectual capacity.
As a result, we do not know which of the earliest human species was the first to think religiously,
to think in terms of this self-conscious separation from nature and the choices that need to be
made to get along with or relate to nature.
What we have is what material culture has left to us.
We only have what material culture has been found and what that material culture indicates
about religious actions and yearnings among those early human beings who created it.
Now the prehistoric era begins with the first appearance of pre-human species during the
period called the Stone Age.
So named, of course, after the primary material used for tools.
The earliest Stone Age period is also the longest, the Paleolithic or Old Stone Age.
The Old Stone Age lasted from about two million years ago to about 17,000 BCE before the common
era.
And the Stone Age is further divided into the Lower Stone Age, the earliest period,
the Middle Stone Age and the Upper Stone Age, the most recent period of the Old Stone Age.
Throughout the Old Stone Age, pre-humans and humans lived in small nomadic family groups
or small nomadic tribal groups and they gained their food by hunting and by gathering, by
hunting animals for meat and gathering nuts and berries and so on for other kinds of food.
Their material culture that has been discovered by Paleontologists is composed primarily of
crudely worked flint tools, hence the term Stone Age because their tools were made from
stone.
A single form of material culture was widespread throughout both Europe and Asia and remained
essentially unchanged for hundreds of thousands of years.
So we're talking about a very stable and about a very mildly developed form of material
culture here.
Discoveries of material culture have been made in open ground, but far more often they
are found in caves that were used as shelters over many centuries, hence the popular term
caveman and cavewoman, referring to people of the Old Stone Age.
Now the Mesolithic era, or Middle Stone Age, followed the Old Stone Age and lasted from
about 17,000 BCE to around 8,300 BCE.
And the Middle Stone Age saw a gradual shift from nomadic life based on hunting to a settled
village life based primarily on the cultivation of crops and the domestication of animals.
So there is a piece of change and development that is much faster in the Middle Stone Age
than it was in the Old Stone Age, and that pace accelerates further in the Neolithic
era or the New Stone Age, which lasted from about 8,300 BCE to about 4,000 BCE and ends
with the development of early city life, involvement in hunting and agriculture, and the beginnings
of written language.
Now going back to the Old Stone Age.
Our earliest evidence for religious behavior among early human beings is based on burial
customs and the artifacts found in cave dwellings dating from the Old Stone Age.
So the earliest indications of religious behavior are found among the Neanderthals.
Neanderthals are an early form of human being who flourished between about 100,000 to about
30,000 years ago during the Paleolithic or Old Stone Age.
Neanderthals buried their dead very carefully and they provided them in their graves with
the food and the implements of daily life.
Sometimes they would remove the brains from human skulls and collect human skulls apart
from the other bones of the human body.
Now this later practice, this last practice of removing the brains and collecting the skulls
separately suggests cannibalism.
Probably this cannibalism was carried out for spiritual benefits as the skills and virtues
of the deceased were believed to be inherited by those who ate the brains.
This seems like a rather unusual assumption except this practice is also testified to
in some isolated cultures during the 20th century.
So there we have a modern counterpart to what we assume was an ancient practice based on
a particular form of material culture, that is skulls with a section of the back removed
so that the brain could be extricated and eaten.
Now Neanderthals also preserved the skulls and some of the bones of cave bears and they
would place them in their caves on platforms or in shelves or in niches, that is in particular
outcroppings of rock that provided a special isolated place for the bones of the bear.
And this practice we assume, although we may be wrong, represents a form of veneration
for a bear spirit.
In other words, some recognition that there is an essential unity among all the bears
that needs to be venerated as a result of living in harmony with the animals that the
cave people depended upon.
Or it may be that the collection of the bones of the bears were a means of offering to the
bear spirit some sort of recompense to make up for the offence of having killed an individual
bear and thereby diminishing the bear spirit to that extent.
Or it may be that the collection of these cave bear bones represents a form of hunting
magic, the idea that what happens to a representation of an animal can forecast and bring about
what happens to an actual representative animal of the same sort.
So that if you could thrust your spirit at the bones of the cave bear, that would mean
that you would have a successful hunt of an actual cave bear.
The trouble, of course, is finding or isolating a particular religious rationale for these
kinds of practices.
And generally speaking, the primary problem in the study of prehistoric religion and
prehistoric culture in general is trying to discover the religious or practical rationale
for a practice that is tested to by physical remains.
In other words, not so much a matter of evidence as the proper interpretation of the evidence.
And of course, because of the nature of the sources, all interpretations of evidence remain
provisional and only conjectural.
Now, remains of early human beings dating from the upper Paleolithic era, which is to
say 30,000 to 10,000 years ago, show a type of religious life similar to that of Neanderthals
during the middle Paleolithic era, that is 70,000 to 30,000 years ago.
So the Neanderthals establish a practice which they carry out and then is more or less continuous
and similar to the practices of later human beings.
While the later human beings in the upper Paleolithic era tend to express those ideas
in more sophisticated forms.
Now the material culture of the middle Paleolithic period, the middle old, the middle old stone
age, is called musterion.
The term musterion comes after the site in France where this culture was first discovered.
And this material culture was relatively uniform throughout the Mediterranean basin from Europe
to the Near East to Africa.
So once again, we have a fairly homogenous, widely spread form of material culture attested
to in a number of different places.
Now the remains of human beings from this era share with the Neanderthals a concern with
proper treatment of the dead.
There is at least some partial expectation, some partial evidence that this treatment
of the dead has religious intentions and religious motivations.
So during the middle Paleolithic era, we find that early human beings are burying their
dead with the body carefully laid on its side, on its face, or on its back, but usually
with the body pulled up into a contracted position, similar to a fetal position, perhaps
reasoning that someone should leave the world or enter the next life in the same way that
they entered the world or entered this life in the contracted fetal position.
Burials were often made during the middle Paleolithic era in the cave where the group
lived, or perhaps in another cave nearby.
There seems to be some concern with maintaining spatial ties between the deceased and the
living survivors, that is of having both the deceased and the living sharing the same neighborhood,
you might say.
Bodies were generally buried under a stone slab, and the burials themselves included
ornaments with the body, provision of stone tools, food, and weapons.
And occasionally, we find burials during the middle Paleolithic era in groups, and some
of the bones of the deceased show traces of red ochre, that is iron oxide.
Now this may indicate that survivors held communion meals at the site, and would pour
red ochre, which was symbolic of the power of blood and the power of life, over the body
and then later over the bones of the deceased.
And there seems to be a clear intention to make the dead happy in the afterlife.
Presumably if you make the dead happy in the afterlife, they will not try to come back
and return to their place in the land of the living.
So these burials seem to indicate a belief in some sort of existence after death.
Maybe we shouldn't call it life after death, but the continued existence of the essential
person after death.
These burials also give some evidence of fear and awe of the dead, and of course that's
a fear and an awe that we as moderns can generally identify with, because so much of our horror
literature is based on the idea of the dead coming back, and they're not happy with us.
Now in the upper Paleolithic era, the upper Old Stone Age, this is a period that extends
from about 30,000 to about 10,000 years ago.
We find some major changes in the way human beings lived, and the way that human beings
expressed themselves, and these forms of expression often appear to indicate religious
beliefs and religious activities.
Now here we're talking about modern human beings, our own species, Homo sapiens.
And early Homo sapiens in Europe painted the walls of caves, and it's often assumed they
did so with a magical intention, or a religious intention, assuming that we can distinguish
between the two.
And they also molded clay figures, and they carved representations of human beings and
animals out of antlers.
Now cave paintings are often found in almost inaccessible parts of the caves that early
Homo sapiens inhabited, away from the portion that was used by the group, and this seems
to be a sign of their symbolic importance.
Since they're isolated sections of the caves, the paintings might indicate a designation
of sacred space, a space that was reserved for only certain members of the tribe or certain
members of the family, and it had to be hard to get there.
There are some cave paintings that show composite animal and human figures, and often these
composite animal and human figures are interpreted as representing shamans, or medicine men,
and shamans were people who communed with the spirit world in a trance to benefit the
tribe by bringing gifts down from the spiritual world.
And they exist as a middle element between human beings and the spirits, and to a lesser
extent between human beings and animals, because of course the animals also had the representatives
in the spiritual world.
Then we also find depictions not only of human beings and of shamans, but of animals in cave
paintings.
There may be some sort of link to sympathetic magic, again the idea that what happens to
an image will happen to the animal it represents.
And sometimes we find cave paintings where the animals have multiple legs, perhaps intended
to represent the motion of running, and often with a number of perforations either painted
on or actually made into the cave wall, indicating that this animal has been struck many times
and will soon die.
It is also in the Upper Paleolithic Era that we first find exaggerated female human figurines
made of clay.
These seem to be associated with fertility rites perhaps, or some sort of cult mother,
a human cult mother, or a divine mother of some sort.
A primary and very well known example of these sorts of female figurines is the so called
Venus of Villendorf.
This is a clay figure shown with a downcast head, very tightly curled hair, with very
exaggerated breasts, belly, and buttocks.
And these features all suggest pregnancy.
And she only has very rudimentary arms and pointed feet so that the other features stand
up by contrast.
And the pointed feet on the figures suggest they might have been placed upright in the
ground to provide the opportunity for worship wherever a person happened to be, wherever
they travel they could stick the figure into the ground and use that as the center of their
worship activities.
Now generally speaking, hunter-gatherers were not usually concerned with human fertility,
because of course the more people, the more you have to hunt, and the more you have to
gather.
So it seems more likely that these sort of exaggerated female clay figurines represent
a cult mother of some sort.
And the abundance and the stereotype nature of these very carefully made figures indicates
some awareness of the full range of human life, from birth all the way through death.
Now the end of the old stone age is marked on the one hand by substantial climate changes,
and on the other by a revolution in material culture.
And this revolution in material culture indicates new forms of economic activity, and new sorts
of social units.
Human manufacture now extended from tools and hunting implements to address other human
needs.
It's during this time that the first human main dwellings, tents and huts, seemed to
have appeared.
And figurines indicate that human beings began to wear clothing during this period.
And so it should not surprise us that the end of the Paleolithic era, the old stone
age, leads to substantial changes in human religious activities to address the changes
in how people live.
And in fact, religious culture during the Middle Stone Age reflects major changes in
human lives.
The Middle Stone Age, the Mesolithic era, extends from about 17,000 BCE to 8,300 BCE,
and begins after the last Ice Age.
This was a period that began with nomadic life based in hunting and foraging, and ended
in the beginning of settled life based primarily on the elementary cultivation of crops.
Food that was supplied by nomadic hunting bans, armed with spears, was supplemented
more and more by wild grains, by berries, and by nuts gathered and prepared primarily
by women.
Fishing with bone hooks or with nets, hunting now with bow and arrow, made the supply of
meat much more dependable.
And because the supply of food was more dependable, people began to settle into permanent villages
and had the opportunity to begin to cultivate crops of their own.
Now in Syria-Palestine, in the Near East, the Mesolithic era, the Middle Stone Age,
is represented by what is called Natufian culture.
Natufian culture is named after Wadi N. Natuf, which is located between Jerusalem and Tel Aviv,
and again is the first place that this culture was discovered.
Natufians in Syria-Palestine lived in caves or in settlements, most often near marshes
or rivers or lakes.
And most sites they occupied show continued occupation throughout the Mesolithic era,
so they weren't moving around a great deal, and once a good habitation was found, people
used it for decades and centuries.
Natufian settlements are most often in open ground, and there's evidence that huts were
built on stone foundations.
They used bone tools, they used mortars and pestles, and they manufactured what are called
microliths, that is very small flint tools that were used for variety of purposes.
And Natufian economy was mixed on the basis of the evidence.
It depended on the one hand on hunting and fishing, but also on collecting shellfish
and gathering fruits and nuts, and included some elementary cultivation of crops.
And Natufian culture also shows an interest in art for its own sake for the first time,
and there are a variety of household items such as beads and shells decorated with designs
that show just an interest in design, an interest in some sort of pleasant thing to look at.
Perhaps most interesting to us is that Natufian culture is represented at the earlier levels
of the city of Jericho in Syria, Palestine, famous for a much later battle there, under
Joshua of course, but Jericho is one of the most ancient cities in the Mediterranean world,
with its beginning sometime around 10,000 BCE, far earlier than any of the other cities.
Now religious ideas that grew during the Middle Stone Age seem to include concern for the
fertility of the earth and crops because of the new cultivation of crops from the earth,
and this concern is represented in naturalistic art objects made of clay, or of bone, or of
horn.
And the fertility of the earth is now represented by the mother goddess, perhaps because the
earth itself is now regarded as a fertile woman who provides for her children by providing
many crops.
And various manifestations of the natural world, sun, moon, trees, mountains, things
like that, these were now often the objects of worship represented in religious art.
At the same time, objects made by human skill that were especially important to life, such
as axes and spears, were also venerated.
They were venerated for the spiritual power they possessed that made them useful for humanity,
and these sorts of human manufactured items that carry spiritual power are known as fetishes,
so there's a certain amount of fetish worship apparently at this point in the Middle Stone
Age.
And once again, we have the evidence of burials, and burials once again became more elaborate.
Bodies have been found from the Middle Stone Age buried in groups, for example in a plastered
stone circle some 16 feet across, and this indicates secondary burial, that is the exhumation
and reburial of a body after some decomposition has taken place, and this practice probably
indicates some sort of religious motivation, although we don't know what it was.
And again, bodies were buried in the fetal position, now often adorned with beads or
shells showing the same kind of artistic interest as other beads and shells found from the Middle
Stone Age.
So again, in the Middle Stone Age, we see the same religious impulses at work that were
typical of the Old Stone Age.
There is the desire to establish harmony and equilibrium.
This goes back to what I said earlier about how human beings choose how they live in relation
to the nature that surrounds them.
The choice seems to be aimed at gaining benefits and welfare for human beings, and in order
to gain benefits and good welfare for human beings, it is necessary to establish some sort
of balance between the human world and the natural world that surrounds it, if you will,
the world of human beings and the world of spirits.
That social harmony, that social equilibrium that was believed to be necessary for proper
social interactions between human beings, was also believed to be necessary for proper
social balance and social interactions between human beings and the spirit world.
So there is this desire that was probably present also in prehistoric social dynamics
to establish harmony, balance, equilibrium.
This represents a recognition of the interrelatedness of all forms of life, not only human, but
also animal, and of course spiritual or divine.
As I've said, there may be indications that prehistoric peoples venerated the spirits
of the animals they hunted and ate to sustain themselves, and the veneration of the spirits
of hunted animals, and the symbols of fertility, such as the female figurines we find in such
abundance, point to a desire to compensate the sources of food and human well-being for
the benefits they bestowed upon human beings, again establishing a mutually beneficial relationship.
And there is a similar kind of desire for harmony between the living and the dead.
The dead do remain part of the living community, but attempts are made to keep them happy in
their new situation, to make them comfortable in the new sort of life they are living elsewhere,
so they will have no desire to come back and rejoin the living.
These same ideas of harmony and equilibrium may have also extended to the unseen forces
that determine the circumstances of human life, but of this, of course, we cannot be sure.
Now in our next session, we will move on to the great revolution in the human way of
life represented by the New Stone Age, and an acceleration of cultural change that ultimately
results in the beginnings of the first great civilizations of the ancient Mediterranean
world, Egypt and Mesopotamia.
