Lecture 11, Egypt, Religion in Everyday Life
In our last lecture, we discussed Egyptian goddesses, paying particular attention to
their attributes and traits and some of their mythology, trying to discern Egyptian ideas
about what we might call the divine feminine.
In this lecture, we will turn our attention to how devotion to these goddesses, and to
the gods, and religious sentiments in general, found expression in everyday life in Egypt.
Basically, we can divide religious actions in Egypt down to official religious actions
and popular religious actions, and I'll deal first with official religious actions.
Official Egyptian religious culture was centered on temple worship, and temple worship was
always carried out in the name of the pharaoh.
The concerns of official Egyptian religious culture are expressed in cult, that is, in
actions of ritual worship.
In Egypt, the focus of cultic worship was not only gods, but also living kings, sacred
animals, and the dead, especially those dead who were venerated as special heroes.
Although the pharaoh was officially the chief cultic official of the nation, in fact, most
of the works of worship were carried out by hereditary or appointed priests who conducted
worship on the pharaoh's behalf, and they did this both in temples and in other sacred
spaces.
The temple would be surrounded and supported by an estate.
The temple estate provided everything necessary to support the worship at the temple, which
takes in a great deal, in fact.
This would include agricultural land, pens for sacrificial animals, and housing for the
cultic personnel who served at the temple and in the temple estate.
There were two orders of priests who were responsible for different aspects of worship.
The higher order of priests performed the rituals that focused on caring for the cultic
image of the god in the temple.
They were responsible for interpreting oracles or prophetic messages that might be received
from the god.
The lower order of priests were responsible for supervising the craftsmen and the servants
of the temple estate.
They carried the shrine that contained the god's image during rituals, and they poured
out water offerings and performed other duties in the temple.
There were, in addition to these two orders of priests, other cultic functionaries, and
there were also musicians, singers, and dancers, both men and women, who had their place and
their proper duties in the temple.
After the Old Kingdom, only men served as priests, although women might serve in other
functions within the temple estate.
The main temple ritual would take place in the morning and coincided with the dawn, considered
as the rebirth of the sun god.
At dawn, the priest of the temple would unlock and open the doors of the temple, just at
the moment that the sun rose.
The temple would be purified with water and incense.
This was in preparation for the opening of the door to the god's shrine.
After the purification, the doors of the god's shrine were then opened, and the cultic statue
that represented the god of the temple was removed.
Now, although we are used to seeing colossal representations of the pharaohs and the gods
in ancient Egyptian remains, most of the cultic statues were themselves relatively small,
around two feet tall on average, and they might be made of stone, of wood, or of metal.
The statue in the shrine of the god, representing the god, was not only a representation, but
also a dwelling that is a dwelling for the Ba and the Ka of the god.
In this case, we can say the dwelling for the presence and the active consciousness of
the god in his temple.
The cult statue would be stripped of the previous day's clothing, while the shrine itself was
washed and purified.
The statue was then decorated and anointed with oil, and then it would be dressed again
in fresh ceremonial clothing, and invested once again with the symbols of its divine
power.
During this ritual, the cultic statue was also presented with the day's offerings.
This provided an opportunity for the statue to partake of the spiritual essence of the
food, as the Ka of the god within the statue partakes of the Ka of the food.
At the end of the ceremony, the priest replaced the cultic statue in its shrine, and shut
the doors of the shrine, and then left the temple, while the chief priest closed and
locked the doors behind them, bringing the ceremony to an end for that day.
So in addition to this primary daily ritual, there were other rituals that were commonly
performed as well, not only in temples, but in other sacred spaces.
Other temple rituals were typically conducted during different times of day.
Mostly they were aimed at purifying the god's shrine, or during the night, they were used
to drive away the threats of the forces of chaos.
Offerings were also celebrated in honor of the divine pharaoh, and this would happen
both during the pharaoh's life on earth, and after his death.
After his death, offerings were made to the divine pharaoh in temples that formed part
of his tomb complex, so there was worship of the departed spirit of the pharaoh taking
place in the tomb, in which his body resided.
There were also funerary cults to provide offerings for all the dead who had been prepared
to enter the afterlife, of course through that process we've discussed earlier of mummification
and the ceremony of the opening of the mouth, so all those dead who are now believed to
reside in the kingdom of Osiris also received the offerings of the funerary cult.
The Egyptians also devoted cults to animals, but the animals not as themselves, or even
as part of the natural world, but the animals filling essentially the same function as the
cultic statue.
That is, the animals served as manifestations and abodes for the Ba and the Ka of the god
they represented, that is they represented the presence and the active consciousness
of the gods to whom they were sacred.
So temple animals were carefully chosen, they had to be without blemish, they had to be
perfect representations of their type, and they were housed and maintained on the temple
estate.
They were carefully chosen to be honored as manifestations of the god, and they were
believed to be able to give oracles themselves, that is prophetic insights on the gods behalf.
They and other animals of the same species were kept in the temple estate in honor of
the god, and at death these animals were mummified and presented in the temple as votive offerings,
that is signs of devotion and respect.
Away from the temple estate, other animals who were members of the same species that
were sacred to the gods were kept in homes and honored as the gods representatives,
and when they died they were buried.
Middle Egyptian religion also included a variety of festivals that honored Pharaoh or honored
the gods, and this provided opportunities for common people to have some fleeting contact
with these sources of divine power, either the Pharaoh or the cultic statue of the various
gods.
The Pharaoh played the leading role in several annual festivals, particularly of course those
that involved his own royal authority, but he was also actively involved in ceremonies
and festivals that celebrated the seasonal fertility and well-being of the land.
A major recurring feature of annual and seasonal festivals also is the transportation of the
cultic statue of a god in a bark, that is in a boat-shaped shrine, from its own temple
to the temple of another god in another location.
This would take place for a specified length of time, and then later the cultic statue
would be returned to its own temple, and we've seen an example of this already in the case
of Hothor, who visits her husband Horus at his temple for a specified time, and then
returns to her own temple.
The transportation of the bark, that boat-shaped shrine that contains the cultic statue, was
one of the few occasions when the temple gods, or at least their shrines, were visible to
the majority of the Egyptian people.
Over time, and especially during the New Kingdom, festivals became an occasion for outpouring
of public religious sentiment, something that was not particularly valued or called for
earlier in Egyptian history.
But public religious sentiment was expressed increasingly from the New Kingdom, as whole
villages would turn out to see the divine procession of the gods' bark as part of this
seasonal festival.
Any kind of close contact with the gods, or with the representations of the gods in their
cultic statues, were extremely rare for the average person.
And we have instances of monuments that commemorate the lives of private individuals, and these
monuments mention that the deceased attended a sacred festival of this kind.
So this was an event that would stand out in your entire life as you come within the
proximity of a representation of one of the gods.
The appearance of the god outside the precincts of the temple estate also provided an opportunity
for the average person to procure oracles, that is, again, prophetic insights.
Usually understood as a yes or no reply from the god in response to a query.
Festivals provided one of the very few opportunities for an encounter between the official religion
of the elite of the nation and the popular religion of the common people.
In fact, for all of the information that is available to us about the religious culture
of ancient Egypt, almost all of it focuses on the official expression of Egyptian religion.
And it is very difficult for us today to reconstruct religious culture among the common people
in ancient Egypt.
So we have abundant resources over many centuries for the official religious culture of Egypt,
but far fewer sources for what we might call popular religion, the religion of the common
people.
And of course, this gives us a rather lopsided view of the subject.
The ruling elite, the literate administrators who made up the royal bureaucracy, they made
up with their families only a very small percentage of the population of the Egyptian kingdoms.
The life of most Egyptians was very different from the life of this elite.
Most Egyptians made their living by manual labor, and that manual labor was often degrading
or grueling, unpleasant, unhealthy, and apparently unending.
For the mass of ancient Egyptians, life was a constant process of loss.
Loss from illness, loss from accident, loss from mutilation, loss from poor nutrition,
loss from mental disorder, and the final loss of early death.
So the gods of the greatest interests of the common Egyptians were the gods who could
help them, the ones who could make their burdens lighter and protect them from these constant
losses of life.
Any religious action that the common people initiated was most likely a response to some
sort of misfortune they had suffered, or perhaps an attempt to gain protection from the gods
against more misfortunes in the future.
Now the common people of ancient Egypt, as far as we can tell, recognized and invoked
the major gods of the national cults, but they did so only in cases where they believed
that the god would hear their concerns and listen to their prayers, in other words where
the god had a reputation for lending an ear to the common people.
For example, both Amun and Ptah were said to hear common people's prayers.
Amun had a temple at Karnak, which included a chapel of the hearing ear, and this dates
from the reign of Ramses II, whose dates are 1279-1213 BCE, long-lived and famous pharaoh
of Egypt.
And Amun's temple at Karnak also included a courtyard where people could gather to pray
in the vicinity of the temple with the expectation that the god might hear them.
In fact, we find instances where walls or monuments devoted to a god are engraved with
ears, in other words with a graphic symbol of the god's willingness to hear and to listen
and to respond to the prayers of common people.
In one temple built during the reign of Ramses III, whose dates are 1186-1155 BCE, there
is an image of Ptah who hears prayer, again with that emphasis of Ptah's willingness
to listen and to respond to the average person's concerns.
Generally, there appears to be an increase in the expression of personal piety during
the New Kingdom, and that's in the period between about 1540 BCE and 1075 BCE.
And this appears to reflect a belief in a more universal accessibility to the gods,
in other words the belief that religion was not only for the high and mighty, not only
for the pharaoh and the elite of the nation, but for all people.
During the New Kingdom, we therefore also find an increase in devotional items in the
homes of common people.
These devotional items take on a number of forms, but most commonly, they are small votive
images of the gods themselves, and sometimes small monument stones that commemorate particular
gods and particular occasions.
Now the primary religious activity of common people in ancient Egypt through most of its
history seem to have focused on what we might style magical practices and magical rituals.
Now magic in our culture carries a certain taint of illegitimacy.
It's something that stands in contrast to religious action and religious practice.
It is sometimes forbidden, sometimes seen as being not appropriate as a response to
the power of the gods.
But in ancient Egypt, magic was part of the divine panoply of power as we've seen specifically
in the case of Isis.
Isis is a goddess who controls many spells and is a mistress of magic.
Spells would be invoked by people in ancient Egypt to subdue the powers of chaos and to
otherwise maintain the divine equilibrium that imposed Ma'at, that is divine order cosmic
harmony.
What we would identify or might identify as magical practices stood alongside other more
practical ways of interacting with the physical world.
A great example of this is in medical procedures.
In some cases, a spell alone was considered a sufficient response to an illness.
You said the spell and eventually that would cure the illness.
Of course, this was most effective with human ills that are resolved spontaneously like
flus and cold.
In other cases, such as a broken bone, which of course will not heal very well spontaneously,
a spell would be said to accompany a specific practical procedure.
So as the surgeon set and bound the bone, he would also say a magical spell to ensure
the efficacy of the treatment.
So the spell and the practical treatment went together.
The two forms of treatment, magical and practical, were complementary and they were carried out
by the same practitioner at more or less the same time because the practitioner learned
both forms of treatment in the context of his medical education.
Nowadays when doctors pray during a medical procedure, they're not usually doing it because
it's part of their medical education.
But probably the most common form of magical protection was the amulet.
The amulet is a small object that has the power to drive away malevolent forces.
These were used not only by living human beings, but also by the gods.
The gods would protect themselves with amulets.
And amulets were very often included in the funerary wrappings of the dead and their mummies.
Other forms of piety and religious activity among the common people focused on gaining
insight into a problem or gaining foresight into the future from the perspective of the
gods.
So one reason, as I've indicated, why a person might visit a temple or might attend a religious
festival was the opportunity it provided to obtain an oracle.
That is, a divine insight or a prophetic answer to a question.
Question would usually be put in a yes or no form.
So at a temple, an oracle might be obtained from a sacred temple animal.
A situation or a query might be placed that demanded a yes or no response.
And the sacred temple animal would respond yes or no by the stall that it chose to enter.
Similarly, during a religious procession, a query might be placed in a yes or no format
and an answer obtained from the god by the forward or backward movement of a cultic statue
within its bark.
And therefore the person would have this prophetic insight, this oracle that told it
yes or no.
And as we'll see, the most common oracular answer, that is the most common answer from
a spokesperson for a god who is a prophet or an oracle, or some manipulation of items
that are sacred to a god, the most common reply is yes or no.
And this is repeatedly the kind of prophetic insight we see being gained by devotees in
the ancient world.
There were other ways of gaining messages from the gods, however.
For example, the gods or other supernatural sources might also convey a message through
a portentous dream.
And that dream would usually require interpretation, a practice that has its own parallels in
our own day.
We see this happening, for example, in the biblical story of Joseph, who interprets dreams
that are received by the Egyptian pharaoh.
Not an Egyptian story, of course, but one that takes place within the Egyptian context
and does reflect the common Egyptian practice.
If one could not obtain an oracle from a god or from a sacred animal, and one received
no portentous dreams, there was also the possibility of consulting a wise woman.
And a wise woman would be a female seer who had a gift of insight, usually a spiritual
gift as a means of gaining insight or foresight.
Or possibly a questioner might resort to several different methods in order to gain
some sort of comprehensive reply to the questions that were plaguing him or her.
So we find essentially two different forms of religious practice in ancient Egyptian
religious culture.
One is the face of the official religious culture.
It was centered at the temple and the temple estate, or centered in the tomb.
It was dependent on the divine pharaoh's power to impose order on the cosmos and represented
the serene and continual interaction between the gods and humanity.
The other face is the face of popular religious culture, and this sought the intercession
of the gods through prayers and votive offerings trying to gain their attention and their favor.
But it was primarily concerned with divine responses to the inevitable losses of a difficult
life and protection against future events.
Although one of these faces is far more prominent in the parts of Egyptian culture that come
down to us, and the other is essentially hidden, they both represent the spirit of Egyptian
religion as it was experienced by its devotees.
Now we have a narrative expression of this same concern, this same spirit in everyday
Egyptian life in a story called The Tale of Sinuwe.
The Tale of Sinuwe is the story of a courtier who leaves Egypt in the fear of a coup, and
then he spends many years living in Syria, Palestine, before eventually returning to
Egypt.
The story is set in the Middle Kingdom at the beginning of Dynasty XII.
It begins with the death of the first dynast of Dynasty XII, Amenemhet I in 1909 BCE.
He's killed as a result of a political coup.
Sinuwe, who is a harem official, sees strife coming for the nation, he sees upset in the
court, and he fears for his life.
So he flees from Egypt and enters Syria, Palestine.
In Syria, Palestine, he is made welcome by a Bedouin chieftain who is friendly to Egypt
and to Egyptians.
And through the patronage of this Bedouin chieftain, Sinuwe becomes one of several native Egyptians
who serve the ruler of a territory that the story calls Upper Retinue.
And the chieftain of this area, the ruler of Upper Retinue, also gives one of his daughters
to Sinuwe as a wife.
So we have here an interesting parallel to the story of Moses.
You have someone who leaves Egypt, enters a territory that is overseen by nomadic tribesmen,
ingratiates himself with the leader, and marries one of the native women as a wife.
So Sinuwe becomes an official in service to the ruler of Upper Retinue.
And the Lord of Retinue gives Sinuwe authority over a district of his domain called Yah.
And here Sinuwe lives happily for many years with his wife and the sons that she gives
birth to over the course of the years.
Ultimately, Sinuwe is summoned back to Egypt.
In fact, there was no great upheaval after the death of Eminemhet.
And he, that is Sinuwe, is summoned back to Egypt by Eminemhet's son, Senwosret I.
Senwosret was able to succeed his father after suppressing the coup against him.
So at the end of the story, Sinuwe returns to Egypt.
And there he is greatly honored by the Pharaoh and the Pharaoh's family.
And Sinuwe lives out the rest of his days happily in his native land, enjoying the benevolence
of the divine Pharaoh.
Now the tale of Sinuwe is most likely entirely a fictional work, although it has an historical
setting.
But it does provide a vivid portrait of the attitudes, the aspirations, and we may say
the yearnings of an Egyptian official of its time.
Most notable among these attitudes, aspirations, and yearnings are those that focus on the
Pharaoh.
The tale of Sinuwe presents the Pharaoh as a divine figure who is at once the source of
all blessings for his subjects, as well as the sum of all virtues.
Sinuwe praises Senwosret as a God indeed, without an equal, Lord of wisdom, wise in
counsel.
So the Pharaoh is both a God himself, but also the God's gift to Egypt.
The Pharaoh is depicted as fierce in battle and is easily able to scatter his enemies.
But he is beloved by his own people who take joy in his rule, and he assures many children
for his subjects, an interesting connection between the Pharaoh and the fertility of his
subjects.
Throughout the story, interestingly enough, Sinuwe repeatedly refers to God in the singular,
but he also prominently mentions the many gods and goddesses of the Egyptian pantheon.
Now references to the one God appear mostly in the context of the divine influence that
seems to guide and protect Sinuwe.
So this may indicate the God who is Sinuwe's protective deity, although it's not clear
what God that might be.
References to the other gods appear in blessings and references to people, places and events
in Egypt that are under the protection or the patronage of particular gods.
What is especially striking for us in this story, however, is Sinuwe's continual longing
for his home, for the gods and goddesses, the rulers and the people, the customs and
the comforts of Egypt.
Although he finds a home and prosperity among the Bedouins in Syria Palestine, this description
of their way of life reflects what appears to be a characteristic Egyptian disdain for
their uncivilized ways.
We find this especially so when Sinuwe returns to the comforts of Egypt.
He says, I bequeath the sand to those who lived in it and the oil of the tree to him
who smelled of it.
For Sinuwe, Egypt is home.
The pharaoh is the gods intended master of the whole earth.
Egypt's customs and comforts are the best that the entire world has to offer.
For Sinuwe, as for Dorothy and Toto, there is no place like home.
For Sinuwe, as a court official, this seems to reflect a larger attitude that was characteristic
of the ancient Egyptians.
We find a strong love for country, a strong regard for the king as the divine protector
of the nation.
We find a strong love for the gods as the protectors and almost the family of Egypt.
The story reflects the spirit of Egyptian religion, most probably as it was experienced
by all of Egypt's people, both the high and the low, and reflects something of that devotion
that is also reflected in the spectacular monuments of official Egyptian religious culture.
In our next lecture, we will conclude our examination of Egyptian religious culture
with a discussion of its literature of spiritual instruction, which provides our earliest example
of the Mediterranean world's wisdom tradition.
