Lecture 20 The Gods of Syria-Palestine
In our last session, we considered three different traditional conceptions of the nature of the
divine world, polytheism, henotheism, and monotheism. Polytheism posits a multitude of
gods of greater and lesser power arranged in a hierarchy with an abstract principle such as
fate determining the course of events. Henotheism restricts its worship to a single god among the
many gods that exist, with that god serving as the worshipper's defender and advocate in the
divine world. Monotheism posits one and only one god, the one true god for all people.
We will try to keep these conceptions in mind as we begin our discussion of the religious
cultures of Syria-Palestine, including the evolving faith of ancient Israel.
Now in our discussions of the religious cultures of Egypt and Mesopotamia,
we saw how geographical setting influenced the development of their distinctive religious
cultures. The relatively secure and isolated situation of Egypt in a fertile valley surrounded
by desert produced a serene religion with hopes of a blessed afterlife. But it also produced
an underlying sense of the threat of chaos, and this was kept in check only by the power of the
gods and the authority of the divine pharaoh. The place of Mesopotamia at the crossroads of Asia
and the Near East produced a sense of the precariousness of human life. The gods were
thought to be generally indifferent or even hostile to their human subjects, and the human
subjects served the gods in some hope of earthly blessings. In spite of this, that is this difference
between Egypt's geographical situation and that of Mesopotamia. We found similarities between these
two polytheistic systems, including the centrality of the king in human relationships with the
divine, temple practices, wisdom traditions, and certain recurring aspects of their mythological
traditions. These similarities seem to reflect more or less universal concerns in the ancient
Mediterranean world, and they also seem to be more or less universal responses with religious
experience that will resonate also in the religions of Syria, Palestine, and other religious cultures
we will consider. Now, the area of Syria, Palestine comprises the western arm of the
fertile crescent, and it extends from western Mesopotamia to the northern Sinai Peninsula.
So Syria, Palestine lies to the east of the Mediterranean Sea and west of the Arabian desert,
creating a relatively narrow strip of land, a fertile land suitable for cultivation and
settlement between the sea on the one hand and the Arabian desert on the other.
As a result, Syria, Palestine is also the natural passage between the territory of Egypt
and the territory of Mesopotamia. And of course, these were the two great ancient centers of
Near Eastern Empire. So most of the history of Syria, Palestine in both ancient and modern times
has been a history of warfare and conquest. Palestine's relatively small area, it's about the
size of Ireland, is divided into four distinct climactic areas. You have fertile plains along
the coastline, then rocky highlands to the east, a fertile valley around the Jordan River,
further to the east, and finally on the borders of the Arabian desert, a marginal scrubland
suitable only for herding and hunting. Now throughout its history, people in Syria,
Palestine have lived very different sorts of life within that small area, and they have been dependent
on different kinds of economies in remarkably close proximity to each other. And this has
often led to conflict in the history of Palestine. Traditionally, there have been three basic sorts
of culture and economy in Palestine. There is nomadic pastoral culture, that is, the way of life
of wandering herders of small cattle, in other words sheep and goats. They follow their flock
in an annual cycle of searching for pasture in more or less marginal scrubland away from the
habitations of human beings. Then in addition to nomadic pastoral culture, there is settled
agricultural economy. This is dominated by small farms and related rural villages.
Usually farmlands and villages have a population distribution of about 30 people per square mile,
not that many, but a great deal more than are found out in the marginal scrublands.
And then in addition to the nomadic pastoral economy and the settled agricultural economy,
there is urban village or city culture. This is dominated by trade, crafts, government service.
Primarily these cities are located in the foothills or plains of the territory of Palestine.
So these three different kinds of basic economies and cultures exist in very close proximity to
each other. And historically this has led to the sort of conflicts between cultural and religious
groups that we find reflected in the Hebrew Bible and the New Testament. In other words, many of
these conflicts arise from people living very different sorts of lives in very close proximity
to each other within a very small territory. Of course, the Syria Palestine was also subject
to historical developments that shape the culture of its inhabitants, including, of course,
their religious beliefs and practices. For one thing, Syria Palestine, like Mesopotamia,
was subject to successive waves of ethnic migration. Some of these were peaceful, but most
were not. And of course, this has changed the face of the region over the centuries.
There was also a general development of the region from pastoral herding as a way of life,
to settled agriculture as a way of life, and then the growth of cities as more people settled in
the fertile areas and produced extra goods that could be used in trade and in in sale in cities.
So the combination of the migration of various ethnic groups and the concentration of various
ethnic groups into particular areas of Syria Palestine led to a diverse culture, but also to
a certain uniformity of religious beliefs and practices throughout the territory. And these
primary religious practices were based on fertility religions and also on urban political
cults. So if you will, we have the religious cultures of the countryside with its concern for
fertility and the religious cultures of the cities based on the political order.
Now as far as we can determine, religious cultures in Syria Palestine all shared general
influences and general characteristics. The religious communities in Syria Palestine,
like the other religious communities we have discussed, were what we call natural religious
communities. In other words, they were coterminous with a secular community. A clan shared a common
religious culture or a tribe shared a common religious culture or a city state or a nation.
In this respect, the religious culture of Syria Palestine was like that of Mesopotamia
or Egypt. These two are natural religious communities. The Mesopotamian city-states
have a common religious order, a common social identity and a common religion. The Egyptian
kingdoms have a common political identity and a common religious practice. The later Mesopotamian
empires the same situation. A natural religious community coterminous with the political and
social community. Now the equivalence of the political and the religious community meant that
the head of the political entity, a patriarch or a clan or a tribal leader, a civic magistrate,
a king, whatever it may be, this person was also the chief cultic official of the community
and represented his political underlings before the gods. So he is not only a king,
but if you will, also a priest. Of course, there were other specialized priests and other religious
officials who served the cult and served the gods primarily, but these religious officials were also
officials of the political order because they were members of the royal administration or they
were members of their advisory council to the leader of the clan or the tribe and so they serve
as official advisors to the leaders as well as mediators with the gods. The common religious
culture of Syria Palestine was polytheistic and like other polytheistic religious cultures,
it had the gods arranged in a royal hierarchy that for the most part reflected the political
hierarchy of the city state, the city states that gave rise to this religious culture in particular
and the name and the identity of the chief god of Assyria Palestine
group or natural religious community would vary according to the territory of the
worshipers sometimes according to the ethnic identity of the worshipers and this led in
time to a great deal of syncretism that is a great deal of combination of one system of gods,
myths and rituals with aspects of another system of gods, myths and rituals.
Now we've already seen examples of this syncretism with the gradual accumulation of divine attributes
and associations by gods such as Amun or Inanna as they take on titles and attributes of other gods
that is one form of syncretism but there can also be syncretism across religious cultures
as the gods, myths and rituals of one are assimilated into another.
Generally speaking, syncretism and syncretistic practices reflect the universalizing tendencies
of polytheistic religious cultures. The systems expand to accommodate or in some case to combine
all the possible gods from all traditions. The attitude in a polytheistic religious culture
seems to be there's always room for one more.
In the particular case of Assyria Palestine the chief god of the pantheon was El.
El was the creator of all things and believed to be the father of the gods. In fact over time
El's name became the generic Semitic term for any god and we can compare the Akkadian term
Elu which also came to represent any god.
El was the oldest of the gods. He was head of the divine council and he was particularly well
respected for his wisdom and judgment but at the same time El does not appear to have been a king
over the other gods. He was more of a chief or a first among equals among the other gods.
El's home was in the mountains far to the north and this was believed to be the source of the
waters of the cosmos and to a certain extent we see a similarity with Utnipishtim who lives at the
head of the Tigris and Euphrates. But in any event El lives far away where the waters originate
up in the mountains and when the other gods want to consult with El or to make requests of El
they must go to where El lives. The most significant epithet or special name given to El is the
bull El and again the bull represents here the virile power of divinity, the power to
exert one's authority and the energy associated with the virile power of the bull. And so the
epithet the bull El indicates his power and his strength because he is identified with the animal
that sometimes represented him in the human realm. El also appears in various mythologies,
enjoin the recreations and the prerogatives of a patriarch that is as the senior male in a family.
For example we find instances of El hunting or of El feasting and of El enjoin sex with his
mistresses and of course because he's a god his mistresses always respond with cries of delight.
His consort is also his sister she is the mother of the gods Ashura Elat but he also has other
mistresses his other sister Astarte for example and his daughter Anat who is also the wife of his
son Bael. These sorts of incestuous relationships as we've seen are typical of divine patriarchies.
El's relationship with his mistresses appear in a text that seems to be the basis for a
hiros gamos that is a sacred marriage a ritual where the political leader and a priestess representing
a god and a goddess have sexual intercourse as a means of ensuring annual fertility and I've
already referred to this in the case of Inanna and the king of the city who represents Dumuzi.
And El's relationship with his mistresses again appear to
establish the same kind of ritual practice the hiros gamos or sacred marriage.
El also appears as a divine warrior but interestingly this happens only in the context
of gaining supremacy over the other gods once El becomes dominant as the first among equals
El more or less retires from warfare and the divine warrior and the work of the divine warrior
falls to El's son Bael and as a result Bael also sits at El's right hand in council
representing his preeminence over the other gods. Now in time Bael became the dominant god of
Syria Palestine or the other one being the lord worshiped in Israel. The name Bael means lord
or master and like El the name Bael became something of a generic identification for gods
so we find a number of other gods similar to Bael identified in partially as a Bael either a Bael
who is represented by a locality or a Bael who is known also by another name. So for example
in the case of Melkart a god worshiped in the Phoenician city of Tyre sometimes he is referred
to as Bael Melkart sometimes he's referred to as the Bael of Tyre so sometimes identified by a
locality sometimes by another divine name. Now Bael was initially a god of the storm he was the
one who makes the earth fertile through providing rain and his fertility aspects are dominant in
stories that involve his consort Anat as we might expect. Some of these stories have been
recovered in cuneiform tablets from Rashamra the site of the ancient city of Ugarit on the Syringan
coast and of course because they are written on clay tablets and they're thousands of years old
these texts are quite fragmentary and the relationship between one text and another
is not always clear so it may be there was a collection of stories about Bael and Anat
or it may be that they formed in some way a single epic tale about these two gods.
For example in one story El forces his son Bael to serve Prince C Bael is made to become a servant
but Bael is able to overcome Prince C and instead of serving him he destroys him afterwards El
apparently seen the error of his original decree decrees now that a temple must be built for Bael
in recognition of his success over Prince C. In another story this one seems to recall the
descent of Inanna to the underworld in the Mesopotamian tradition we have a story of Bael
descending into the underworld to do battle with Mott who is the ruler of the underworld
but instead Bael becomes caught in the underworld and becomes the slave of Mott and once again we
have the motif as Bael becomes a servant in this case it is Anat Bael's sister and consort who
struggles with Mott and defeats him and then cuts his body into pieces and scatters the body of Mott
across the earth particularly in the fields Bael also does combat with Mott and then eventually
resumes his proper place on earth there are obvious fertility overtones to this story
because on the one hand Bael goes to the underworld that is he dies and then he returns to life with
the help of his wife Anat and Mott's scattered body gives rise to new life in other words the
remains of the god who personifies death gives rise to rebirth there's also a story in which Bael
and Anat fight together in this case they fight against a primordial sea monster named Lotan
and there seems to be a connection between Lotan and the biblical Leviathan and other
sea monsters that are mentioned in the bible and elsewhere in ancient Near Eastern mythology
so biblical scholars in particular have noted substantial echoes and overtones between Bael's
mythology and the stories about the lord of Israel in regard to their titles and their attributes
and other elements of their divine stories although many of these are rather muted in the case of the
biblical stories about the lord now other gods of Syria Palestine were the chief gods of particular
peoples or local manifestations of major gods and this is one of the reasons why we find Bael
being associated with different localities and different names so they are sometimes identified
these gods by the locality or with a particular attribute for example the Jebusites the people
who were the original inhabitants of Jerusalem had a chief god called Salim the chief gods of
the philistines was a half man half fish god called Dagon and the Tanakh that is the Hebrew bible
includes names of other gods such as Shamash or Mollek who demanded human sacrifice at least
according to those who worship the lord instead then we do have gods who are identified by attributes
for example El Shaddai meaning El the one of the mountains or Bael Zabub Bael of the little vermin
or if you will lord of the flies sometimes thought of to be a satiric name but probably
an actual attribute of Bael as we've seen Bael was sometimes identified with other local gods
such as Bael Melchart Bael Melchart is important because he is the god worshiped by the israelite
queen Jezebel another name for the Bael of her native city Tyre usually the god people worshiped
in the ancient Near East could be identified by the god bearing element in the names they gave
there to their children that is the theophoric element in the names they gave their children
and there are many examples of this in the Hebrew bible so we have names sacred to Salim
such as Absalom Salim is my father or names sacred to El such as Michael who is like El
or if you prefer who is like God because El becomes the generic name for any god
or we have names sacred to Bael such as Ish Bael one of the sons of King Saul meaning man of Bael
and we also have names representing the worship of the lord of Israel such as Yehoshaphat name
meaning the lord rules now to a large extent Israel's worship of the lord stands apart from the
religions of other gods of ancient Syria Palestine although in some respects it is also continuous
with them now the name of the lord appears in the Hebrew bible as four letters that are
translated into English as Y H W H these four letters stand alone and also appear as a theophoric
a god bearing element in names in places outside of Israel so it is probable that the divine name
of the lord also existed outside of Israelite religion the origins of the name of the lord are
Semitic and most scholars agree that the root are three consonants transliterated H W Y the basic
form of the verb to be and in the name of the lord appearing in the finite form he is in these
lectures i will sometimes use the vocalized form of this name Yahweh but will more often refer to
the lord and sometimes to Hashem which is Hebrew for the name the original associations of Hashem
are difficult to determine although some scholars have speculated that Hashem is a god of the storm
or a god of the mountain for example the lord is sometimes identified with El Shaddai
loosely god of the mountain but this may be a syncretistic identification with El rather than
an origin of the identity of the lord similarly the associations with the storm may also be
indirect arising from similar terminology used to refer to attributes shared by the lord on the
one hand and bail on the other so nearly by looking at attributes given to the lord we cannot
really determine the origins of his identity what does seem to be clear is that the lord was
associated with the wilderness of what we might call no man's land he lived far away from human
habitations of villages and cities this is in keeping of course with the original identity
of the people of israel as nomadic herders of sheep and goats they travel from one place to
another throughout the year in search of pasture lands and the earliest religious observances
connected to the worship of the lord are the Sabbath observance and the Passover both of
these are observances that are appropriate for the way of life of nomadic herders so the nomadic
herders live away from human habitations in no man's land and this is also where the lord is to
be found the initial association between the lord and the people of israel appears to have
been a connection between the god and the patriarchal father Abraham so the initial
identification of the lord is as the god of Abraham Isaac and Jacob Isaac being the son
and Jacob the grandson of Abraham this identification of the god of a name has parallels
elsewhere in ancient Syria Palestine and often a god was identified with a particular person
implying some sort of personal connection between that individual and the god this sort of association
seems to acknowledge the diversity of religious allegiance in polytheistic Syria Palestine
for example there's a biblical formula that appears many times for example in first king's
chapter 10 verse 19 where somebody says blessed be the lord your god may your god be blessed
i have another god personally but may your god be blessed for what your god has done
acknowledging the religious diversity now the relationship between the lord and the ancestors
of israel is understood to be voluntary on both sides taking the form of a covenant or a legal
contract the lord and Abraham and later the people of israel have a legal contract as the basis of
the relationship in the Hebrew bible the covenant between the lord and Abraham is presented as what
we call a covenant of grant because the lord makes promises to Abraham that impose no obligations
on Abraham to make the promises effective it's like a will this is what you will receive and
that kind of promises made to Abraham i will make of you a great nation and i will bless you
and make your name great so that you will be a blessing this is from genesis chapter 12 verse
2 and then a bit later god promises that Abraham's descendants will possess the land of Canaan in
genesis chapter 12 verse 7 after the sojourn in Egypt when all the descendants of Abraham moved
down into Egypt during a famine in the Syria Palestine the covenantal relationship is renewed
but it is also changed because now the people of israel have grown beyond the bounds of a
single patriarchy family the covenant now between the lord and israel is made at Sinai and is a
different kind of contract now there are conditions or stipulations placed on both parties on the
one hand the lord is to protect and govern his people israel and on the other hand the people
are to follow a way of life that will set them apart from the other people and nations of Syria
Palestine they are to live in such a way that their allegiance to the lord as their exclusive god
is quite clear so observance of the covenant produces a state of harmony and equilibrium
between the human world and the divine world between israel and the lord and this of course
is the goal sought by all religious yearning and all religious action in the case of the covenantal
relationship between the lord and israel it is understood in terms of the lord's declaration
you shall be my people and i shall be your god in the next session we'll look more carefully at
the historical setting of the religious culture of israel's ancestors and consider the religious
cultures development in response to the historical experience of the people in the exodus from egypt
and their wanderings and the wilderness
