Lecture 2 What is Religion?
In our last lecture, we previewed some of the major features of the course.
We will be using stories as our primary means to gain insight into the historical religious
cultures we will discuss.
These are stories about the why instead of the how of events in the human world.
In this lecture, we will consider some necessary elements for a proper definition of religion.
Before we begin our discussion of religion in the ancient Mediterranean world, we really
have to ask that fundamental question, what is religion?
Now this sounds like the sort of annoying question asked by a college philosophy major.
And it's an annoying question because everyone thinks they know what religion is, or at least
they think they do until they try to define it in some sort of comprehensive way.
Now in religious studies, what is religion is a sort of question dealt with by historians
of religion.
That is, the people who study characteristic religious phenomena across a range of cultures
used to be called comparative religion, because often the intention is to see how particular
phenomena work out across a range of cultures.
And that includes ancient religious cultures and modern religious cultures.
So historians of religion both create overall theories of religious activity and religious
culture, and they investigate particular religious cultures in the world community.
And in fact, this question, what is religion, is a major problem in systematic treatments
of divergent religious communities.
What is it that unites them?
What is it that marks them as distinctively religious communities?
What is it that makes them religious rather than some other sort of community?
So we will first consider the elements that seem to be essential to a definition of religion,
and then we will consult two classical definitions of religion to guide our discussion.
Now most of us, I think quite rightly, when we begin to construct a definition of a complex
human phenomenon like religion, do it by making a list of what seem to be essential
elements in all the diverse examples of that phenomenon.
So in this case, that would mean making a list of all of the distinctive characteristics
of religious activity, religious cultures, religious beliefs, and expressions.
Now we might begin with the idea of religion as something about the gods, or something
about spirits, or something about obedience to what the gods or the spirits command human
beings to do.
But there are forms of religion that do not think about gods or spirits in particular.
There are some like Buddhism that seem to have no gods of any sort.
And there's also the problem of obedience and the problem of worship.
Some religious people don't perform any acts of worship to speak of, and of course we have
to define what sort of activities qualify as worship in the first place.
So we might want to identify religion, at least in part, in terms of what it concerns,
and then how people reflect that concern in how they live their daily lives.
So we might say, religion is a human concern with, and a response to, the supernatural,
the mysterious, or the unknown.
In other words, with everything that seems to lie beyond the human capacity to understand.
That's not a bad start.
But of course it needs some fine tuning.
Now it leaves some questions unanswered and some characteristic aspects of religion unaddressed.
For example, if we talk about the concern of religious activity as the mysterious or
the supernatural, these are not clearly identifiable terms, especially the term the mysterious.
After all, what was mysterious to ancient peoples, such as the nature of human disease,
that's not mysterious to us anymore.
We do not understand disease as having any connection with the supernatural.
We do not think of it as a realm of religious concern, although we might still pray for
people who are ill and pray for their healing.
But really what is more basically problematic is the entire distinction between the idea
of the natural and the idea of the supernatural.
This is a modern distinction and not an ancient distinction.
Ancient people saw the world as unified.
They saw human action and divine action at work in the same world, at work through all
aspects of that one world, the world that we call the natural world.
People in the ancient world thought of the gods and humans as existing in the same natural
world and acting in the same natural world.
Because the gods were part of nature, they were part of what was natural.
Now we also want to know what responses constitute religious action.
We have to come up with some sort of idea of what in particular means that someone is
acting in a religious way.
And this is especially difficult, of course, from a distance of centuries as when we talk
about religion in the ancient world.
So we want to know what constitutes a religious action, who performs religious actions, what
their intentions are when they perform those actions, what context they perform those actions
in, and what ideas they have in mind when they perform those actions.
So in short, we might ask two questions at this point in attempting to formulate a definition.
How do we best describe the object of ultimate concern for those who participate in a particular
religious culture?
In other words, what do they think of as gods, or as spirits, or as powers, or a world with
concerns beyond our own?
How do we describe the object of their ultimate concern?
And the other question is, how do we best delineate the consequences of sharing this
ultimate concern among the members of the community?
How do people respond to this ultimate concern in actions, or in words, or by a distinctive
way of life?
How does a shared concern with one particular ultimate concern unify and define a community?
So let's start with the first question.
If we're attempting to describe the object of ultimate concern for those who participate
in a particular religious culture, we may turn to the German theologian Rudolf Otto,
whose dates are 1869 to 1937.
He was a theologian who devoted an entire book to the essential nature of religious concern,
which he called The Idea of the Holy.
This was first published in 1923.
Now Otto approached the subject of the Holy from a theological perspective, that is, from
the perspective of somebody who was concerned with the doings of God, thought of primarily
as the God of Christianity.
And his theological perspective, moreover, was informed by comparative religious studies,
that is, looking at the gods as they were understood in different religious communities,
but also by the traditions of German mysticism.
In other words, ideas about how one communicates or understands God through contemplation and
through a mystic uplift into a higher realm of understanding.
So Otto defined the Holy with a Latin phrase, Mysterium tremendum et fascinans, translates
as the overwhelming and awe-inspiring mystery.
And this was an overwhelming mystery that was experienced as entirely other, that is,
as not being like anything else that we encounter in our everyday lives, as being different
from everything we are familiar with.
We are one, our world is one with us, we live and move within this world, but this fascinating
mystery, this overwhelming and awe-inspiring mystery is other, it is different.
We confront it and recognize it as being other.
So for Otto, religion is primarily the experience of the Holy, of the other, that is awesome
and fascinating to us awe-inspiring.
This is the human encounter with an overwhelming mystery that is not amenable to any kind of
rational analysis, because it is beyond our normal human experience.
So Otto's idea of religion has the advantage of shifting a focus from spiritual beings
to what we might call the supernatural in general, or really to a more general idea
of the Holy as something humanity experiences as both awesome and compelling, and also experiences
as other, as different from everything in everyday experience.
Now, unfortunately, in keeping with the intellectual climate of his day, Otto conceived of religion
primarily as something interior, something inside a person, a process of experience or
a process of belief.
And so he was concerned more with feeling and belief than with the consequences of religious
feelings and religious beliefs in how people live their lives, or how people come together
as a result of their common beliefs and experiences.
So Otto's definition of the Holy as the Mysterium Tremendum et Fascinans, the overwhelming and
awe-inspiring mystery, is helpful to us, because it helps us to understand the object of religious
concern, but it says much less about the consequences of religious experience, the expression of
religious belief in words and actions and a way of life.
Now, in regard to the second question, how do we best delineate the consequences of sharing
an ultimate concern with the other, with the Holy, in terms of how people respond to it
in words, actions, and by a distinctive way of life?
Here we can gain insight from the French sociologist Emile Durkheim, whose dates are 1858 to 1917.
It makes sense that you find out about human beings in religious society from a sociologist.
Durkheim was one of the great pioneers of sociology in the early 20th century, particularly
of sociology as an academic discipline.
He wrote major works about sociology and he created a place for sociology in higher education.
Now in this case, Durkheim's purpose in writing the elementary forms of the religious life
was to provide a basic definition of religion based on the simplest forms of religious culture,
but he wanted to develop a definition of religion that would also apply to the most
sophisticated forms of religious culture in the modern world.
So as part of this effort, Durkheim extensively critiques several existing definitions of
religion before he offered his own attempt at a comprehensive definition of his own.
As usual, a scholar starts off by demolishing everybody else's arguments before advancing
his own arguments, convinced of course that his cannot be demolished in turn.
Now Durkheim's definition in the elementary forms of the religious life is, a religion
is a unified system of beliefs and practices relative to sacred things.
That is to say, things set apart and forbidden, beliefs and practices which unite into one
single moral community called a church, all those who adhere to them.
I'm going to repeat that.
A religion is a unified system of beliefs and practices relative to sacred things.
That is to say, things set apart and forbidden, beliefs and practices which unite into one
single moral community called a church, all those who adhere to them.
That is Durkheim's definition.
Now this is rather complex, as you probably noticed.
It attempts to be comprehensive and Durkheim's definition has several distinct advantages.
First of all, it includes not only the idea of belief, but also the practical consequences
of belief.
In other words, the actions that arise from belief, the way of life that arises from belief
and the community of believers that unites around their common beliefs.
Note also that Durkheim's definition defines the word sacred and focuses on sacred things
rather than the idea of the sacred in general.
I think that Durkheim's definition makes it clear that religion is a community phenomenon
and that community is bound together by a particular way of life.
This is why he calls it a moral community.
It shares a particular way of life and this community also shares a form of behavior that
arises specifically from its religious beliefs.
And finally, notice that Durkheim's definition is of a religion rather than of religion in
general.
It's a clever thing to do.
Some people may regard it as a strength.
Some people may regard it as a weakness.
Now for all of the strengths of Durkheim's definition, much like the earlier definitions
that he had demolished on his way to creating his own definition, his definition too has
some distinctive shortcomings.
And his own definition has failings that weaken its effectiveness for our purposes in this
course in talking about ancient religious cultures, ancient religious communities and
attempting to understand them by what they believe and by what they do.
Now I think probably the most serious shortcoming of Durkheim's definition is that he defines
religious community as a church.
He says that beliefs and practices unite into one single moral community called a church,
all those who adhere to them.
Now of course, a church is a restrictive term taken very much from the European context.
And I think one of the unfortunate things about this particular term is it implies a
distinction between a social community and a religious community.
And if you will, between a political community and a religious community.
Because in most cases, religious communities are equivalent to the social and political
communities in which they exist.
So we really should not impose a distinction between the social and political and the religious
group because this is an invalid distinction for most communities.
Durkheim's definition defines sacred things as things set apart and forbidden.
So Durkheim seems to be limiting the idea of the sacred to what we call the taboo, in
other words that which is forbidden.
Now taboo is a valid idea in comparative religious studies.
It is a powerful term in the history of religions.
But I think in this case, it is unnecessarily restrictive because taboo restricts the idea
of the sacred to that which is forbidden.
And in some religious communities, the sacred is embraced and not avoided.
Finally, Durkheim's definition places sacredness exclusively in things.
And there are a couple of problems with that idea.
First of all, things itself is an ambiguous term and it seems to imply sacred objects.
But there are other forms of the sacred as people experience them in religious community.
There is sacred space such as the interior of a church or a temple.
There are sacred beings such as spirits or gods or demons or angels.
And there is, I think as Rudolf Otto told us, a general concept of the sacred.
What it is we encounter in religious experience often is best understood as the sacred and
not sacred things or sacred space or sacred beings.
So the limitation of the sacred to sacred things may be the most serious problem with
Durkheim's definition.
On the other hand, Durkheim's definition of religion has the advantage of being easily
understood.
So we will adopt it, but modify it somewhat in light of its shortcomings.
So here is a modified definition of religion based on Durkheim's definition.
A religion is a unified system of beliefs and practices relative to the sacred.
Beliefs and practices that unite into one single moral community, all those who adhere
to them.
And I'll repeat that again.
A religion is a unified system of beliefs and practices relative to the sacred.
Beliefs and practices that unite into one single moral community, all those who adhere
to them.
Now of course, this definition requires a further definition of the sacred.
So taking a cue from Otto to some extent, we will define the sacred as that which permeates
influences and relates to material reality, and yet is recognized as part of another reality
not subject to the limitations of material reality.
That which permeates influences and relates to material reality, and yet is recognized
as part of another reality not subject to the limitations of material reality.
So we will use these definitions, one of religion and the other of the sacred as the object
of religious concern.
We will use these as working definitions primarily to reinforce several concepts basic to understanding
ancient religious cultures, the idea of the sacred or the holy, the interdependence of
beliefs and practices, and the necessity of a community that follows particular patterns
of behavior based on its religious beliefs, a religious community that is united by common
beliefs that result in common practices and common practices that add up to a distinctive
way of life.
Now in talking about religion in the ancient Mediterranean world, we also need to consider
certain recurring features that are found in different religious cultures.
Now that we have our definition, we can begin to look at certain points of commonality that
seem to exist among all religious cultures.
We can say that these recurring features arise pretty much from human attempts to understand
the divine realm, the realm of the sacred or the realm of the holy.
But as we've seen, in order to understand the realm of the divine or the realm of the
holy, human beings have to use ideas and language taken from everyday life.
They have to make sense of that other realm with terminology taken from this realm, the
realm of the everyday and the historical.
We find that each culture's idea of the divine realm bears a strong resemblance to its own
cultural models of power, or of benefits, or of wisdom, or of relationships, or of value
in general.
Now of course religious symbolism can arise from different places.
Sometimes it arises from individual consciousness, that is from an individual's own inspiration,
as we might put it.
Sometimes it arises as a common community expression of a common experience or a common belief.
And sometimes religious symbolism seems to be given, that is it is determined by the
nature of the religious experience itself.
But even in cases where the symbolism is given, just as in the cases where it arises from
a community or from individual consciousness, there is an undeniable cultural component,
because the givenness of the experience is still understood in a particular cultural
context.
And so we can reasonably expect to find similarities in religious ideas and organization of religious
ideas in related cultures.
For example, we find that the divine realm is most often believed to be organized on
the model of human, social, or political organization.
In other words, the gods live in a society like the society of the culture that believes
in them.
So we find that ancient Mediterranean peoples thought of the gods as arranged in a political
hierarchy, usually with a chief god who presided over a body or a council of subordinate
gods.
And each of those subordinate gods had a special range of concerns.
I suppose if we had a polytheistic culture in our own country, we might think of the
chief god as being a president presiding over a cabinet.
Each god with a particular specialization having orders given by the chief god to carry
out specific functions.
Usually the chief god is male, but sometimes female.
And the chief god is accorded royal honors.
But the chief god is usually limited in his or her ability to act because of the competing
interests of the other gods.
In other words, most of the gods are not absolute monarchs.
Most of them work in concert with the other gods, and to a certain extent in consultation
with the other gods that make up the royal council.
As we will see, the political organization of the divine realm takes on many different
forms and works out in many different ways in ancient Mediterranean religious cultures.
Now another recurring feature in different religious cultures is the relationship between
the gods who inhabit the divine world and the human beings who inhabit the earthly realm.
So if a given culture thinks of the gods as a divine governing council, the question is
the nature of their attitude towards the human beings they control.
So human beings might be thought of as independent actors who owe allegiance and tribute to the
gods just as they owe allegiance and tribute to their own political overlords.
So the gods might be thought of as much like earthly kings except in a somewhat higher
position, and their underlings owe them loyalty and tribute.
Or human beings might be thought of essentially as the slaves of the gods.
People who must submit to the will of the gods without question, bearing the punishment
meted out by the gods for unknown reasons without any kind of complaint, completely subservient.
Or human beings might be thought of as related to the gods, something like younger siblings
to the gods, so that human beings have to grow up and mature to become like the gods
over an extended period of time.
Now just as there are different models for the relationship between the gods and human
beings, there are also models for the nature of the human predicament, the human situation
in life which human beings find so unsatisfactory.
And usually the models for the human predicament depend on the sort of relationship posited
between humanity and the divine world, and so of course, so do the possible solutions
to the human predicament.
So if the gods are set apart from humanity by a superior status, they have a much higher
standing in the cosmic order than human beings, then human ills may arise from human pride
or human presumption that offends the gods, and then they suffer because of a response
of divine jealousy.
Or perhaps the gods are set apart from humanity by a superior morality.
They are morally pure, whereas human beings are not.
In that case, human ills may arise from human moral failings that inflict harm on other
human beings, but also separate human beings from the morally pure gods, who cannot approach
human beings because human beings are corrupt and polluted.
Or if the gods are set apart from humanity by a superior understanding, then human ills
may arise from human ignorance, and the solution over time may be contemplation, or the accumulation
of knowledge, or the exercise of wisdom.
In all events, we find the divine realities believed to govern human existence are conceived
of in human terms, because they are the result of human beings striving to give expression
to their experience of the divine in ways that make sense to human beings.
Human beings defining the divine realm in terms that make sense to human beings.
So we've now formulated a working definition of religion.
We've considered some recurring human models for religious symbolism, and we've talked
about the way that context will determine the way that the human situation and the solution
to the human situation is understood.
In our next session, we will look at the earliest evidence of the struggle for meaning in life
in the religious experience of the earliest human beings.
