Lecture 4 Prehistoric Religion, The Neolithic Era
In the previous session, we began to discuss the earliest forms of human religious expression
by examining the material culture of the old and middle stone ages.
We saw that the evidence all relates to a desire for harmony and equilibrium among human
beings and between human beings and the spiritual world.
In this session, we will consider the more rapid changes that typified human life in
the New Stone Age, or Neolithic Era, and its characteristic forms of religious expression.
Now the Neolithic Era extends from about 8,300 BCE to about 3,000 BCE.
This period saw some major changes in the way that human beings lived, as well as a more
rapid pace of change and a more rapid pace of human development.
These changes included the widespread cultivation of crops and the domestication of herd animals
such as sheep, goats, and cattle.
These provided a more dependable and varied source of nourishment.
This of course led to an increase in human population, as well as a better fed and more
healthy human population.
The growth of settled communities and permanent dwellings allowed people to live where the
conditions were most favorable for agriculture or hunting and fishing, and most often they
settled in river valleys and along coastlands.
The development of domestic art such as pottery, weaving, and sewing led to a more distinct
separation between the daily activities of men and women, and we begin to see the development
of men's lives as opposed to women's lives consumed with different kinds of activities.
The Neolithic Era also saw the development of skills not directly related to the procuring
of food such as early indications of surgery, the decoration of objects of art, and the
invention of the wheel.
Now one of the most surprising archaeological finds in the New Stone Age comes from the
city of Jericho in Palestine, again familiar from the story of Joshua, and this was one
of the oldest cities in the Mediterranean world.
Jericho you'll remember was founded in the Mesolithic Era, in the Middle Stone Age, about
10,000 BCE, some 6,000 years before the general age of urbanization began elsewhere in the
Near East, particularly in Sumer and in Egypt.
But Jericho flourished in the Neolithic Era.
Then it had a population of about 2,000 people, and they were apparently supported by agriculture
and by trading in minerals from the nearby Dead Sea.
Jericho at this time was surrounded by a city wall, and the city wall was later reinforced
and augmented with a moat, and in the city there was a tall round tower whose function
is largely unknown, but there was a large round tower in the inside of the wall which
had some function, although we don't know what it was.
Now later Neolithic inhabitants of Jericho have left two buildings that seem to have
been devoted to specifically religious functions.
One was a rectangular room with a niche featuring a stone base for a caultic object, and that
caultic object was probably a standing stone or a stel that was found elsewhere in the
same building.
The other building devoted to religious functions was a temple, apparently, featuring rounded
chambers and a plastered floor.
The reason we say that this building was a temple was that found within it were two groups
of human figures depicted in a family group.
These were made up of decorated, unfired clay, and seashells were placed in the face representing
the eyes of these figures.
There are also burials under the floor of the temple, and some of these burials had
the skulls removed, as we've seen earlier.
And these skulls were collected in the chambers of the temple, but they were not collected
merely as skulls, but as decorated objects.
They had been covered with clay, molded and painted to represent human faces, and had
shells for eyes.
Now we don't know if this was a widespread practice, collecting and decorating the skulls
of the dead.
It may have been restricted to burials of temple personnel, or other dignitaries of the city.
But now, of course, it's impossible to say.
The evidence of religious practices during the Neolithic era reflects these changes in
human life that we've already talked about, and the evidence itself becomes more abundant,
unfortunately, more overtly religious in intention.
So religious life begins to reflect a growing emphasis on the importance of the fertility
of crops, a growing emphasis on the importance of the fertility of animals, and therefore
a growing importance of those natural forces that influence growth and fertility.
So we see, for example, an increasing number of female figurines reflecting the growth
and spread of the cult of the mother goddess.
And now, the mother goddess is probably understood also as a representation of the fertile earth
that provides abundant crops and abundant animal life.
At the same time, in Palestine and elsewhere, we find large numbers of red-painted stone
and clay representations of both male and female genitalia, as well as representations of female
breasts.
These would seem to indicate concerns with human sexual activity as a mere of the forces
of fertility in nature, or perhaps an influence on the forces of fertility in nature.
Throughout the Neolithic era, burial of the dead also becomes more elaborate, and that
means not only in apparent ritual attending the burial of the dead, but also the placement
of the dead bodies and the decoration of the bodies of the deceased.
Apparently funerals during the Neolithic era might include the sacrifice of several animals
as part of the funeral proceedings.
There might be a sacrifice's grain as part of an elaborate ceremony, and we find the
remains of these animals, and this grain, of course, in tombs and graves from the Neolithic
era.
Graves were often covered by boulders, and burials were in groups made in carefully constructed
stone chambers in times, or in cave-like tombs, which still seems to be some association of
burial with the earth or with the old cave dwellings that had been used by earlier peoples.
So we find bodies decorated with clothing that they wore in life, the accessories that
they wore in life, and that gives us the opportunity to determine some of the social status of
the deceased in these burials.
And in some cases, as we saw in Jericho, we find burials with lifelike decoration of
a separated skull.
Now it may be that any ideas about a personal essence that lives on after death arose from
these sorts of ceremonies, that is, funerary rituals that focused on proper disposal, proper
decoration, and proper interment of the body.
Now in many ways, Neolithic funerary rituals resemble other rituals of passage that commemorate
a person's movement from one stage of life into another.
These sorts of ritual of passage are a common component of almost all religious communities.
They represent a recognition and a celebration of the passage of a person from one part of
life into another part of life.
So we have rituals of passage that are associated with the process of birth, both for the child,
some sort of initiation into the group, such as circumcision for example, and for the mother,
some sort of purification or reentry into the mainstream life of the community after
the end of the pregnancy.
We find rituals of passage associated with the onset of puberty for both boys and girls,
their own distinctive ceremonies.
We find rituals of passage associated with marriage as people go from being too independent
individuals to being a single couple and the nucleus of a new family.
And of course, we also have rituals of passage associated with death.
Now these rituals of passage are both progressive and yet cyclical in nature, and of course
that fits into the progression and cycles of time as humans observe it.
So the ritual is always the same, but it comes to a different person at a different time.
The ritual is the same, but it represents a progress through an individual life.
So these rituals appear to be complementary to the changes of seasons, for example, or
the agricultural cycle, or the movement of the sun, the moon, and the stars.
In this context, death and burial takes on aspects of movement from one form of life
into another, or we might say from activity into dormancy.
And there seems to be the expectation that activity will again follow.
Now we'll later see the same pattern at work replicated in stories of dying and rising fertility
gods moving from activity into dormancy and back into activity once again with the changes
of the agricultural seasons.
So it appears that people of the Neolithic era regarded death as an occasion for sadness,
but also as part of another natural cycle and therefore to a certain extent as an occasion
for celebration.
Because part of a natural cycle, death will in time produce a rebirth and a continuation
of the individual's life in some other realm of existence.
And the same idea of death and rebirth, the parallel to death and rebirth in the cycle
of fertility brings us back to that idea of fertility of the earth and its representation
in the cultic figurines of the so-called earthmothers or the mother goddess.
And during the Neolithic era, we have an abundance of these images once again of the mother goddess.
Now some scholars have speculated that there was a time in early human prehistory when
human society was not yet patriarchal, that is not under the control of men and fathers.
And when religion itself was centered on a mother goddess.
Now this theory is a long-standing one and it was originally based on mythology and legends
about ancient cultures that were dominated by women were most familiar probably with
the mythology surrounding the Amazons, women warriors who dominated their own female society.
And these theories were also based on the worship of goddesses in historical religions
in Egypt, in Mesopotamia, in Greece, and in Rome.
Now in the 20th century, this theory of a widespread mother goddess cult or a mother
goddess religion was bolstered by archaeological evidence.
And this archaeological evidence we've already looked at, that is the stone and clay figurines
that seem to indicate that the worship of a mother goddess was central to prehistoric
religion and ideas of fertility.
And the sheer number of these female images suggest the goddess was central to prehistoric
religion, despite the presence of male deities as well.
Now as we've seen, goddess worship appears to have begun in the Paleolithic era, in the
Old Stone Age.
And according to some theories about the mother goddess, her worship reached its height in
the Neolithic, Calcolithic, and Bronze ages, roughly between 8300 BCE and about 1200 BCE.
Now scholars disagree as to how widely spread goddess worship might have been, and they
disagree about whether it was restricted to Europe or might also have extended to the
Near East, and the evidence is equivocal.
And similarly, there are a few scholars who postulate that ancient goddess religion continued
well into the historical period, and in fact, they say, only faced its final defeat from
the rise of Christianity about 500 of the common era.
After that time, they argue, goddess worship continued but went underground, and stayvotes
were often persecuted as witches.
So according to this theory, the triumph of patriarchy and the worship of a chief male
god represents an innovation in human religion from its earliest origins.
And this triumph of patriarchy has been tied to a change in human life, say the shift from
village life that was based in crafts and in agriculture, to an urban life in cities
based on war and commerce, and other theories trace the change to the advent of Indo-European
warrior culture as represented by the Greeks and various others.
Now in these theories of a dominant prehistoric goddess worship, this worship is most often
thought of in terms of a single supreme goddess, and she is often called the goddess by those
who subscribe to this theory, or the ancestress, that is the mother of all, I suppose.
This goddess was believed to be the mother and giver of all life, in other words, not
just for human beings, but for all forms of life.
So she was a symbol of animal and vegetable fertility, and the source of all life through
the fertility of animals and vegetation that provide for the life of human beings as hunters
and as agriculturalists.
Some scholars go so far as to theorize that worship of the goddess in the Stone Age was
dominated by women, and women were both the primary worshipers and the primary cultic
personnel as priestesses.
And in its most extreme form, this theory of the original mother goddess postulates
that the religion of the goddess was the center of an egalitarian society in which men and
women were social equals, or perhaps that women were in fact the dominant social group.
They were revered for their role as the givers of life because the role of males in procreation
was at that point unknown.
Now this theory in its various permutations has gained many fervent adherents, and many
of its elaborations, it must be admitted, remain purely speculative, and in fact even
some of its major tenets have to be recognized as at best unproven.
Now it does seem extremely likely, based on the physical evidence, that worship of goddesses
or perhaps a single goddess was central to prehistoric religion.
We see this for the sheer abundance of female figurines of various types that appear from
the Old Stone Age into the Middle Stone Age and so on into the Neolithic Age, the New
Stone Age.
And certainly there is worship of goddesses within the historical religions, and this
continues often as a concentration on primary goddesses in the early historical period.
For example, in the Minoan civilization of ancient Crete, we find many depictions of
a central goddess, as we will see.
And it is also true that scholars, most of them male scholars, too often assume that
religion is primarily a male activity and a male business.
So they do not consider the various ways that women contribute to religious culture, and
they often, at least mentally, have traditionally relegated women to the mere idea of support
for the men who carry out the real business of worship.
But we cannot simply deduce from the fact of goddess worship that women enjoyed a high
social status in the culture concerned.
Just because a culture has veneration for a goddess, for a female deity, it does not
mean that there is a similar veneration for human females.
We cannot even assume that the sexes enjoyed equal esteem.
There are far too many instances of historical religious cultures that have worshiped goddesses,
but where women were nonetheless subjected to very low status.
For example, in Athens, dedicated to the worship of the goddess Athena, men enjoy a high social
status, a high political status, and women are relegated to the household and have very
little social standing of their own.
More recent times, within Hinduism, there is a great deal of goddess worship within Hinduism.
Often the goddess is the primary deity worshiped, but there is not a comparable high regard
for women in those parts of Hindu society, although that situation is changing.
So there appears to be no direct correlation of a worship of a primary goddess or of any
number of goddesses in a similar high social status for women in that culture.
Similarly, there is no real indication that women necessarily enjoy more equal status in
small village cultures than they do in urban cultures, even though small village cultures
are supposedly the home of goddess religion.
Both in urban culture and in small village culture, there are distinctive realms of women's
activity, and women's contribution to the larger social economy may be valued, but
again, there is no indication that there is a distinctive difference between the contribution
and the status of women in small village cultures and later larger urban cultures.
Again, reliable conclusions about the breadth in time and space of pre-patriarchal culture
are very difficult to make, as you might expect at this point in our proceedings.
As we've seen, material culture, which is what provides our basis for speculating and
making inspired guesses about prehistoric religion and other aspects of prehistoric
culture, the nature of material remains provide only a very sketchy picture of the sort of
culture that produces them, and there is a great deal of theory, a great many hypotheses
that may or may not be valid.
But at the same time, the clear evidence of early goddess worship should caution any religious
historian to avoid male bias.
It should lead them to emphasize the importance of goddesses in later religions in particular,
and most necessarily of all, to take the feminine aspect of religion seriously.
I've said that our discussion is much about religious stories, religious cultures as revealed
by religious stories, and this seems to be an appropriate time to ask ourselves what
particular stories prehistoric religion has to tell us.
Now, obviously, they don't tell us the stories in their own words, but their physical culture,
the material remains seem to have some stories to tell us about their ideas regarding the
gods and human beings and the relationship between them.
First, prehistoric religion tells us a story about human beings living in relationship
to the sacred.
Now, what prehistoric peoples may have believed about the nature of the sacred is hard to
determine on the basis of the material culture that remains, but it does appear the prehistoric
people located the sacred in specific places such as those inaccessible parts of the caves
where the cave paintings are found, or in particular beings, or in particular objects, objects
that may be regarded as sacred objects.
There seems to be a sense that the spiritual world mimics the human world, so we can take
the human world as a model for the spiritual world.
So that representative objects or actions experienced in the spiritual world bring about
a change in the life of those who possess the objects or initiate the actions.
For example, this is the rationale behind hunting magic.
If you have a spiritual representation, such as a painting of an animal, or a collection
of its bones, or a small figure of that animal, and you make certain ritual actions at that
representation, that spiritual enactment is carried over into the physical material world.
It's a whole rationale of hunting magic.
And there also seems to be, throughout prehistoric religious culture, some concept of spiritual
power, what religious scholars call manna.
And the spiritual power seems to permeate existence, both spiritual and material existence.
And it is concentrated more in some beings than in others, but can be transferred from
one being to another.
It is found in some places more than others, or in some objects more than others.
But it remains transferable, and it is possible for human beings to gain manna, this spiritual
power from other beings, from places, and from things.
So it is a story that the prehistoric era tells us about human beings living in relationship
to the sacred, or to the spiritual.
Second, this is a story that is also based on belief in spiritual power or manna, involving
the human desire to accumulate manna by religious actions.
In other words, the manna is not just there, and it's nice if you get some, but it's okay
if you don't, but rather that manna spiritual power is something that human beings need
to have fortunate or successful lives.
There is a human desire to accumulate manna by religious actions.
So the manna gained by religious actions may be understood as a gift from the spirits,
or the gods, consciously given to those who initiate the religious actions.
Or the manna or spiritual power may be understood as an automatic result of the action itself.
In other words, you put the card into the ATM, you get the right combination of keys,
and the spiritual money comes back to you.
That's our own idea of interacting with another world we don't quite understand.
So manna exists not only in beings, in human beings, in animals, in gods, in vegetation,
but also in places, as I've said, but also in social groups, such as families and tribes.
And the spiritual power of family and tribe is greater than the accumulated spiritual
power of those who make up its members.
In other words, the association of human beings has the spiritual power of its own.
Not just the individual power of each member, but the organization, the group, has the spiritual
power of its own.
Third, this story of prehistoric religion also tells us that the dead possess spiritual
power, and it is necessary to ease the deceased into a new form of existence while maintaining
their ties to the surviving community.
Earliest religious human activities have to do with the treatment of the dead, or at least
those that we can trace have to do with the treatment of the dead.
And they point to both awe and fear of the dead who enter the realm of the sacred.
So the dead are not only buried with the tools of everyday life, but in some cases the bodies
are later exhumed and further honored with decoration and participation in communion
meals.
This part of the story tells us that the dead are held in honor as bearers of manna, of
spiritual power, and it is believed that they remain capable of offering power and benefits
to their survivors.
Fourth, the story sees the power of life tied up somehow with women's mysterious powers
to give birth, so women become symbols of both direct and indirect sources of life.
The emphasis on the explicit symbols of human sexuality, both female and male genitalia,
implies some awareness that this powerful and compelling act of sexual intercourse is
somehow tied to the basic rhythms of creation, even apart from the fact of childbirth.
Childbirth is understood as an exclusively female enterprise, again since the role of
the male was not known.
And in time, childbirth became a model of the fertile female earth providing nourishment
for her children through fertile crops.
Finally, part of the story told by prehistoric religion is this idea of the story itself.
The idea that human life is meaningful.
The idea that the meaning of human life is worked out over time in a life that is lived
in relationship to other human beings, but also to the divine realm.
On the one hand, life follows cycles comparable to the passage of time in days, months and
years, and life passes through recognizable stages that are honored by various rituals
of passage.
On the other hand, each life is a one-way trip, moving from birth to death, and passing
through each stage of life marked by these appropriate rituals of passage.
So life is something that is celebrated not only in its overall meaning, but in terms
of its passage through each successive stage of the common human life.
And we will see that many of these same ideas appear and resonate in the religious culture
of the earliest civilizations.
We see these civilizations now appearing towards the end of the Neolithic era and appearing
first in the river-based cultures of Egypt and in Mesopotamia.
So our next session will begin our discussion of religion in ancient Egypt, a highly sophisticated
system of belief and practice that developed as we've seen in near isolation from the religious
life of other ancient cultures, and therefore developing into a unique and unparalleled
religious culture that remains for us in many ways mysterious, but in many ways extremely
compelling.
