Lecture 10 Induction as Illegitimate
We saw at the end of our last lecture that popper and the logical positivists, our main
protagonists, are concerned with what they called the context of justification, not the
context of discovery.
We have a precedent for this in our course because we saw a similar thing when we examined
the positivist conception of theories.
They weren't interested in how scientists arrived at a theory, or how they actually
formulate and use it, but rather in a restatement of a theory that shows its logical relations,
the logical relations that hold among the statements that comprise the theory, need
to be exhibited in a clear, useful way.
So the received view of theories is what we called a rational reconstruction of scientific
theories.
It shows the logical relations that matter for philosophical purposes in the theory.
As we might expect then, we find popper and the positivists interested in what we might
call the logic of justification or confirmation.
This is a particular kind of scientific method.
We're concerned here with relationships among statements, and we're asking, what
sort of a relationship a statement must hold to another statement for the first to confirm
or justify or provide evidence for the second, and I'll use all those terms more or less
interchangeably.
The idea is not, again we've seen this before, that scientists explicitly use this logic
any more than they explicitly used the logical positivists' reconstruction of theories.
But you don't explicitly use the premise, all men are mortal, when you reason from
Socrates' man to Socrates' mortal.
There is nevertheless a sense in which your inference depends on that premise, even though
you're not explicitly deploying the premise.
And the idea here is, there's supposed to be a sense in which inferences scientists
actually make depend on their being a logic of confirmation, even if they're not explicitly
using it.
Also in keeping with our earlier discussion, we have in mind at least a rough distinction
between statements that can legitimately serve as evidence for other statements, and those
that stand in need of evidence from other statements.
And that difference is the difference between observation and non-observation statements.
An observational statement is a justificatory starting point, because we're assuming empiricism.
In an epistemology course, we have to worry about whether we have a good argument for
trusting our senses, and that sort of thing.
But since we're doing empiricist philosophy of science, we start from the premise that
we can get useful information from our senses.
So what we want to know is what the relationship is between a theoretical statement, a statement
that goes beyond observation, and observation statements, if the observation statements
are to provide evidential support for the theoretical statement.
And let's remind ourselves just how far beyond observation science routinely goes.
All copper conducts electricity, vastly surpasses every observation that will ever be made
about copper, because it's about all copper at all times and places in the universe.
And think about how far beyond experience science goes when it makes claims about what
the universe was like just after the Big Bang.
I mean, how does observational evidence so much to support the claim that there was a
Big Bang in the first place?
Certainly nobody was there to see it, and yet we think observation can help justify those
This is the mystery into which we begin inquiring today.
Now as we briefly noted in lecture six, the special thing about deductive inferences is
that they preserve truth.
The form, the syntax of such inferences, guarantees that if the premises are true,
the conclusion must be true.
Though deductive logic provides a model for the logic of confirmation, we know since our
conclusions so far outrun our observational evidence for them that we won't find this
kind of deductive guarantee, this notion of deductive proof.
Even if our premises, in a solid scientific argument are true, our conclusion might still
be false.
So we're looking for a weaker notion than deductive validity.
We're asking what the premises must be like so that they provide solid reason for accepting
the conclusion.
And remind yourself, please, that a reason can be excellent without being conclusive.
From the mere fact that we might be wrong, we should not dismiss our reasons, because
sometimes they can be excellent reasons.
The kind of logic the positivists we're looking for is often called inductive logic.
I'll use the term, but it can be a little bit dangerous.
This is to use the term induction in a broad sense, in which it simply contrasts with deduction.
Induction in a broad sense encompasses all rationally defensible inferences that are
not deductively valid.
And again, deductive validity is a matter of truth preserving, and inference is deductively
valid if it's impossible for the premises to be true and for the conclusion to be false.
In addition to this broad sense of induction, there's a narrower sense in which inductive
inference is a subclass of inductive inferences in the broad sense.
In the narrow sense, inductive inferences are what are sometimes called more of the
same inferences.
So a classic illustration, a nice simple one, is induction to an instance.
This is induction in the narrow sense, and in the broad sense, of course, it licenses
the inference from all observed x's have property p to the next observed x will have
property p.
That's a more of the same inference.
Inductive inferences to generalizations, like inferring that all copper conducts electricity
on the basis of certain observations of conductive copper, such generalizations are of more
scientific importance, since in general in science we're more interested in laws or
patterns than in particular facts.
It's worth noting that even with these very simple inferences, we don't automatically
make them.
We don't think all of them are justified.
Suppose this is your first teaching company course.
You would not make the inference from all observed teaching company courses concerning
the philosophy of science to all teaching company courses concerning philosophy of science.
Sometimes we have background evidence that blocks an inductive inference, sometimes we
don't think the sample is big enough or varied enough, but we do think there are favorable
cases for making such inductive inferences.
If we have a large and varied sample of conductive copper, we think that can provide an excellent
reason, not a conclusive reason, but an excellent reason for thinking that all copper conducts
electricity.
Before turning to examine this question, let's give a quick indication of the main kinds
of arguments that are inductive in the broad sense without being inductive in the narrow
sense.
Copernicus did not infer from all observed planets orbit the sun to all planets orbit
the sun, because he didn't observe planets orbiting the sun.
That was an inductive inference in the broad sense, it's not deductive, but nor is it
a more of the same inference.
This inference has the logical form of what's usually called inference to the best explanation,
it's called explanatory inference.
Certain observations, like the fact that Mars appears to reverse its course in the sky,
and that Venus is never observed very far from the sun, those sort of facts, Copernicus
thought, are best explained by the hypothesis that the planets orbit the sun, and if that
explanation is good enough, then the observations provide evidence for the hypothesis.
We'll examine that kind of inference in lecture 12, that's not a more of the same inference,
let's say behind the scenes kind of inference.
So we're returning here to induction in the narrow sense, to more of the same inferences.
And here we confront a famous argument due to David Hume, Hume's argument is designed
to show that inductive inferences in the narrow sense are entirely unjustified.
Now in one sense that's not that surprising, back in lecture 5 we saw Hume arguing that
if we were stuck believing only what we really have observational evidence for, we'd have
no beliefs about anything that we're not currently perceiving.
So it's hardly a surprise that he doesn't think we can use inductive inference to get
from the present to the future.
But Hume's argument is nevertheless striking, and it's easy to underestimate it.
He's not just saying that we can't be certain of our inductive inferences, we already knew
that, that follows from the fact that they're inductive.
What he's saying is we don't have any evidence at all for them, and he's not saying we don't
have any evidence in weak cases, like your inference that all teaching company courses
concern philosophy of science.
Take the best case for performing inductive arguments you would like.
No matter how large the sample size, no matter how varied it seems to be, Hume thinks it
provides no reason for its conclusion.
In other words, Hume is arguing that you don't have any reason to think that the sun will
come up tomorrow, none at all.
Taking the point as the positivist would put it, in terms of statements and inductive
logic, Hume is saying that no set of observation statements, no matter how large, of the sun
coming up, confers any support at all on the conclusion that the sun will rise tomorrow.
Now, it's worth noting that science doesn't very often make explicit inductive, in the
narrow sense, arguments.
They don't go around saying all observed copper conducts electricity, so all copper
conducts electricity.
They use explanatory inferences and probabilistic inferences.
But though these kinds of inferences aren't explicitly used very often in science, it's
reasonably clear that science relies on such inferences.
If the fact that all observed copper conducts electricity provides no reason at all for
expecting the next instance of copper to conduct electricity, science would be in big trouble,
even if it doesn't explicitly make many such inferences.
And of course, it's not only science that would be in trouble.
If past instances of bread being nourishing rather than poisonous, to take one of Hume's
examples, provide no reason at all to think that the next piece of bread you eat will
be nourishing rather than poisonous, it could get downright tricky to plan your day.
Putting the point less practically and more epistemically back to a kind of demarcation
problem, if Hume's argument succeeds, science would seem to be on an evidential par with
superstitions, with paranoid delusions, with the least reputable practice you'd like.
None of these provide any decent reason for their conclusions.
So that's a motivational speech for why this is an important problem to wrestle with.
Now let's turn to the argument.
Hume's argument proceeds via elimination.
Hume first notes that no deductive justification of induction is possible.
What does that mean?
With the recognition of our earlier point, inductive arguments are not deductively valid.
From the fact that all observed pieces of copper have in the past conducted electricity,
we cannot deductively infer that the next piece of copper will do so.
If that were a deductive inference, the truth of the premises would guarantee the truth
of the conclusion.
And that manifestly doesn't work.
We could have a valid deductive argument that the next piece of copper will conduct electricity
if we could help ourselves to a premise like the future will resemble the past, or the
future will resemble the past in the respect that copper will keep conducting electricity.
But that premise, of course, is exactly what we're trying to show.
We're wondering whether we have any good reason, based on past experience with conductive
copper, to think future experience with copper will involve conductivity.
So to get a deductive justification of induction, we would have to assume what we're trying
to show.
Hume's next move is to argue that no inductive justification of induction is possible.
So you might be pointing out that induction has worked pretty well both in science and
in everyday life.
The hypothesis that the sun will rise each morning has worked out pretty well for us.
So let's grant that premise.
Despite the fact that induction has some noteworthy failures, think of an argument like, the volcano
has stayed quiet this long.
That's an inductive argument, and it's a case of famous last words.
But induction doesn't always work.
We were never claiming that it would always work.
We're asking whether it provides solid reason.
Hume's question is, why should the fact that induction has worked well in the past count
as a reason at all for thinking that it will be reliable in the future?
It only does so if we assume that induction is reliable, because that's a more of the
same inference from past to future.
You're arguing in a circle.
This can be made more vivid by imagining somebody who doesn't buy induction as a reason.
Somebody who relies on counter induction for making his inferences about the future provides
a useful challenge here.
Induction assumes that the future will be very much like the past.
Counter induction predicts that the future will be extremely unlike the past.
Now, I don't know of anybody who generally or globally uses counter inductive inferences,
but gamblers and sports fans are prone to at least local versions of inductive inferences.
From the fact that they've lost 10 hands in a row at the poker table, or that their
team is on a long losing streak, these people don't infer that they're bad poker players
or they've got a bad team.
They infer, oh, I'm due, or my team is due.
Things are about to get better.
That's using the past as a negative guide to the future.
So we might think of the motto of induction as being more of the same, and the motto of
counter induction is time for a change.
Now it's true that you can sometimes reconstruct counter inductive arguments as inductive arguments
in disguise.
Maybe the sportscaster is making an inductive argument saying it's rare for a team to lose
more than eight games in a row.
I'm not going to speculate on how rational gamblers and sportscasters are.
Maybe they're counter inductive as sometimes maybe they're not.
I have in mind here an imaginary counter inductivist who is a real time for a change guy.
That's how he does his inferences.
So you try to reason with him.
You point out to him all the times in the past that induction has worked and that counter
induction has failed.
You say to him, remember that time you said, burners on a stove top that are glowing red
are due to be cool and pleasing to the touch.
It was time for a change back then, you said.
And look, you put your hand on it and you got burned.
What a disaster your counter inductive practices have been.
What's your counter inductive is going to say?
He's going to say you're right, which is an excellent reason for thinking they're going
to start being excellent inferences.
The counter inductivist will agree with you about all these cases, but they're not going
to have any tendency to persuade him because he thinks that the fact that counter induction
has worked badly in the past is itself evidence that it will work well in the future.
Counter induction is due.
Time has had its day.
It's now time for counter induction.
Hume's point is that our reasons for adopting the more of the same principle are of the
same type as the counter inductivist's reasons for adopting the time for a change principle,
which is to say, they're lousy reasons.
All of this is well illustrated by Bertrand Russell's example of a chicken who trusts
induction.
Every morning of the chicken's life, the farmer brings feed.
Farmer feed every morning, just like us with the sun coming up every morning.
But one morning, the farmer does not bring feed.
The farmer brings an axe.
And the chicken learns that the world does not need to obey our inductive expectations.
Hume's point is we should see ourselves like Russell has us seeing the chicken.
His point is not that we could or should refrain from performing inductive inferences.
He just wants us to realize we're not governed by reason when we do so.
We're not any smarter than Russell's chicken.
Experience causes us to reason inductively.
It pushes our buttons.
But that's very different from experience justifying our reasoning inductively.
Hume wants to deflate our conception of ourselves as highly rational creatures.
Now the fact that it would be a disaster for us to be reasonable doesn't make it reasonable
for us to make these inductive inferences.
Just means we're lucky not to be too reasonable.
There have been many attempts to answer Hume's argument.
Hume's argument has been called a scandal to philosophy by many philosophers.
And we're going to start looking at those next time.
Let me quickly note a couple of responses to Hume that we're not going to consider before
turning to Popper's response to Hume, which is Hume is right and it doesn't matter.
One response would be to try to argue that the uniformity of nature, the fact that the
future will resemble the past in important respects, can be established as some kind
of metaphysical principle, knowable apart from experience, a synthetic a priori principle
that guarantees the reliability of induction.
Now that's not going to be taken seriously by the logical positivists or by Hume because
their empiricists, they think it's mysterious how we could get a reason to believe in such
a principle.
The real evidence for them is observational evidence and you can't get observational evidence
that induction will work without begging the very question at issue.
So this is a reason why some metaphysicians have tried to reject empiricism and argue that
we have to have justified beliefs that are not grounded in experience.
But we're assuming empiricism in this course as philosophers of science are want to do,
so we're not going to pursue that.
That's to go into metaphysics in a way that we're not going to bother.
As I've presented it, the argument pulls a fast one, but it's not actually a dangerous
or damaging fast one.
The argument claims that deduction can't defend induction and then it claims that induction
can't defend induction and it concludes that there's no defense.
But the argument shifts between induction and the narrow sense.
We've argued that induction in the narrow sense can't be used to defend induction without
begging the question.
If induction in the broad sense could provide support for induction in the narrow sense,
then we might get somewhere.
But that's a pipe dream.
Nobody thinks that induction in the broad sense is more reliable than induction in the
narrow sense.
Explanatory inferences are much trickier than more of the same inferences.
So if induction in the narrow sense is more or less worthless, induction in the broad
sense is not going to bail it out.
So we're going to have to come up with a more elaborate, a more demanding solution
to Hume's problem.
Or we won't if Popper is right.
Popper actually claims that induction plays no role in science at all.
And so he can happily accept Hume's argument and go on about his merry way.
As we saw back in lecture two, Popper thought confirmation is cheap.
It's interpretation of data in the light of your theory.
What matters to Popper is not getting evidence for your scientific theories.
It matters whether your theories are subject to falsification.
This is the key to Popper escaping from Hume's clutches.
Popper thinks that scientific theories can be falsified using only observation and deduction.
You don't need inductive logic at all.
One black swan conclusively falsifies all swans are white.
Notice that we're putting aside all the worries about auxiliary hypotheses we discussed a
little while ago when we were talking about quine.
In principle, one can always modify the web of belief so as to preserve any hypothesis.
For instance, the hypothesis that all swans are white.
Popper's point is some ways of modifying the web of belief are unscientific.
So we're going to put aside worries about holism for now.
There's another worry about Popper that we can note and set aside, which is we saw earlier
in the course that hypotheses of the form there is at least one X in the universe, like
there is at least one unicorn somewhere in the universe, is not falsifiable by any finite
amount of observation.
It could just be around the next bend no matter how long you look.
Popper denies that science has need for hypotheses like that.
He thinks science has need for hypotheses of the form all X's are Y's, all copper
conducts electricity.
And those are fairly readily falsifiable.
So Popper doesn't need induction.
On Popper's view, scientists shouldn't try to confirm their theories.
They shouldn't perform inductive inferences in the first place.
The most we can ever say in favor of a theory or hypothesis is that it has survived our
attempts to falsify it.
And Popper calls this corroboration to distinguish it from confirmation.
Now he's serious about distinguishing it from confirmation.
The fact that a hypothesis has survived severe testing does not indicate that it's likely
to be true.
Or that it's more likely to be true than it was before it was tested.
So when Eddington failed to falsify Einstein's hypothesis that the sun would bend light rays
that pass near it, that was not on Popper's view evidence that general relativity is correct.
That would be an inductive argument.
Popper has no use for induction.
Corroboration does not indicate that a theory is healthy, just that it's not dead yet.
The Eddington experiment tried to kill Einstein's theory and failed, and that's all we learn
from the Eddington experiment.
So Popper goes out of his way explicitly to deny that a theory's corroboration is any
predictor of its future success.
And he's got to deny it, because otherwise he'd be relying on induction.
He'd be saying that past survival of strenuous tests is evidence for future survival.
And that's an inductive argument.
So you've probably seen commercials where stockbrokers are forced by the government
to point out that past performance of some mutual fund is no guarantee of future performance.
Popper's going beyond that.
Past performance for Popper is no evidence at all of future performance.
And he's got to stick to that claim, otherwise he's reasoning inductively.
Now at some point, we stop testing our theories.
We start taking them for granted.
And this looks like a problem for Popper, because it looks like we're deciding the theory has
been supported by enough evidence that we no longer need to test it, and we can start
using it to design experiments to test other theories.
Popper's response is we are saying no such thing.
It's a decision about how to best use our time and our money and our lab equipment.
It's not to say general relativity has been shown to be true, it's to say, all right,
we feel like testing something else now, and we're going to use general relativity to test
that.
Similarly, outside of science, we can rely on hypotheses for various practical purposes.
As we do when we get on airplanes, we're relying on Bernoulli's principle about lift.
But if we're Popperians, this is not a judgment that the hypothesis is likely to be true.
It's a decision about what to do, how to get from point A to point B.
Now Popper has some serious trouble explaining why it is rational to prefer corroborated theories
to untested theories.
He's got a point if he says that it's rational to prefer corroborated theories, theories
that have survived severe tests, to theories that have actually been falsified.
If we know that a theory is false, that's a pretty good reason not to rely on it.
But remember, Popper insists that corroboration says nothing at all about the likely truth
or future performance of a theory.
And so the challenge for Popper is, why aren't all theories that aren't already known to
be false on an equal footing?
What's special about theories that have survived severe tests?
Why should they be preferred to theories that have their names drawn out of a hat or theories
that can be formulated in the fewest number of words?
Popper seems to say that the practice of science simply includes preferring corroborated theories.
This is part of what makes science science, just as falsifiability is supposed to be part
of what makes science science, it's how the game is played.
But that's not an obviously fair move.
The original demarcation criterion, the falsifiability criterion, was put forward to account for
the difference between what Freud was up to, for instance, and what Einstein was up to.
It was motivated by a desire to sort cases.
And it's not clear what the motivation for the idea that scientists are just supposed
to prefer corroborated theories to untested theories is supposed to be, doesn't have
a similar function in Popper's view.
When Popper explains his position, what he tends to say is, scientists should prefer
corroborated theories because there's nothing better to go on.
Since he accepts Hume's argument that induction doesn't work, there's nothing better to go
on than theories that have survived severe tests.
So far so good, there is nothing better to go on, if induction doesn't work.
But there are lots of things that are no worse to go on.
Choosing theories by reading tea leaves would seem to be no worse to go on, if severe testing
is no guide to future performance, well, I think reading tea leaves is no guide to future
performance of theories.
And reading tea leaves might be cheaper, easier, more fun than choosing theories on the basis
of which ones have survived severe tests.
So it's misleading for Popper to claim that simply because there's nothing better to go
on, we should prefer theories that have survived severe tests.
We need some reason to think that it's a virtue of a theory, if it has survived a severe
test.
And without relying on induction, he's gonna have a hard time doing that.
So both within science and outside of science, so within science we use theories to design
experiments to make predictions, outside science we use theories when we get on airplanes
and decide how to spend our time.
It's hard to see how Popper has given us a reason for preferring corroborated theories
to untested theories.
The best response I can make on his behalf is a kind of dance with who brung you to the
bash principle.
The idea here is you don't drop a theory until it fails a test.
You've been using a theory, what you need is a reason to give it up.
And until your theory fails a test, you've got no reason to give it up.
But this relies, dance with who brung you to the bash is an old western swing song and
it's a little more romantic than our choosing of scientific theories.
You owe your date a little bit of loyalty.
You don't drop your date if you see somebody you think looks better at the bash.
Not clear that we owe our scientific theories that kind of loyalty.
If there's no reason to think that a theory that has survived severe tests is gonna work
better than the next theory that pops up, why can't I switch just for the fun of it?
So it looks like Popper either has to assume some kind of induction in order to get us
to prefer corroborated theories to uncroborated theories, or he's got to admit that there
is no good reason for preferring either for scientific or for practical purposes theories
that have survived severe tests.
And ask yourself how much sense it makes to get on an airplane if you don't think past
performance is any indicator at all a future performance.
So we're in trouble if we can't defend the use of the past as a guide to the future.
Both in science and outside science, it looks like we need to make inductive arguments,
which means we need to have an answer to Hume.
Now one striking thing about Popper is he nevertheless thinks scientific theories aim
at the truth.
Even though they can never get any evidence at all that they're getting there.
So I'll use an example due to Peter Godfrey Smith, a philosopher at Stanford.
Popper's conception of science is like you go around looking for the holy grail, but
you can never get evidence that any grail you've got is holy.
There are a gazillion grails out there and you want to carry one around and you'll drop
it if you get some indication that it's unholy.
Sometimes you can find out that a grail is unholy, but you can never ever, no matter
what happens, get any indication you've got the holy grail.
So you're seeking it, but you can never get the slightest bit of evidence that you found
it, no matter what happens.
It's nevertheless the goal of science to try to get true theories, but there is no way
to get any evidence at all that you're getting closer to your goal.
That's kind of a striking and peculiar feature of Popper's view of science.
We'll see whether we can do better by trying directly to answer Hume's argument next time.
