Lecture 7 Logical Positivism, Science, and Meaning
Last time we saw the positivists struggling as we saw Bridgeman and the classical empiricists
struggle with the notion of an experiential legitimation of concepts and claims.
So in the last lecture, as in the lecture on classical empiricism, we approached this
problem in a general way, as concerning all concepts.
In this lecture, as in our discussion of Bridgeman, we're going to focus explicitly on scientific
theories and the claims that comprise them.
The positivists needed to show, as their empiricist predecessors had not, that science could
be adequately reconstructed in empiricist terms.
Since we know that for the positivists, science exhausts the realm of the empirically meaningful,
we know that we're dealing with the very same issues that we dealt with last time.
In what way is science experientially legitimate, such that other enterprises aren't?
But this time we approach it from within science, rather than from the problem of demarcation.
And this is going to involve a certain amount of heavy lifting, things should get easier
after this lecture, I hope.
The positivist conception of how scientific theories work was so influential that it's
generally called the received view of theories.
This is part of why it's worth our getting clear about this now, we'll keep coming back
to this conception of a scientific theory.
Rudolph Carnap did more to develop this conception of theories than anybody else.
Unsurprisingly, given the positivists' conception of the business of philosophy, they think
of a scientific theory as a linguistic kind of thing.
It's a set of sentences that has certain properties.
The sentences are not expressed in just any old language.
For purposes of explicitness and clarity, they envisioned scientific theories stated
in the language of logic.
Now they were not so ridiculous as to think that scientists would state their theories
this way.
The point is that they can be restated and clarified by being stated in the language
of logic.
In actual practice, scientists often don't bother explicitly stating their theories at
all.
That's a philosopher's job for the positivists.
And the positivists are not saying that this kind of a restatement is the best form in
which to put a scientific theory for purposes of doing science.
That's the best form for purposes of displaying the relationships of meaning and evidence
that make science special.
So this distinctive approach to science is called a rational reconstruction.
The positivists were not interested in the messy process by which scientists actually
arrive at their theories, or the messy ways in which scientists actually state their theories.
They were interested in presenting highly developed, highly successful theories in ways
that make the logical relationships of the theories explicit.
We will eventually contrast this with approaches that think the messiness of science is more
crucial to science than the positivists do.
They tend to think of the messiness as incidental.
They want to display the logic distinctive of science.
The language of logic itself presents no problems in terms of meaningfulness.
As we've seen, there's an explicit definition of the logical connectives, of the terms that
comprise logical sentences.
So they're analytically true, true by virtue of meaning.
A sentence of the form, if p then q, can be pretty messy in English.
It's not always clear exactly what's meant, I'll give you an example in a moment.
But in logic, if p then q is going to have a very specific kind of meaning, we're not
going to permit the kind of ambiguity we permit in ordinary language in our logical
language.
So in logic, we define something called the material conditional.
It looks like a horseshoe, and it's defined such that p horseshoe q is true whenever either
p is false or q is true.
You don't have to memorize this, it's just going to be an illustration that will be
useful for us.
So this is very like the main use in English of if then.
The main use of if then is to block moving from a true p to a false q.
So p horseshoe q can be loosely translated as if p then q, but it's more precise.
Let me give you an example.
In English, if I say, if you listen to all 36 of these lectures, I'll give you a swell
philosophy book.
It's clear that I've said something untrue if you listen to all 36 lectures and I don't
give you a book.
And it's clear that I've said something true if you listen to all 36 lectures and I give
you the book.
But if you don't listen to all 36 lectures, it's not clear what we want to say.
If you don't listen to all 36 and I give you the book anyway, notice I never said I won't
give you a book unless you listen to all 36 lectures.
It's not clear whether the if then statement was true or false.
If you don't listen to all 36 lectures and I don't give you the book, again, it's not
quite clear whether we want to say the if then is true or false.
Stating theories in the language of logic avoids this problem.
P horseshoe q is defined to be true in all cases except when p is false and q is true.
So it automatically comes out true whenever the if part is false.
If you don't listen to all 36 lectures, whether I give you the book or not, the statement
comes out true.
We just need to stipulate the right sort of meaning so that we know exactly what we're
asserting.
So it's less important that you find this answer intuitive, though it is pretty intuitive.
What's important is that you see that in logic, unlike in ordinary English, there's
a clear answer.
These statements in logic are what philosophers call truth functional.
The truth of the whole statement is determined entirely by the truth of the components plus
the unambiguous meaning of the logical connectives.
So this is the advantage of stating our theories in the language of logic.
We know exactly what's being said.
So far so good.
But we need, of course, more than just logical connectives in order to do science.
The language of logic has variables, and they can stand for objects and properties.
There is an object x such that x has property p, that kind of stuff.
And a statement like that is perfectly clear in one sense, in the sense that matters most
to logicians, and perfectly unclear in another sense that we'll explain in a moment.
It's perfectly clear syntactically.
Syntax is the logical structure, approximately the grammar of a language.
So we know what follows from there is an x such that x has property p.
So it follows that there's at least one thing in the universe that has property p.
One of the kind of remarkable things when you step back from it about logic is that
we can perform rock solid inferences without knowing what the inferences are about.
If I start from no blonks or cronks, and newfoo is a cronk, I can infer that newfoo is not
a blonk.
I have no idea what I just said.
I don't need to.
The form of that inference is such that if the first two statements are true, the third
one has got to be true.
So I can use syntax to crank out inferences without knowing what I'm making inferences
about.
That's part of what's cool about logic.
Now these statements are quite unclear semantically.
I haven't told you what newfoo is.
I haven't given you a meaning or a reference for that term.
So I don't know whether the statements are true.
What I know is if the first two were true, the third one would have to be true.
So that's the part that we get through logic.
We then need to be able to give an experientially kosher interpretation of the objects and properties
that figure in a scientific theory.
And we've already seen some issues about what this should be like.
So Locke, Barkley, and Hume thought that only sensations are experientially kosher.
We've decided to decide with Bridgeman and some of the positivists, and we're helping
ourselves to the idea that it's okay, that it's unproblematic, to talk about observable
objects having observable properties.
So such objects and properties form what we can call the observational vocabulary.
The observational vocabulary counts as meaningful.
The logical vocabulary counts as meaningful.
So in interpreting our scientific theory, we can help ourselves to the idea that we
can see of a piece of paper that it's blue or red, of a dial that it points to 100.
We probably can't see that something is litmus paper.
That's something about what it's made of or how it behaves.
So that statement will need to be unpacked or explained in the observational language.
It's not itself independently meaningful until we connect it in the right sort of way to observation.
Blue we can see, litmus paper we can't directly see.
So any statement formed out of the logical vocabulary, combined with the observational
vocabulary, counts as empirically meaningful.
So far so good.
But we're unlikely to be able to do any interesting science on this basis.
What we're going to have so far is a list of observations, but it's hard to do any predicting
or explaining with just a list of observations.
What we're going to get is something like blue pieces of paper like that one turned pink
in some but not all liquids.
That's observationally kosher.
But it's not of much use for generating a scientific theory.
It's not of much use for predicting or explaining things.
We need what are called theoretical terms, meaningful terms that are not themselves given
an observation, acid, litmus paper, proton.
If we're going to have any scientific understanding of the world, we're going to need to get behind
or beyond observation, and we're going to need to be able to meaningfully talk about
it.
So our question, our big challenge in this lecture is to figure out how we can give
meaning to terms that are neither part of the logical vocabulary nor part of the observational
vocabulary.
And this encapsulates, in a nutshell, a huge recurring tension within the philosophy of
science.
On the one hand, science must limit itself to experience.
On the other hand, it must go beyond experience.
We saw an empiricist like Barkley reject the whole project of getting behind experience.
But now we're beginning to see why it's difficult to settle for mere patterns in experience.
We need to be able to see what's going on as it were behind the scenes if we're going
to see what's common to those substances that turned litmus paper pink, because that's
not directly observable.
And we're going to see over and over empiricists struggle to distinguish the ways science must
keep itself honest by constraining itself within observation and the ways in which it
must go beyond observation.
So how can we expand our vocabulary without violating empiricism, without opening the
door to metaphysics?
Well, we're allowed to introduce new terms as long as we can define them using terms
we already know to be legitimate.
So I can perform any logical or mathematical observations on terms in the observational
vocabulary, and as long as I'm clear about what I mean by them, I can introduce them.
So if I have my standard bread box and my standard Shaquille O'Neal, who is a very large
basketball player, and if I have my trusty meter stick, then I can define, I can introduce
the term medium-sized and say by it I mean anything that has a volume greater than or
equal to that of a bread box and less than or equal to that of Shaquille O'Neal.
I've told you exactly what I mean in observational terms, and so my new term is legit.
I can operationalize that term, connect it to experience.
The question is whether this is going to work for less silly, more scientifically interesting
terms.
Let's try a fairly easy case at the outset.
Fragility is a term that has clear connections to observation, but it's not itself an observation
term.
Why not?
We can't tell just by looking whether something is fragile or not.
You have to whack it.
Fragility is what philosophers sometimes call a disposition term as opposed to a manifest
term.
There are lots of these in science.
To call something soluble is to say it's disposed to dissolve in certain liquids.
To call somebody allergic is to say that this person is disposed to react in the presence
of certain test conditions.
So disposition terms are linked to observation only in the presence of a test condition.
You can't just look at somebody and tell that she's allergic.
Okay, but this doesn't seem like too much of a problem because we can use logic and
observation terms, and we can define fragility, or x is fragile, as if you strike x, it'll
break.
That way we can introduce the term.
Now, of course, it's going to have to be a little fancier than that.
This is science, right?
So we have to have the standard mallet, and we have to have a precisely calibrated machine
that delivers the standard whack with the standard mallet, and a bunch of fancy stuff
like it's fragile only if after receiving the standard whack it breaks within a certain
narrow time frame, but we know how to do all that sort of stuff.
So have we then defined fragility in observational terms?
No.
Our definition is something like this.
This fragile means if you strike it the standard whack, et cetera, et cetera, it breaks.
But this is one of those if-then statements, and we saw that the standard truth functional
reading of if-then, as in if you strike it, then it breaks, says that the if-then is true
whenever the if is false.
That was the moral of the if you don't listen to all 36 lectures, it doesn't matter whether
I gave you the book or not, what I've said counts as true.
The analog here is any object not struck the standard whack comes out being fragile,
because the if part, if you strike it the standard whack, is false, the whole thing
comes out true.
So our definition, which says if you strike it the standard whack, it's fragile, ends
up saying of a sponge or of the Empire State Building, if they haven't been struck the
standard whack, our definition says they're fragile.
And we don't want to say that, that's wildly false.
Now you might want to try to come up with a different reading of the if-then, but there's
no way to develop an if-then that is truth functional, that is clear and analytically
definable, that's going to do the trick without violating our standards of meaningfulness.
Why not?
Because here's what you want to say.
You don't want to say if you strike it, it will break.
You want to say if you were to strike it, it would break.
That doesn't sound as different as it seems, but it's pretty different.
There's a big difference between saying if Oswald didn't kill Kennedy, someone else did.
That seems pretty clearly true.
And if Oswald hadn't killed Kennedy, someone else would have.
Much less obviously true.
The latter one is called a counterfactual conditional, rather than the material conditional
we talked about earlier.
That talks about how things would be if the world were different than it is.
And these are tricky.
They're too messy to get a nice, clean, analytic definition.
They depend on a substantive kind of connection between the if-part and the then-part.
The material conditional doesn't, it's just a logical connection.
So the kind of if-then we want when we say if you were to strike it, it would break is
not definable in terms of logic, and it's not suitably observational either.
We can see what does happen.
We can see of things whether they've been struck and whether they break.
But we don't directly observe what would happen if things were different than they are.
So this is the kind of problem we face as we try to give empirical meaning to scientific
statements.
The positivist conception of theories is not dead yet, though.
Karnat makes a nifty move here.
He shows that we can still connect fragility to observation, even though we can't define
fragility in terms of observation.
When we offered a definition, we ended up saying wildly false things about which objects
are fragile.
What we can say is something like this.
Anything struck the standard whack is fragile just in case it breaks.
Now, I know this doesn't sound very different from what we said before.
Let me point out the difference.
This would be easier if we were using logical notation, which we're not.
The big difference is this.
This statement, the one I just offered, is a definition of fragility only for struck
objects.
This statement doesn't say anything about the fragility of unstruck objects.
It is silent on the question.
It is a partial definition or partial interpretation of fragility.
This one says, of unstruck things, you know, it remains true, but it doesn't say whether
they're fragile or not.
It just doesn't apply to anything that's unstruck.
Our theory avoids falsehood by paying the price of silence.
It makes no assertions whatsoever about the fragility of unstruck objects.
This is modestly technical.
Let's try to come back to the important content behind the technicality.
This partial definition has empirical content.
It's connected to observation.
It tells us something about what to expect experientially.
For instance, it shows that if something is struck the standard whack and doesn't break,
then it's not fragile.
It's got a real connection to experience.
And this allows us to claim that the term fragile has some legitimate meaning.
It's not metaphysical like pyramid-powered.
I might adopt the theory that things break when they do because of the power of the pyramid
and that they hold together when they do because of the power of the pyramid.
But that has no experiential implications.
This is broadly paparian in scope.
We saw when talking about logic that you don't need to give a meaning, a complete semantic
interpretation to a sentence in order to derive consequences from it.
All that stuff about new food.
I didn't know what I was talking about, but I knew what followed from it.
So here we're giving a partial interpretation in terms of experience.
We don't need any interpretation at all to crank out some consequences.
The interpretation assures us that some of the consequences have observational content.
So we're going beyond what we need to perform inferences.
So we can make some predictions using fragility.
And we've seen how to use a partial definition rather than a full definition in order to
increase the linguistic resources of our theory.
Even when we can't define in observational terms, we can link our terms to observation.
And we acted like we were settling for second best here, that the ideal would have been
a definition of every new term in observational terms.
But that's actually wrong.
It's these partial links that we really want.
If you could completely define a term observationally, what you've got is an abbreviation.
It just summarizes observational content you've already got.
I haven't really added anything new to my conceptual resources if I introduce APA as
an abbreviation for the American Philosophical Association.
I'm saving my breath, but I'm not adding to my linguistic resources.
By adding terms that are only partially defined in observational terms, I'm enriching my
linguistic resources.
We have to be able to get away from the observational level if we're to predict and explain.
And that means have fairly tenuous links to the observational level.
And this is what makes empiricists uncomfortable.
If fragility is to be of any real use to us scientifically, it will have to say or do
something beyond its direct observational content.
Otherwise, it's just a summary of experience.
This is the bind the empiricist is in.
Fragility will need to get hooked up, not just to experience, but to claims about something
like molecular structure or something like that, if it's going to tell us anything of
scientific interest.
And that hooking up is going to have to come from the kinds of logical, deductive relations
we've been exploring.
So to do real science, we need terms that are greater removed from observation and links
between these terms that are at some removed from observation.
Not all of the links can be directly to the level of observation.
We need to be able to link fragility to molecular structure in some way, even though neither
of those terms is directly about observation.
But this means our earlier problem is back with a vengeance.
Every scientifically legitimate notion was supposed to hook up with experience somehow.
How are we going to get this term molecular structure to hook up with experience so that
it can then hook up with fragility?
Well, once we start enriching the observational vocabulary, like we did with fragility, we
have a larger vocabulary to draw on.
And then you can partially interpret new terms on the basis of this larger vocabulary.
So for instance, the property of being made of copper might get partially interpreted
observationally through some chemical test for the presence of copper.
And it also might have meaningful links to a more theoretical notion like being a metal,
which is not directly observable.
We need links down from theory to observation, links up from observation to theory, and links
across or sideways within the theory, if we're going to do science.
But notice we're getting beyond observation.
The empirical meaning of a term or a statement is going to be its role in forging these logical
connections between inputs and outputs.
So what's the experiential meaning of copper?
It's exhausted by its role in all the chemical and physical laws in which that term appears.
And for some scientific terms, like gene or quark, they're going to have no direct links
to observation at all.
All of their connections to observation are going to proceed via other theoretical terms
like DNA or trait.
The empirical meaning of a term like that is not going to be cashed out in anything
like seeing a gene.
It's going to be cashed out in terms of what we lose in our theory's ability to derive
observations if the term was deleted.
So what we need is a connection to observation that's not too tight and not too loose.
And the picture that emerges is of theories as what are called partially interpreted formal
systems.
You don't need to memorize this, I'm just giving you the party line here.
A scientific theory is structured like a mathematical theory.
The most general laws of the theory are axioms.
So in Newton's mechanics, Newton's three laws of motion are basic.
They are posited, they're not derived.
We use them to explain everything else.
And the empirical meaning that all these statements get comes from observation statements, which
then are used to partially interpret this richer vocabulary.
And the deductive logical relations spread this observational meaning around the theory.
This is what I mean by the received view of theories.
A theory has the logical structure of a geometry, but it gets an empirical interpretation, partially
at least, in terms of observation.
Now we've seen that we need connections among theoretical terms, as well as connections
between theoretical terms and observational terms, for science to work.
And we've considerably loosened up the strictures that made operationalism and classical empiricism
much too tight.
They had to connect terms to experience so tightly that you can't really do science
that way.
But as we've seen, most bowls of porridge are either going to be too hot or too cold.
The question is, once we let in enough looseness in order to do science, are we going to be
able to keep out metaphysics?
The received view has a couple of ways of trying to deal with this problem.
But it's a big problem.
Once we think about how complex, how far removed from experience many scientific claims are,
it seemed to the positivists that we're losing track of anything worth calling experiential
meaning.
The claim that the charm quark has a mass equal to that of 1.6 protons is only linked
to experience via an enormously complicated and indirect network of theoretical statements.
The experiential meaning of that looks pretty slender.
So here's the worry.
Once we allow that, what stops me from introducing the following kind of partial definition?
I'm going to call a sample of water unholy if it has ever been used to make light beer.
And this is part of my chemical theory.
This allows me to make some observational predictions.
I can tell you some places where unholy water will be found.
So it connects to experience.
Why isn't that a legitimate scientific term?
The classic response is this sentence is what is called isolated.
It doesn't hook up to other statements of the theory.
It doesn't help us derive any new predictions that take advantage of the distinction between
unholy water and regular water.
I can find what my theory says is unholy water, but I can't predict any observational difference
between unholy water and regular water.
So it's like adding a piston to your engine that doesn't turn anything.
So that's the basis on which they try to distinguish terms that are experientially legitimate
from terms that aren't.
And of course, this has the baby in the bathwater problem.
You need to come up with a clear notion of what counts as isolation because it appears
that science permits some isolated terms, and it's going to be hard to keep in what
we want while keeping out the nonsense.
So when a term like gene gets introduced into biology for a while, it was just a placeholder.
This was not a term that connected to observation in any very clear way.
It needed to be connected to DNA, which didn't happen for 50 years after it was introduced,
before gene helped us make any predictions about hereditary characteristics.
So the sentence introducing the term gene looks a whole lot like the sentence introducing
the term unholy water.
So again, this problem, we want to link our theoretical statements closely to observation.
But if we loosen things up enough to do real science, it's hard to keep metaphysics out.
So we're trying to avoid too much of a gap between observation and scientific assertion.
Another way that a positivist had of dealing with this involves refusing to take what theories
seem to say about unobservable reality too seriously.
So for the positivist, the job of theories is not to get the world right, it's to get
experience right.
We saw a version of this in Barkley, as I'll explain in a moment.
But a clearer example in some ways might be acupuncture, at least as it's viewed by Western
medical science.
One can respect that this theory offers highly reliable, at least within a certain domain,
predictions.
And that it can bring about some lovely cures.
We can respect all of that without buying the explanations it offers for the predictions
and the cures.
It says stuff about energy channels and stuff like that that Western medicine is not a big
fan of.
For the positivist, this stuff about energy channels has no meaning beyond the way it
connects.
Observational inputs, like my back hurts, and observational outputs, like my back has
stopped hurting.
If you take the claims about energy channels too seriously, you're going to find yourself
doing metaphysics.
The meaning of statements is exhausted by their role in systematizing experience.
And so acupuncture can count as a good theory, even though what it seems to say, if you took
it too seriously, would sound metaphysical.
So, the theoretical parts of our scientific theory are crucial, but what they're crucial
for is not describing unobservable reality.
They're crucial for deriving observations.
Strikingly, a scientific theory doesn't have to be true to be good.
There don't have to be energy channels for acupuncture to be a good theory.
Indeed, often in a scientific theory, the theory won't be capable of being true or
false because it's only partially interpreted.
We haven't interpreted fragility for all objects, but only for struck objects.
A scientific theory is not an attempt to describe the world.
It's a set of inference tickets saying it's okay to derive this kind of observational
prediction from this kind of observational data.
But that's okay, since the statements of the theory can play the needed role without
being true.
Their needed role is as inference cranks.
Take observational inputs, generate true observational predictions.
On this view, a theory is an instrument.
This is the instrumental conception of scientific theories.
They don't try to describe the world, they tell you what to expect.
This is the Barclayan side.
The classic example is Andreas Ossiander's preface to Copernicus's sun-centered picture
of the solar system.
Ossiander was trying to get Copernicus's theory accepted, so he said, I'm not saying
this is a true theory.
I wouldn't want to contradict the church, I'm just saying it's a very good way of figuring
out where you're going to observe planets when.
It's a useful instrument for prediction.
To some people, this seems like a decisively scientific attitude.
To others, it seems crazy.
Late in the course, we will confront this head-on.
The point here is, we've got this Barclayan inheritance.
We don't want to try to go too far beyond experience because we'll get into metaphysics.
But we've got this scientific imperative that we need to predict and systematize experience.
So now we've got this very sophisticated, received view of theories which says, we go
beyond experience for inferential purposes, but not for assertive purposes.
We're not trying to describe unobservable reality, but we'll talk as if there's an
unobservable reality, so that we can better predict observable reality.
This is a major and influential achievement, which we will next time watch begin to unravel.
