Butcher 19, Putting the Cause Back in Because
The worries that we discussed last time about whether Hempel's covering law model of explanation
is too restrictive, whether it's too physics-centered in its reliance on laws and excludes biological
and psychological explanations. Such worries have not really been resolved largely because
bigger problems have emerged from the other direction. The model is generally thought
to be too permissive. Arguments that intuitively have no explanatory force count as legitimate
scientific explanations according to the covering law model.
We think that the height of a flagpole explains the length of its shadow. Now that's not
a problem for the covering law model. From some laws, geometrical laws, physical laws,
for instance optical laws. Plus some initial conditions, we can deduce the length of the
shadow from the height of the pole. So far we have a perfectly fine covering law explanation.
But we can equally well start from the length of the shadow and, using the very same laws,
deduce the height of the flagpole. Now can the length of the shadow explain the height
of the flagpole just as well as the height can explain the length of the shadow?
Arguments for Hempel are arguments, and the argument from the length of the shadow to
the height of the flagpole looks every bit as good as the argument from the height of
the flagpole to the length of the shadow. So Hempel bites the bullet in this case and
says that the explanation is equally good in either direction. Now this sounds odd,
but that's not conclusive, maybe our intuitions about explanation are imperfectly reliable.
When we consider some similar cases however, this bullet is going to seem decreasing bitable.
For similar reasons, Hempel's model allows symptoms, in a broad sense of symptom as we'll
see, to explain the things of which they are symptoms. Coplic spots are little white spots
on the inside of one's cheeks that show up a little while before one comes down with full-blown
measles. I don't know whether coplic spots are always present prior to measles, but let's
suppose for the sake of argument that they are. In that case, coplic spots provide excellent
evidence that one has the measles. They are a very good basis given the law connecting
the spots and the disease for predicting measles. But does it make sense to say the reason why
the patient has the measles is because the patient has coplic spots? Notice that it seems
unproblematic to say that the reason the patient has coplic spots is because the patient has
measles, and by measles here we mean the infection, not the spots on the skin of full-blown measles.
A disease and its symptoms might be perfectly symmetrically correlated, but explanation
doesn't seem symmetrical in the way that correlation is. The reason the sense of a symptom at work
here is not limited to medical contexts can be seen using a meteorological example. From
the approach of a storm, using some reasonably familiar laws, we can predict the fall of
a barometer, and it seems right to say that the barometer is falling because a storm is
approaching. But again, we can use the fall of the barometer and the very same laws to
predict the approaching storm. Are we then comfortable saying that the storm is approaching
because the barometer is falling? A couple of additional examples can help us appreciate
the extent of the problem. This crops up all over the place in the philosophy of explanation.
In Kepler's laws, I can make a deductive inference from the current position of Mars
to its position three days from now, and it seems to make sense to say it will be there
then because of where it is now. But the very same inference would allow me to say that
it's where it is now because of where it will be in three days, and it seems like the past
or the present can explain the future in a way that the future cannot explain the past
or present.
Hemple's model also seems to allow irrelevant explanations. Here's an entertaining one.
If Mr. Jones takes his wife's birth control pills, we can certainly predict, using the
laws of nature, that he will not become pregnant. For simplifying purposes, let's suppose the
birth control pills are perfectly effective. That it's a law that nobody who takes birth
control pills becomes pregnant. And Mr. Jones took birth control pills. Have we thereby
explained his non-pregnancy?
Many philosophers think that the same thing has gone wrong in all of these cases. An event
is explained by what causes it. The causal model of explanation, simply stated, says
that to explain an event or a fact is to provide information about the causes of that event
or fact.
As we've seen, the covering law model gets into trouble because the notion of expectability
on which it relies is too symmetrical. And causation, many philosophers think, provides
the needed asymmetry. The disease causes and hence explains the symptoms, while the symptoms
neither cause nor explain the disease. The height of the flagpole causes the length of
the shadow, but not vice versa.
Similarly, explanations that include irrelevant information fail because they lead us away
from the actual causes.
So here's a good covering law explanation. Let's say that Jones has eaten a pound of
arsenic. That's an initial condition for our covering law argument. Here's a law, any
member of Homo sapiens who eats a pound of arsenic dies within 24 hours. So Jones will
die within 24 hours. We have a good explanation by Hempel standards of poor Jones' demise.
But suppose that Jones gets run over by a bus 10 minutes after ingesting the arsenic.
It does not seem like we have an acceptable explanation of Jones' death. There is an interesting
move available to the defender of the covering law model.
The defender can claim that the relevant law isn't strict. The real law that applies in
this case is an all other things equal law, sometimes called a Keteris paribus law. The
true law is only a human being who eats a pound of arsenic dies within 24 hours, all
other things being equal. Similarly, a metal expands when heated, all other things being
equal. But if somebody is banging on each end of the metal while it's being heated,
it won't in fact expand.
So the idea is that the covering law explanation fails because one of the statements of the
argument, the law with the all other things equal clause, is not in fact true since all
other things were not equal, Jones got hit by a bus, and so we don't have an acceptable
covering law explanation. It's not clear however that this will work. Keteris paribus
clause is function to save laws from apparent falsification. They're invoked to explain
why what the law said should happen didn't happen because something was not equal. But
in this case, the law says Jones is going to die, and Jones died. How can a Keteris
paribus clause help protect a law when the law is not actually threatened? The law makes
a true prediction.
Notice that we can't reinterpret the law as saying that Jones would die from arsenic
poisoning. The from there is a causal claim, and that would give away the game to the causal
theorist. Hempel for empiricist reasons we saw last time does not want to rely on a metaphysical
notion of causation.
Once we move to the causal model, we arguably don't need the whole covering law argument
apparatus. An event can be explained simply by saying what caused it. It's the cause
of the event that makes the event happen, and it's knowing how an event was caused that
increases our understanding, so we get the connection between explanation and understanding
that we looked at from the covering law model.
Now as we saw back in lecture five, empiricists like Hume have big problems with the notion
of causation. We talk as if one event makes another event happen, but Hume emphasizes
that this kind of talk is not adequately grounded in experience. You don't see the
cue ball causing the eight ball to move.
And you might recall that it was empiricist scruples in the first place that motivated
Hempel's covering law model of explanation. So an empiricist like Hempel is going to challenge
this causal approach to explanation by asking whether we have a sufficiently clear notion
of causation and whether that notion is adequately grounded in observation and experience.
To what extent does the world show us the difference between genuine causes and mere
coincidences or other kinds of non-causal relations? We observe correlations, we do
not observe causation. And are we any better at inferring causation from correlations than
Bertrand Russell's chicken was?
In order to approach this question, we need to survey some ideas about causation, and
then we'll reconnect this issue of causation back into the explanation discussion. Perhaps
the most immediately intuitive idea of causation involves a kind of physical connection, a
transfer of some kind of stuff from cause to effect. Paradigmatically, it would be something
like a transfer of momentum from a bat to a ball.
There are a number of such theories, and each of them has able defenders, but such approaches
have to stomach some pretty counter-intuitive consequences.
On such a view, it's not clear that drowning can be a cause of death, since it's the absence
of oxygen that causes death. In general, preventions and omissions can't be causes on a view
like this, since they don't involve any transfer of any kind of stuff from cause to effect.
And some potential cases of causation don't seem to be connected through space and time
in the way this approach would require. If we think that the death of Socrates causes
Zantipi to become a widow, then we have to allow that causation travels, as it were,
instantaneously across space. Causation can do what light cannot.
On the other hand, it seems equally counter-intuitive to allow just any relevant absence or omission
to count as a cause. Did my failure to throw a rock at the window cause the window not to
break?
There's some power to the idea that I am at least somewhat causally responsible for the
deaths of starving people insofar as I fail to perform actions I could perform to save
them.
But there are a lot of things I'm omitting to do right now, and it's not clear that
I'm equally a cause in all of them. If I am, then I exert an awful lot of causal energy
all the time. So, for instance, is my failure to travel to China today, where I could help
pandas find bamboo in the forest, a contributing cause of the near extinction of the species?
If I'm causing that, then I'm causing an awful lot of stuff while I'm here delivering
a lecture.
This physical connection account of causation is just one of many, and many of these use
can be combined in sophisticated and complex ways.
We just need a taste of some of the range of conceptions of causation that are out there.
I'll turn now to the most flexible and most common conceptions of causation.
According to a regularity view of causation, a cause is a necessary part of a condition
that, together with the laws of nature, is sufficient for its effect.
The big condition is itself sufficient, but not necessary for the effect, because we're
talking about a cause of a phenomenon, not the cause of a phenomenon.
This is clearer when illustrated. My striking a match is a cause of its lighting, because
it's a condition that, along with some other conditions and the laws of nature, is sufficient
for the lighting of the match.
Similarly, the presence of oxygen in the atmosphere is a cause of the match lighting.
If you took either of those conditions away, keeping the laws and other conditions constant,
we wouldn't have a case of the match lighting.
We sometimes pick out one of these conditions as the cause, because it is particularly surprising
or relevant to some project we care about.
So if you leave your iron on at home and your house catches fire, that counts as the cause
of the fire. You don't get to say to the fireman, it was the presence of oxygen in
the atmosphere that caused that fire.
Each is a necessary part of a sufficient condition, but some of them matter in ways that others
don't.
The main competitor to the regularity approach is the counterfactual approach to causation,
which analyzes causation in terms of what would have happened had things gone otherwise.
Since the match would not have lit had I not struck it, the striking is a cause of the
lighting.
Problems arise for each of these major approaches.
The regularity approach is empiricist friendly, it's the kind of approach to causation somebody
like Hempel would adopt.
Since the only connection asserted between the cause and the effect is logical, not
physical, a cause is a certain kind of logical condition for its effect.
We've seen empiricists try to use logic where others use metaphysics.
For this reason though, it's going to run into problems like those that plagued the
covering law model.
It looks like, given the laws of nature, coplic spots cause measles if we can derive measles
from coplic spots and the laws of nature, but can't derive the measles without the
coplic spots.
It looks too permissive as a conception of causation, if not made more sophisticated.
On the other side, we see that empiricists are uncomfortable with appeal to counterfactuals.
We want to know how experience will tell us facts about what would have happened had
things been different than they in fact are.
So the regularity approach seems a little too modest, a little too empiricist, while
the counterfactual approach might be too ambitious and too metaphysical.
How are we to run the counterfactuals with any confidence?
So back to the coplic spots example, keeping the world as constant as possible, we take
away the coplic spots and ask whether that takes away the measles.
Were the patient not to have coplic spots, would the patient have measles?
If taking away the coplic spots does not take away measles, which seems the most intuitive
way to evaluate the counterfactual, that is to say the infection would still be present
but wouldn't have given rise to the coplic spots, on that interpretation, coplic spots
plausibly do not cause measles.
On the other hand, in the nearest possible world, in which if the coplic spots went away,
the measles would have gone away, then we do have causation, at least on a simple version
of the counterfactual view.
There are a number of classic problems in the causation literature that are more or less
tailor-made to vex any conception of causation.
One of them is overdetermination.
Let's say we have two sharpshooters fire at the same time and accurately at our poor
condemned person.
On the most straightforward version of the regularity view, each sharpshooter causes
the death of the condemned.
Each shot, together with the laws of nature, is part of a package sufficient for the death
of the condemned person, and each is a necessary part of a sufficient but unnecessary package.
That's a mouthful, but you get the idea.
Each is a component of a package which is sufficient to result in the death of the condemned
person, and each is a crucial component of that package.
On the counterfactual view, however, neither shooter caused the death of the condemned
person, since it's true of each of them that had the shooter not pulled the trigger, the
guy would have died anyway.
So the counterfactual view nicely captures our intuition that something that makes no
difference to the outcome doesn't seem to be a cause.
On the other hand, the regularity approach has intuitions going for it as well.
How can it be that a shot that had plenty of causal power on its own to bring about the
death of the condemned person somehow loses its causal effectiveness just by being partnered
up with a similar shot?
Other kinds of causal complexity can make mischief for both of these approaches as well.
So take the bus and arsenic case in which Jones adjusts arsenic and then gets flattened
by a bus.
The regularity view seems to count both the bus and the arsenic of Jones' death, while
the counterfactual view seems to account neither the bus nor the arsenic.
On the counterfactual view, had Jones not eaten the arsenic, he still would have died
and had the bus not hit him, he still would have died.
There's room for more sophistication here.
We can try to appeal to an explanation of a different event.
For instance, why did Jones die at time t rather than merely why did Jones die?
But we've perhaps seen enough to realize that the notion of causation is a vexed notion
and this supports empiricist suspicions about how much weight it can bear in the philosophy
of science.
So to take another illustration of the peculiarity of causation, one might have thought that
causation is transitive.
If A causes B and B causes C, then A causes C. To illustrate why this isn't always the
case, let me invoke my handlers here at the teaching company who are doing a marvelous
job with an instructor who requires a lot of care and attention.
So for instance, Marcy might be worried about whether my voice is going to hold up in doing
these lectures.
She sees me drinking coffee, replaces it with tea with honey and lemon in it.
But Laura is worried about whether my brain is going to hold up while doing these lectures,
so she sees the tea and replaces it with coffee.
But that doesn't make Marcy the cause of my tea being replaced with coffee, though she's
the cause of my coffee being replaced with tea.
Let's try to bring all this complexity about causation back to explanation.
Even if we wave objections to the notion of causation itself, the causal model has other
challenges to face, challenges similar to those that have been faced by other approaches
to explanation.
Does the causal model include illegitimate scientific explanations, and does it exclude
legitimate scientific explanations?
One problem that the model can probably handle is the following.
Many standard views of causation have the consequence that the complete causal history
of an event comprises its full cause, and hence, according to the causal model, its
full explanation.
So, for instance, on the counterfactual view, the Big Bang caused me to give this lecture
because had the Big Bang not happened, I wouldn't be giving this lecture.
And Marcy's failure to poison my tea caused me to give this lecture because had she succeeded
in poisoning my tea, I wouldn't be giving this lecture.
Similarly, on a regularity view, a failure to poison my tea combined with other conditions
is a sufficient condition given the laws of nature for my giving this lecture.
Such cases can perhaps be handled by distinguishing the semantics of causation and of explanation
from the pragmatics of causation and explanation.
Semantics concerns what's said and what's true about what's said, while pragmatics concerns
what's done with what's said, how we use these conceptions in, say, ordinary or scientific
speech.
So if we draw this distinction, we can say that semantically, the Big Bang did cause
me to give this lecture.
It's true because of, say, the counterfactual conception of causation, that the Big Bang
plays a distinctive role in my giving the lecture.
But it's not generally a helpful thing to say.
There are lots of true things that it's not helpful to say.
You don't go around making true predictions like something's going to happen today.
It's not that what you said there is false.
It's uninformative.
It's distracting.
So similarly, saying that the Big Bang caused me to give this lecture is uninformative,
distracting, unhelpful, but not untrue.
So let's turn to some different problems the causal model might face.
Laws don't cause other laws to be true.
So the causal model will need to be supplemented if it's going to handle the explanation of
laws as when Newton's laws seem to explain Kepler's laws of planetary motion.
It's hard to see how the causal approach can handle this since laws just don't seem
to be the sorts of things that get caused.
But it's not obviously a fatal objection because we could adopt a causal approach to
the explanation of facts and events, and a different approach to laws that's not obviously
cheating, because our explanation might just work differently for those different kinds
of phenomena.
A more serious problem is going to concern the explanation of facts and events.
It does appear that the average kinetic energy of the molecules of a gas sample can explain
its temperature, but in a sense that we'll explicate later in the course, the average
kinetic energy of the molecules of the gas is its temperature.
So this appears to involve a fact explaining itself, which is a bit weird, but perhaps
permissible, and we'll talk about that in a few lectures, but it doesn't seem permissible
that a fact can cause itself.
So it seems that we've got a kind of explanation of facts or events that is not a causal explanation,
and that will involve a significant limitation on the causal model.
We've seen that the covering law model seemed to give short shrift to biological explanations.
One important subclass of biological explanation is functional explanation.
A biologist might ask, though a biologist wouldn't ask this particular question, why
do mammals have hearts?
And the most obvious answer is for pumping blood.
Seems like at least the beginnings of a decent explanation, though the covering law model
has a problem here, because there's no law saying that whenever a species needs blood
pumped, it will develop a heart.
And where there's no law, there's going to be a problem with explanation.
The reason there's no law is we could easily imagine creatures with a different mechanism
for getting their blood pumped.
So there won't be a law saying whenever there's the need, there will be a heart.
But it's not clear that the causal model is much friendlier to biological explanation.
Functional explanation sounds to many ears like the kind of thing that went out with
Aristotle's physics, according to which, stones fall to earth because that's where
they belong.
That's part of their job.
It seems to many a kind of pre-scientific approach to explanation.
But nevertheless, it's hard to banish such appeals from biology.
To call something a wing is to describe what it's for, it's a functional notion, not
how it was made.
But very important work has been done in recent decades to try to show how an explanation
like mammals have hearts for the purpose of pumping blood can be construed as a genuine
causal explanation in terms of evolutionary history.
The idea here is that the existence of a given heart in a given mammal is explained causally
by the function, the causal contribution to the reproductive fitness, to the reproductive
success that past hearts have made in the creature's ancestors.
Now some complain that this approach threatens to eliminate functions from the natural world,
it reduces functions to something else, while others want to claim that it makes function
and purpose safe in a mechanistic world, and so vindicates function and purpose.
Yet a third camp suggests that these are two ways of saying the same thing, that legitimizing
function will require, in some sense, reducing it to mechanism.
It's worth noting that purpose of explanation seems to show up in other sciences as well.
For instance, we explain why people make the choices they do by talking about their goals,
their desires, things like that.
Can such explanations get unpacked causally, and must such explanations get unpacked causally?
This is to ask whether beliefs and desires are causes and what kinds of causes they are.
These are big questions, which will get a bit of attention in our next to the last lecture,
which will concern the philosophy of psychology.
We'll ask whether belief and desire are legitimate scientific categories, and whether they have
to have causal powers in order to be legitimate scientific categories.
Strikingly there also appear to be teleological, this is from the Greek telos, meaning goal,
and or purpose.
Explanations even in physics.
So we seem to talk, at least casually, about a system attaining or moving toward a thermodynamic
equilibrium, a state in which all of the energy is uniformly distributed.
Or we talk about a light ray following a kind of straight line, a null geodesic.
It's generally less problematic in such cases to adopt a mechanical reading of the teleological
principle.
But it takes some work.
It's worth noting that it's not just in biology that we seem to talk of goals, purposes, functions,
things like that.
It's not always misguided Aristotelianism in which these kinds of terms figure.
So the covering law account of explanation faces serious problems.
The causal approach to explanation faces serious problems.
We've got one lecture remaining about explanation.
We'll look at alternative approaches that try to capture what the causal and covering
law models have aspired to, a kind of contribution to our understanding.
That a legitimate account of explanation is going to have to muster.
And we're going to look at attempts that try to, as it were, explain explanation away
to suggest that there is no need for a general account of scientific explanation.
It's also worth noting that one could try to have a multifaceted approach to scientific
explanation.
We've seen this with the distinction between explaining laws and explaining events.
If we're going to be sympathetic to the causal approach, in some cases, we know we're going
to need to supplement it in order to explain scientific laws.
So why not say that sometimes explanation is a matter of what the covering law model
provides, namely, NOMIC expectability?
That explanation is a matter of saying this is the sort of thing that always happens given
the laws of nature.
That might be appropriate in some contexts.
A causal explanation might be appropriate in other contexts.
And then we'll look at other approaches to explanation.
And finally, we'll close in on statistical explanation, which looks like it shouldn't
change very much from the deterministic case.
Some laws of nature are statistical.
Some causes are statistical.
We can make something more likely to happen without, as it were, making it happen.
But when we bring statistical and probabilistic thinking to bear on explanation, it's going
to turn out to work surprisingly differently than it had.
So explanation is a vexed literature.
It seems like an inescapable ambition of science.
But there is no generally agreed upon way in which this ambition can get executed, either
in the deterministic case or in the probabilistic case.
