Lecture 14, Revolutions and Rationality
We focused last time on Kuhn's conception of normal science, and we saw that as he describes
it, normal science is more dogmatic than many philosophers think science is, or at least
science should be. It's also less governed by rules or method than many philosophers
would have thought.
A scientific method had seemed to them pretty general, something that could be applied in
any field of science, and an aspect of rationality as such.
Kuhn's substitute for the notion of a logic or method of science is mainly given by his
notion of exemplars, which fulfill a kind of similar function of guiding scientific
practice, but they are more specific or internal to a particular field.
An exemplar is an exemplary problem solution, which implicitly embodies a sort of notion
of what counts as a problem like this, and a well-trained scientist learns how to assimilate
new problems to these classic problems.
The criteria involved in an exemplar are more implicit, they are harder to bring out, and
so harder to defend than a logic or methodology would be.
Despite these controversies, it's not Kuhn's treatment of normal science that has gotten
people worked up, it's his treatment of scientific revolutions that has generated most of the
controversy. Many thinkers found it shockingly deflating of the aspirations or pretensions,
depending on which side you come down on, of science to a kind of special status or rationality.
In cases of revolution, the old paradigm, and remember, a paradigm includes theories,
it includes exemplars, it includes standards of what counts as a successful solution to
a problem. The dominant paradigm can no longer restore order after a prolonged crisis, and
a new paradigm emerges to govern the field. This is very like going from the pre-scientific
stage to the scientific stage. A single paradigm needs to take hold and generate consensus
for normal science to get done.
The new paradigm restores order by exhibiting striking new problem-solving power. This sounds
like a good thing, it hardly sounds like something to get worked up about, it hardly sounds undermining
of scientific rationality. But a closer examination of scientific revolutions shows that notions
of rationality and truth play surprisingly little role in Kuhn's explanation of the
rise of the new paradigm. The new paradigm will have achieved some impressive successes,
but in general it will be relatively undeveloped, and it will not be able to solve all of the
puzzles that the old paradigm could solve, so there will be loss as well as gain.
Newton's way of doing physics, as we saw, offered quantitatively accurate predictions
about the motion of objects, but it didn't offer a mechanism or an explanation for how
the force of gravity was transmitted. The Cartesian theory that got displaced by the
Newtonian one had material bodies tumbling and whirling through a thin material ether.
The planets moved around the sun kind of like things drain out of your bathtub. This had
serious problems as a physical theory, it didn't fit the observational data all that
well. But it nevertheless seemed to many physicists quite a drastic step to drop the requirement
that science should provide an explanation for how a force gets transmitted.
Very often younger scientists who are less invested in the old paradigm are the ones
who are willing to switch to the new way of doing things. If their work looks promising
enough, the new paradigm will continue to gain adherence while proponents of the old
paradigm die off. So Kuhn quotes the great German physicist Max Planck,
A new scientific truth does not triumph by convincing its opponents and making them
see the light, but rather because its opponents eventually die, and a new generation grows
up that is familiar with it. But in Kuhn's hands, this is not a triumphalist
picture of old, funny duties blinded by prejudice being superseded by clear-thinking young minds
that now see the plain truth. The generational differences and other non-evidential factors
emerge during a scientific revolution precisely because the evidence is inadequate to settle
the question of which paradigm should govern the field. There is in general Kuhn thinks
no clear standard by which the promise of the new paradigm can be rationally compared
to the achievements of the old. So young scientists are willing to jump to the
new paradigm not because they are less biased than older scientists, but because it's easier
for them to do so because they don't have as much invested in the old paradigm. This
is a non- or irrational factor, but it's crucial to decision making during a scientific
crisis, according to Kuhn. Notice that in normal science there is very little room for
the personal and for the idiosyncratic, but in the freer conditions of crisis science,
a whole bunch of personal factors will affect the decisions scientists make. So religious
or national allegiances might matter. You had a number of French thinkers between the
wars objecting to, or during World War I primarily I should say, objecting to the theory
of relativity on the basis of Einstein's German nationality, for instance. Or you'll
see scientists switching paradigms because one seems simple and elegant to them. It's
a kind of aesthetic judgment. Or on the basis of metaphysical beliefs. Einstein objected
to quantum mechanics, which says that two atoms of uranium can be identical, but one
of them will decay and the other one doesn't. The world is at bottom a chancey place, not
a deterministic place. Einstein hated this and he said, God does not play dice. And so
Einstein was unwilling to get on the quantum mechanical bandwagon as it were. In times
of crisis these sorts of factors are needed to explain the decisions that scientists make.
Now we need to look at this picture of scientific change in more detail in order to see why
the structure of scientific revolutions was itself such a revolutionary work. A great
deal of Kuhn's position can be summed up by his insistence that rival paradigms cannot
be judged on a common scale. To use Kuhn's term they are incommensurable. This doesn't
mean that they can't be compared, we have to be able to compare them to know that they're
rivals. But it does mean that they can't be compared via a neutral or objectively correct
measure. This is an enormously controversial thesis, which Kuhn defends in several ways.
First he says the standards of evaluation vary too much across paradigms to be of decisive
use. In later reflections on the commotion that his work caused, you know, reducing science
to mob psychology and stuff, Kuhn emphasizes that he shares with his critics a sense that
certain intellectual values are more or less permanent parts of science. To do science
just is, he thinks, to care about predictive accuracy, to care about consistency within
your theory and between your theory and other things you believe. Broad scope, so one of
the great things about Newton's theory was it explained the tides and the motion of the
planets and the motion of cannonballs. Simplicity is a virtue of scientific theories. Fruitfulness,
being suggestive of new work, also a permanent virtue of science. These are Kuhn's examples,
he doesn't mean the list to be exhaustive. And he agrees with these critics that if you
leave these values vaguely described, everybody will agree that scientists do and should take
them into account. But Kuhn says, if you insist on a more precise statement of any given value,
rational disagreement about, for instance, what constitutes simplicity is in play. Is
simplicity a matter of positing fewer kinds of basic objects, fewer basic equations? Is
it a matter of how easy the theory is to use? Any particular notion of simplicity is going
to be controversial, though the value of simplicity is not itself controversial. More deeply,
the comparative weight assigned to each value can vary without anybody having departed from
the standards of doing science. And the values often conflict with one another. So, for instance,
simplicity of a very particular sort, says Kuhn, favored Copernicus' sun-centered conception
of what we now know as the Solar System over the traditional Earth-centered view. It was
mathematically simpler, not in the sense of being easier to use to calculate the positions
of celestial objects, but only in terms of how many orbits were needed to explain the
basic features of, say, the motion of Mars when it appears to change direction in the
sky. On the other hand, the Earth-centered view was no less accurate in terms of getting
the right predictions, no harder to use, and it was more consistent with other theories.
We've already seen the parallax problem for Copernicus. No matter where the Earth is in
its orbit, the distant stars don't seem to change their position. In addition, Copernicus
had a hard time, he actually had a bad theory, of trying to explain why a rock dropped from
a tower falls next to the tower. If the Earth is moving, shouldn't the Earth be moving
under the rock, and the rock should fall away from the tower? That's an observational problem
for the Copernican view. And on the traditional conception of science, nobody talks about
how the Copernican view faced problems when it was being adopted. They suggest it was
obviously the right way to go. So each paradigm, according to Coon, is governed by genuinely
scientific values. But the work in each paradigm will hold itself to the standards for good
scientific work, provided by the paradigm itself. And Coon takes this talk of values
quite seriously. He means it to contrast with talk of rules, or method, or logic. Even within
a paradigm, the values do not function as explicit principles, but rather as shared
habits and ways of seeing things among scientists who do normal science in the same way. So
we see here a connection between Coon's account of scientific education and the role of exemplars,
in normal science, and his account of scientific revolutions. Coon thinks it is important to
the proper functioning of science that the norms governing science not be too explicitly
needed. Because if you insist on explicitly stating how you're supposed to do physics,
there's room for so much disagreement that normal science would get bogged down. Revolutionary
science, however, needs to tolerate a certain amount of subjectivity. Because in periods
of crisis, you want scientists trying different things from one another. You need a range
of different views about how the crisis might be solved to get a hearing. But you don't
need everybody paying attention to any particular new approach. You want projects to appeal to
a small group of people, and you want to see whether this small group can then make their
project more appealing to other scientists. So the idea is that those who have pretty
similar values, those who emphasize simplicity, will jump onto each other's projects, while
those who emphasize consistency with received doctrine will pay attention to each other's
work. And so those who have a rather different emphasis among the scientific values will
be harder for me to convince, which is a good thing. You want a range of projects being
undertaken, and you want a certain threshold of convincing people, so that the new paradigm
when it catches on will receive very widespread assent.
Coon's second reason for claiming that rival paradigms are incommensurable, not subject
to a common measure, is that effective communication across paradigms is very difficult. He needs
this claim because one could grant Coon everything that's been said so far about the different
interpretation and weightings of scientific values, and nevertheless think that rational
discussion among scientists should lead to substantial, maybe not perfect, but substantial
agreement about which approach to science it makes the most sense to take.
Coon thinks that this does not in fact happen during scientific revolutions, and he wants
to explain why.
Like Coon, Coon's conception of meaning is holistic. As we saw, Coon took very seriously
the positivist conception that a theoretical term like mass gets its meaning from its role
in deriving observational consequences. Its meaning is a matter of every connection to
other statements in the scientific theory that the term bears.
Since the meaning of a term or statement derives from this role it plays in the web
of belief, changes elsewhere in the web can bring about significant changes in the meaning
of a scientific term or statement.
Let's see in a little detail how this works.
The standard view has it that Einstein's conception of mass is an extension or improvement
over Newton's conception of mass. Newton's works fine for objects not moving in a significant
fraction of the speed of light, while Einstein covers all the Newtonian cases and then extends
a theory to objects moving at an approximation of the speed of light relative, of course,
to our reference frame.
And this fits the standard cumulative progressive picture of science. The idea is that all of
the observations that favored Newton also favor Einstein.
Newton corrects a few mistakes and limitations of his predecessors and science gets better.
As is his way, we've seen his objections to the textbook approach to science. Coon rejects
this picture as too simple and too cumulative. In his view, the word mass means something
different in the two theories. It's not as straightforwardly comparable, commensurable
as the standard view has it. Why? Einsteinian mass is convertible into energy, E equals
mc squared. Newtonian mass has nothing whatsoever to do with energy. The techniques for measuring
Newtonian mass won't work for objects moving a significant fraction of the speed of light
relative to one's reference frame for measuring Einsteinian mass and vice versa. So if you
look back to something like operationalism, the very meaning of the term, its connections
to experience changes when the theory changes, or so Coon and Quine would emphasize. As
Coon sees it, wholesale changes in the network of concepts occur when we switch paradigms,
when we switch to say the Einsteinian worldview. So a Newtonian won't recognize this as a better
theory of mass. Newtonian will see this as a theory of different stuff that has the same
name. And this makes both clear communication and clear progress difficult. Advocates of
different paradigms will tend to talk past each other. It's hard to avoid changing the
subject since a term like mass means something different in each theory.
Now perhaps the most obvious response to all this is to suggest that, at least after a
while, no matter how bad the communication issues are, observation can settle questions
of paradigm choice. During a crisis, there just may not be enough data, but let the data
accumulate and we'll be able to see which paradigm provides the right way to go.
It is Coon's denial of this claim, perhaps more than any other, that drives his critics crazy.
Paradigm neutral observations, Coon says, cannot be used to settle scientific disputes.
Coon emphasizes that observation is what he calls theory laden. What people see depends
in large part on what they already believe or expect to see. Perception is much less passive
than previous thinkers have thought. Now there's a relatively uncontroversial
version of this claim, according to which paradigms influence what we see in the sense
that they influence which experiments get performed, which theories get attention.
That's not an occasion for controversy. It's pretty clear that the observational data are
going to be significantly affected by which experiments we perform. But that just reduces
the problem of incommensurability to other problems about choosing paradigms. The claim
we're discussing here is deeper and more controversial. And Coon defends it by appealing to
some empirical results. He draws on Gestalt psychology and tries to undermine the distinction
between seeing and seeing as. There's an image of something called the duck rabbit that can be
seen either as a duck or as a rabbit, but not as both. Switching between the two perceptions
is called a Gestalt switch. And Coon thinks that that's what it's like to go from one paradigm
to another. You don't just see paradigm neutral things, you have to see them as one or the other
paradigm presents them. Coon's favorite example in support of this view is the anomalous playing
card experiment. If you show people ordinary playing cards for a short period of time,
they can identify them without any problem. But then if you slip in anomalous cards like
a black six of hearts, they will tend to identify it either as a black six of spades or as a red
six of hearts. They can't notice the unexpected perceptual input. You have to increase exposure
time quite a lot before they can properly identify what's right before their eyes.
In a similar way, Coon says, the Chinese could record the appearance of new stars in the sky
while Europeans who thought the sky was perfect and unchanging couldn't see them even though
they were there. Coon is thus denying a claim that was more or less sacred to the positivists,
namely that we can have access to a level of observational evidence that is sufficiently
independent of theory, that it can be used as a source of meaning and evidence for theory,
or that it can be used as a neutral basis for choosing between theories.
We will evaluate this and some of Coon's other claims next time. Today we're just presenting
Coon's claims. Right now it's worth noting that Coon commits himself to rather extreme sounding
versions of some of these claims. He says that in an important sense, followers of different
paradigms inhabit different worlds, very striking location. A Copernican, and a follower of the
older Earth-centered astronomy, says Coon, see different things when they look at a sunset.
The Copernican sees evidence of the Earth moving around the Sun, while the Geocentrist
sees evidence of the Sun moving around the Earth. Now the notion of a level of perception that
underlies and explains both descriptions drops out in Coon's language. There's no difference
between what you see and what you see something as. Coon does not seem to have much use for the idea
of paradigm-independent reality. Let's note that we have to place the observers in some sense though
in a common world if we want to say in the first place that they're both looking at a sunset.
This location that they inhabit different worlds is hard to make clear sense of.
Now, since logic, evidence, and scientific values cannot fully account for paradigm choice,
it's no surprise that as we've seen, extra scientific factors figure crucially in the
explanation of scientific decision making. So we've seen Coon compare a paradigm shift to a
gestalt shift, and more provocatively he says that changing paradigms is a lot like undergoing
a religious conversion. This just annoyed the bejesus out of traditional philosophers and some
scientists. The idea is that one comes to see the world differently and to feel different problems
in need of a solution. Once you've made the shift, the reasons look compelling, but that's because
you now see the world as a duck where you had seen it as a rabbit. So reasons are persuasive
across paradigms, but they are persuasive only for those who no longer need persuading.
Since individual psychological matters are crucial to understanding why individuals change paradigms,
and since the sense of crisis and of its resolution are largely social phenomena,
we get a sense of why somebody like Lakatoche called Coon's picture one of mob psychology.
Revolutionary science is just a matter of following the mob or not, according to Lakatoche.
And this applies not only to Coon's account of the mechanisms of scientific change,
but also to the consequences of this picture. Science cannot, since this is allegedly the
right description of revolutions, be seen as straightforwardly cumulative or progressive
or truth-tracking. According to Coon, the history of science does not support a claim of scientific
progress. Again, he's arguing against the science textbooks here. The Cartesians and a French
playwright named Molière famously mocked Aristotelian explanations in terms of occult powers.
Molière presents a chemist standing for the equivalent of his doctoral exam,
and he's asked why opium puts people to sleep. And he stands up triumphantly because he knows
the answer to this one, and the answer is because it has a dormative virtue. A dormative virtue is
just a sleep-inducing quality. That's no explanation at all. But Newton's physics relied on what the
Cartesians thought of as an occult power. Objects just pull on each other, we call it gravity.
It's a pulling on each other virtue. So what had seemed like an object of mockery comes to seem
like scientific progress in some cases. And now, post-Einstein, physics is back in the business
of providing a kind of mechanical explanation for gravity in terms of the shape of spacetime.
So in some ways, Einstein's physics resembles Descartes more than it does Newton's.
The progress is, if there's any at all, by no means linear.
Kuhn does note that, for reasons we've already seen, science will inevitably appear to exhibit
progress. Because normal science needs to present its history as triumphalist and cumulative. The
victors write the history, and they write it in such a way as to show that contemporary science
is the right way to do things. On the other hand, despite this denial of any sort of objective
sense of progress or accumulation, Kuhn does often write as if science manifests a genuine,
not just an apparent kind of progress. That's progress in problem solving. This is the side
of Kuhn's thought that fits with his emphasis that science, warts and all, is an especially successful
activity. So we can see now in more detail how Kuhn would run his, it's not a bug, it's a feature
argument. If science were more rule governed, less dependent on non-rational factors, social
and political aspects, agreement across crisis science would be reached too quickly. Because
everybody would just be following the same notion of evidence. But just as a successful
scientific paradigm is a big achievement that should not too readily get discarded, it's a big
event when a once successful paradigm runs into serious trouble. And Kuhn thinks that science
has stumbled onto a mechanism by which crisis science as well as normal science has a distinctive
job to do. Kuhn has a kind of invisible hand picture. Normal science is quite dogmatic.
Revolutionary science allows quite a role for individual eosyncrasy.
Neither of these seem especially intellectually virtuous. But they function together in a
complicated social arrangement that produces desirable outcomes, just as in Adam Smith's
model of economics, individual selfishness, under the right sort of conditions, produces
socially desirable outcomes. So this side of Kuhn anyway seems to place a lot of confidence
in science as a social institution. But it's quite unclear how this side of Kuhn can be
reconciled with some of the arguments for incommensurability. This idea that science is great
at increasing problem solving ability does not seem to fit well with the idea that new paradigms
solve different problems, not more problems or better problems. And it sits very badly with
Kuhn's talk of scientists inhabiting different worlds, because that suggests that there's no
place from which it makes any sense to endorse a particular resolution to a crisis. We can make
some steps towards resolving this tension, but only some steps. There's no agreement on how to
read Kuhn on this issue. So for instance, Kuhn could combine his insistence that any scientific
revolution involves losses as well as gains with his claim that science increases gradually but
steadily in problem solving power. But he'd have to insist that we almost always gain more
than we lose across crisis science when a revolution occurs, and Kuhn shows no interest
in making a claim like that. So on the one hand, it's reasonably clear that Kuhn is not a complete
relativist about science. He says that it's the best method for investigating the natural world,
because it's good at generating and at solving puzzles about the natural world.
But it's equally clear that Kuhn thinks that the intellectual achievements of science are not as
grand and not as straightforward as somebody like the positivists thought they were. In particular,
Kuhn does not accept any story according to which science progresses in the sense of getting
closer to the truth. We saw that even Popper made that claim. You can't get any evidence that science
is getting closer to the truth. But he still wants to claim that science aims at the truth. For Kuhn,
truth makes sense within a paradigm, within normal science. But it's an unclear and dangerous
notion when applied across paradigms. Kuhn sometimes goes so far as to deny the intelligibility
of any paradigm-independent notion of truth. So not only is there no ideal paradigm,
there's nothing for an ideal paradigm to be about. We don't have any grip on the notion
of the world apart from our paradigms. Kuhn doesn't think that science or philosophy can
make useful sense of the notion of a world out there, independently of the paradigms we currently
inhabit, and that we're trying to get that world right. The picture seems to be, I'm speculating
a little bit here, that the notion of a world functions much like Barkley thought the notion
of matter functioned. We don't mean much of anything by it, but we want to feel like we're
in touch with something out there, that we could make progress towards grasping it or fitting it,
but that we assign no real content to this idea. How to balance these thoughts within Kuhn's project
is a very difficult, controversial question. We've seen that Kuhn offers not a theory of
scientific method, it's not a recipe or anything like that. It's not a conception of inductive
logic. What it is is a theory of scientific change. It is more directly descriptive than it is
normative. But he thinks this descriptive project deflates certain normative claims about logic
and methodology. Nevertheless, he seems to think that this warts and all description of science
still leaves science deserving something like the place in our cultural and intellectual lives,
that the more normatively ambitious traditional view thought science deserved.
And so we've seen a profound tension between the deflationary descriptive claims and the kind of
valorizing normative ones. Kuhn does an interesting job of forging them into a kind of single chemical
compound, that's the it's not a bug, it's a feature aspect of his view, but it seems like a kind of
unstable compound. We'll subject it to criticism next time and see to what extent it can endure
as a kind of weird hybrid of deflating and valorizing aspects. I'd like to close with a
metaphor that illustrates in rather different terms the difference between Popper and Kuhn,
the two sort of giants of 20th century philosophy of science. Popper's view of science can be
compared to the kind of classic account of biological evolution. There's blind variation
by which we mean that conjectures for Popper are random with respect to the truth. You put forward
a hypothesis without any evidence for it and then you see whether it gets falsified by experience.
And there's selective retention, as in Darwinian evolution, because falsified theories get weeded
out. So Popper's is the relatively traditional view when unpacked in evolutionary terms. Kuhn's
view can be illuminated by a more recent, somewhat controversial, but now more or less mainstream
picture of evolution, advocated most famously by Stephen Jay Gould. It's called punctuated equilibrium.
It's not necessarily incompatible with the traditional view. But on this model,
ordinary natural selection operates for long periods of time, but does not modify organisms
all that much. In part because organisms have built-in mechanisms for resisting change.
This is the analog of normal science for Kuhn. He thinks that organisms don't change as quickly.
They don't falsify their hypotheses, as it were, as quickly as Popper would have thought.
Every once in a while, though, a burst of rapid evolutionary change will happen,
and daughter species will emerge then very quickly, as measured in biological time.
This can happen due to climate changes, geographical isolation, or whatever.
But it's a very different picture of evolution, according to which the change happens intensely
and in bursts, and then relative stability takes over for a long period of time. That's a burst of
a scientific revolution followed by normal science, during which things change very slightly,
if at all. So we'll critically evaluate this intriguing but maddening Kuhnian picture next time.
