Lecture 18 How Does Science Explain?
With this lecture we begin the second of our two major narratives that comprise the course.
So we're going back to logical positivism to look at a different cluster of issues in
the philosophy of science, and then we'll bring our two strands of history together
towards the end of the course.
It seems obvious to most people that science seeks to answer why questions, that it does
not rest content merely with describing phenomena.
Science is supposed to tell us why the sky is blue, not merely that the sky is blue.
So we think that science offers not just knowledge, but also understanding.
And just piling more descriptive factual knowledge on top of descriptive factual knowledge
does not by itself add to understanding.
On the other hand, empiricists have tended to think of science as constrained by, and
concerned with, what happens, and with nothing beyond what happens.
For some empiricists, talk of why things happen, not merely that they happen, smacks of the
metaphysical.
So for instance, Aristotelian explanations that stones fall to earth because that's
where they belong seemed at best unsuccessful explanations, at worst unscientific explanations
to many thinkers.
And we saw that Newton felt no need to explain what gravity was, it seemed like an invitation
to metaphysics to him rather than part of a properly scientific project.
And there are many ways in which the demand for explanation can lead one awry.
Merely verbal explanations are probably no explanation at all.
We briefly noted Molière making fun of medieval chemistry when he had someone triumphantly
explain that opium puts people to sleep because it has a dormative virtue.
The scientists of Molière's day wanted to be told that opium was made up of round particles
and that round particles were soothing.
How much better an explanation is that?
And notice that though we make fun of Molière's chemist, we're not obviously doing a whole
lot better ourselves.
We will explain why we want to know something by saying that we're curious, or why the
turtle goes to the sea after laying its eggs by saying that's an instinct.
So far anyway, that's just a name that feels explanatorily soothing to us.
Maybe that word can be backed up with some actual explanation, but we very often feel
like we've explained something when we've just uttered a magic word to make the puzzle
feel like it goes away.
And history is full of explanations that are far from trivial as those verbal explanations
are, but also far from successful.
A contemporary of Galileo's, a fellow astronomer of his name Francesco Sisi, explained why
there had to be seven planets, and thus why Galileo's claim that Jupiter has moons must
be wrong, because moons would have counted as planets in the relevant sense.
Here's the explanation.
There are seven windows in the head, two nostrils, two ears, two eyes, and a mouth.
So in the heavens there are two favorable stars, two unpropitious, two luminaries, and
Mercury alone undecided and indifferent.
From which, and many other similar phenomena of nature, such as the seven metals, etc.,
we gather that the number of planets is necessarily seven.
Besides, we have the division of the week into seven days named for the seven planets.
Now if we increase the number of planets, this whole system falls to the ground.
Moreover, the satellites are invisible to the naked eye and therefore can have no influence
on the Earth and therefore would be useless and therefore do not exist.
There's scientific explanation for you.
Since this background, it is perhaps unsurprising that many empiricists have taken the rather
extreme sounding measure of denying that science is in the explanation business at all.
For many empiricists, science summarizes experience in a useful and accurate way.
So scientific laws, like Kepler's Laws of Planetary Motion, are economical ways of
describing observation.
It is no part of science to tell us why things happen, it just shows us in a useful and clear
way the patterns that happen.
The suspicion behind this empiricist skepticism of explanation is that you'd have to go too
far beyond or behind experience in order to explain the patterns in experience, and pretty
soon you'd find yourself positing entities that are quite remote from observation, like
an unobservable ether that your explanatory ambitions force you to posit so that light
waves have something to move through.
So on a common empiricist view, scientists, like parents of toddlers, just have to learn
how to reject why questions.
Because the world said so is the version of the parents because I said so.
Just reject the why questions entirely.
Carl Hempel's Covering Law Model of Explanation is one of the great achievements of logical
positivism.
In this model, he tries to reconcile empiricist scruples, like I've just been describing,
with the need for genuine scientific explanations.
Fully adequate scientific explanations, according to Hempel, show that the Explanandum, that's
the to be explained fact or event, there's a lot of Latin in this little bit of the
philosophy of science, sorry about that.
A fully adequate explanation shows that the Explanandum had to happen.
This is a time honored way of linking explanation and understanding.
Aristotle had famously said that explanation is knowledge of the reasoned fact rather
than of the mere fact.
And the reasons why something happens are reasons why it had to happen, why it was
no mere coincidence.
So we have a full understanding of why the bridge collapsed when we know that the collapse
was the only outcome to be expected in the circumstances.
We understand when we see why something had to happen.
But experience provides no direct evidence of anything having to happen.
Hume's critique, which we've examined a couple of times here, shows that experience
only provides one damn thing happening after another.
We experience no connection between events, such that one event makes the other happen.
No event as experienced anyway, confers any necessity, any making happen, on any other
event.
This is the problem Hempel needs to solve, and he does so by appealing to the only notion
of necessity that the positivists found clear and useful.
The premises of a deductive argument necessitate the conclusion.
If Socrates is a man, and if all men are mortal, Socrates must be mortal.
That's a necessity relation that holds among statements, not as it were out there in the
world.
So it's not metaphysical, it's reasonably clear, it's analytic, has all those lovely
positivist features.
So Hempel appeases his inner empiricist by construing explanation as a logical relation
among statements.
This is the classic logical positivist approach.
Hempel requires that the explanandum statement follow from the explanans statements.
The explanans is the stuff doing the explaining.
Explanations for Hempel are arguments.
We've seen a similar approach in confirmation.
They wanted an inductive logic.
They try to use logic to solve philosophical problems.
And as we've seen in their treatments of scientific theories, and of confirmation,
the positivists are offering rational reconstructions of these notions central to science.
In this case, it's of scientific explanation.
So Hempel is going to offer necessary and sufficient conditions for a scientific explanation.
But he's trying to reveal the logic of scientific explanation.
He's not beholden to what scientists or ordinary people think of as an explanation
of a fact or an event.
He's more interested in revealing the logical structure of explanation than in the historical
or actual practice of giving explanations.
This is that side of the positivist that Kuhn didn't much care for, though he didn't
much talk about explanation.
Testable laws of nature provide the centerpiece for Hempel's covering law explanations.
Hempel allows for two different kinds of explananda, things to be explained.
You can use science to explain laws, and you can use it to explain particular events.
To explain a law is to derive the law from other, more general laws.
Thus, Newton's laws of motion explain Kepler's laws of planetary motion, because the Newtonian
laws are more general laws governing the motion of all bodies, while the planetary laws are
the motion of particular bodies.
You can derive the more specific law from the more general law.
More commonly, though, we explain events.
To explain an event for Hempel is to derive it from relevant laws combined with suitable
initial conditions.
We don't need initial conditions to explain a law, because laws hold always.
So chemical and physical laws combined with initial conditions, such as facts about a
given match, the surface on which it was struck, the presence of oxygen in the atmosphere,
explain its lighting.
We can use the laws of nature and those facts to derive that the match will light.
We can see the overall strategy here.
Given the truth of the premises, the conclusion must be true, and so we have what Aristotle
had called knowledge of the reasoned fact.
Explanations work by conferring when Hempel calls nomic necessity on the thing to be explained.
The Greek term nomos means law governed.
So a good explanation shows that given Newton's laws, Kepler's law has to hold.
Given the physical and chemical laws, plus these relevant circumstances, the match had
to catch fire.
So the laws and the initial conditions render the explanandum unsurprising, and we can thus
see how explanation contributes to understanding.
Now, clearly, the notion of a law of nature is doing some heavy lifting here.
For Hempel, there can be no explanations without appeal to testable laws of nature.
For this reason, Hempel's approach is called the covering law model.
We will devote a couple of lectures to what law of nature might believably be in a couple
of sessions now, but for right now, we're going to focus just on the role of laws of
nature in explanation, and we won't worry about what's distinctive of laws of nature
on their own.
Now, it's not quite enough to require that an explanation contain testable empirical
laws.
You have to require that the explanation need or use the laws.
I can't just add a law like, water expands when frozen into my otherwise metaphysical
explanation, like, this town suffered an earthquake because it failed to appease the great pumpkin.
You can't just add on, oh, and water expands when frozen.
That won't give you a legitimate scientific explanation.
The law has to be required to derive the explanandum.
And this is how Hempel is going to resist the tendency of explanation to lead into metaphysics.
Hempel and the other positivists were much influenced by the case of Hans Dreisch.
He is a contemporary of the positivists and an important German biologist and embryologist.
Dreisch discovered that, for quite a while during development, any cell of a developing
sea urchin is capable of growing into an entire embryo.
This is the ancestor of some of this research about stem cells and things like that.
He was struck by this and other examples of a kind of flexibility and apparent goal-directedness
that living things exhibit compared to inanimate objects.
A living thing will take flexible means to an apparent end.
You change the circumstances by removing some cells and they'll still, as it were, find
a way to develop a whole embryo, or so Dreisch thought.
So he posited a life force within organisms that directs cellular processes, helps limbs
grow back, and motivates organisms to seek their own survival.
This life force is supposed to explain why living things behave so differently from non-living
things.
So just as it was okay, Dreisch thought, to invoke magnetic forces to explain why iron
behaves so differently from wood, we can invoke a life force to explain why living things
behave so differently from non-living things.
Both explanations posit forces that are not directly observable.
We only see the effects of life forces or magnetic forces, but that doesn't mean the
explanation is illegitimate.
Now these cases are not identical according to the positivists.
The magnetism explanation doesn't merely posit some unobservable force or entity, it provides
independently testable laws about the behavior of magnetic forces.
We can use laws about magnetism in other contexts to generate predictions and see whether they
pan out.
So that's a legitimate, at least potential explanation for hemple.
While the life force doesn't have any predictive content, it's only invoked after the fact
to explain things like why this cell developed into a whole embryo.
It is the fact that explanations invoke empirically testable laws that allows them to pass empiricist
muster.
And these independently testable laws link explanation and prediction very tightly, according
to hemple.
Every adequate explanation is a potential prediction, and every adequate prediction is
a potential explanation.
This is crucial for hemple, we'll have to unpack it.
The idea is, the facts and laws that put me in a position to explain why the match
lit when it was struck, would, had I known them beforehand, have allowed me to predict
that the match would light.
And this is the test that Dreish's life force fails.
I can't plug in the life force, along with suitable initial conditions, and derive predictions
about when limbs are going to grow back, and things like that.
I can only explain after the fact.
So Dreish will either have to rest content with vague talk of tendencies of living things
to try to thrive, or he'll end up making false predictions.
His law is not successfully empirically tested.
And since the law makes false predictions, it's no explanation at all.
Because explanation, according to hemple, is what philosophers call factive.
If the statements in the explanans, the thing doing the explaining, are not true, then we
have no explanation.
The phlogiston theory, remember that said there was a fiery element, stuff within things
that burn, its own special kind of chemical, that allowed for combustion.
That was often invoked to explain how combustion could happen.
On hemple's view, it never did explain combustion, because there's no such thing as phlogiston.
It may have offered reasonable hypotheses about combustion.
But since there's no such thing, it can do no explaining.
Knowledge as philosophers use the term is similarly factive.
Sociologists don't use the term in that way, I just want to connect back to the previous
lecture for a moment.
For sociologists, people can once have known that the heavens were perfect and unchanging.
They mean that was regarded as knowledge in that community.
But they don't know that anymore, because it's no longer regarded as knowledge.
Philosophers find this needlessly confusing.
We would prefer to say that people once believed, and maybe had excellent reason to believe,
that the heavens were perfect and unchanging, but nobody ever knew it, it couldn't be known
because it's false.
So for philosophers, both knowledge and explanation are factive.
They have to be true to count as knowledge or explanation.
The symmetry between explanation and prediction links the covering law model to uncontroversial
empiricist goals like prediction.
And this is how hemple buttresses his claim that he's offering a non-metaphysical approach
to explanation.
The covering law model also wants to buttress its claim that it contributes to understanding.
So hemple remembers trying to do two things, he's trying not to do too much, he's trying
not to let explanation get metaphysical, but he's trying to do enough so that it counts
as deepening or enriching our understanding.
The idea is that explanations that meet the standards of his covering law model provide
the resources we need to control as well as to predict our experience.
So if I know my empirical laws, like that water expands when it freezes and by how much
it expands, and I know my initial conditions, like I know how much water is in my radiator,
how thick the metal and its tensile strength and all of that is, then I know I can use
the laws and the conditions to predict under what conditions my radiator will burst.
And so I know under what conditions I had better switch to antifreeze.
The way in which the covering law model answers a why question like why did my radiator burst
gets linked to the things we have reason to care about in doing science, and about science
when we want to use it outside science, like keeping my car running.
So hemple is motivating this rational reconstruction of the notion of explanation quite carefully.
His claim is it does all we should want an explanation to do, and it does so without getting
metaphysical.
It's really a pretty impressive accomplishment.
So his notion of explanation is nevertheless an idealization, as most rational reconstructions
are, it would be a giant pain to construct a full covering law explanation for almost
any interesting phenomenon.
Think of all the laws of nature that bear on my radiator bursting, and think of all
the conditions that are relevant to it.
So hemple is not saying that scientists offer explanations like this, nor is he saying that
scientists should start offering explanations like this.
This is the notion of a rational reconstruction again.
The model is kind of like a mathematical proof.
It provides a standard, not a guide.
The proof shows us that we've got a theorem here, it doesn't mean you need to go around
proving the theorem all the time.
Hemple is showing us what it takes to have a complete explanation, not what we should
be doing in our practice of giving and taking explanations.
So let us grant, at least temporarily, that the covering law model conditions on a good
and complete explanation that it must make non-trivial use of testable empirical laws,
with the explanandum, or the explanandum statement, must be a logical consequence of
the explanand's statements, again, sorry for the Latin, and the explanand's statements
must be true.
Let's grant that anything that meets all of those conditions is an adequate scientific
explanation.
Those conditions are sufficient for a good and complete explanation.
We will revisit this assumption next time.
And note, by the way, that if the statements in the explanand's are true, and if the explanandum
statement is a deductive consequence, we know that the explanandum statement must be true,
because it follows from the explanand's statements.
So we didn't have to state that as an additional condition.
Now let's ask, having granted that these conditions are sufficient, let's ask whether
each of them is necessary.
Hemple doesn't have much problem arguing that some traditional approaches to explanation
are inadequate.
So one account says that we have an explanation when we reduce the unfamiliar to the familiar.
Hemple says, that gives us the feeling of having explained things, but so did those
empty verbal explanations.
So this might work sometimes in science.
We can model gas molecules on little tiny balls, and be able to picture what's going
on there, and that aids our understanding.
That is a scientifically relevant reduction of the unfamiliar to the familiar.
But in many cases, it seems that we explain precisely by reducing the familiar to the
unfamiliar.
Tables are pretty familiar.
We understand them pretty well.
But to scientifically understand them, and to explain facts about tables, we have to
bring in unfamiliar things, like atoms, and protons, and electrons, and of course, we're
going to have to show that these hypotheses are testable if they're going to be adequate
explanations for Hemple, but that's a different problem.
We're worried about testability and meaning already in this course.
The central point for Hemple is that explanation is a logical, not a psychological phenomenon.
Reducing something to a familiar sense gives us the feeling of understanding, but talk
of a life force gave us the feeling of understanding.
Hemple wants an objective standard, an objective check on the notion of understanding, and that's
provided by this idea that a good explanation confers gnomic expectability on the thing
to be explained.
A good explanation says, given the laws of nature, this sort of thing has to happen.
Given the laws of nature, this is the sort of thing that will always happen in these
circumstances.
That's what explaining is for Hemple.
Despite this careful defense and motivation of the project, his model faces genuine worries
about whether the conditions it imposes are too stringent.
In a number of respects, one might worry whether Hemple rules out legitimate scientific
explanations.
So one might charge Hemple's approach with physics bias.
Explanation in some sciences, the claim goes, works rather differently than it does in physics.
So some biologists think that biology explains in a historical rather than a law-governed
way.
Evolution is construed as a set of historical claims about the processes by which organisms
developed on Earth.
This approach is sometimes called the story of evolution rather than the theory of evolution.
And there certainly doesn't seem to be a whole lot of room for laws of the form whenever
dinosaurs are wiped out by a meteor strike, odors will evolve within n years.
If that's a testable law, it's likely to be falsified.
Probably it's not a testable law.
So if, as Hemple strenuously insists, scientific explanation involves laws, and if biology doesn't
make much use of empirically testable laws, there appears then to be a sense in which
biology is an incomplete or at least explanatorily second-class science.
Some creationists would welcome this idea, but most mainstream philosophers of science,
for broadly Kunian reasons of respect for scientific practice, would prefer it if biology
ends up being an explanatorily full-fledged and successful science.
And so they'll blame Hemple's analysis if biology turns out to be inferior.
Similar things can be said about some of the human sciences.
In psychology or in history, we explain people's behavior by reconstructing their reasons.
And it's not clear that this can be assimilated to the case of explanation in terms of laws.
Doesn't seem to be a law of history that any British colony subjected to a certain amount
of taxation without representation, and add in a few more of your favorite initial conditions,
will stage a rebellion within n years.
Very tough hypothesis to test, and not that plausible insofar as we think it's tested.
Likewise, it's not a plausible testable empirical law that anybody cut off by a rude driver
not using a turn signal will utter between x and y expletives within n minutes.
Those explanatory sciences don't work that way, and yet we might think that taxation
without representation helps explain the American Revolution, and that being cut off
by a rude driver helps explain the utterance of expletives.
So there does seem to be explaining going on in biology and psychology and history.
Is this all to be dismissed as merely giving us the illusion of explanation, merely giving
us the feeling that we understand what's going on?
Well, Hemple is willing to offer some principled compromises with these views that criticize
his model is too stringent, depending on the circumstances of the example in question.
So Hemple has no problem at all admitting that some complete explanations are incompletely
stated.
That will be the rule rather than the exception.
So Hemple thinks you can explain why ice floats on water by saying that it expands when it's
frozen.
You've left out an awful lot of stuff, but the explanation is as it were out there,
it's in principle available, you're just assuming that the person you're talking to
knows a bunch of these initial conditions and some of these laws, and you might not know
all of them, but you could look them up if you needed to.
So that is a compromise that happens at no cost to Hemple, but it's not much of a compromise.
He's still insisting that the other sciences meet his standards.
Hemple could also grant that an explanation can be partially successful.
So insofar as evolution allows for prediction, and again this can mean retradiction, a prediction
about the unexamined past.
Retradiction has the same logic that prediction has.
If biology can explain and retro-dict that a species of a certain description will emerge
in given circumstances, given the relevant biological laws, then evolutionary biology
can explain the existence of a species of that type, though not the existence of the
species that came into existence.
Biology might be able to explain why there will be a small scavenger under certain biological
circumstances, but not why the weasel will have evolved.
So that's a partial explanation, that's an accomplishment, it's just not an explanation
of the complete fact.
And as we saw Popper allowing that metaphysical frameworks can be scientifically valuable,
though not themselves scientific, Hemple can allow that a biological narrative can suggest
testable laws, can provide data that might figure in or support testable laws, without
itself being law governed, and so it could contribute to explanation without itself explaining.
Again, Hemple is trying to compromise, but he's mostly requiring that his opponents surrender
to his model.
These moves are not going to resolve much of the tension between Hemple's view and
our intuitions about biology, psychology, and history.
So Hemple's not going to allow that the story of evolution, as opposed to the theory of
evolution, provides any explanation at all.
And furthermore, he's going to insist that the theory of evolution does not explain as
much as its proponents generally have thought it does.
Hemple must insist that the theory of evolution explains relatively little, because the phenomena
involves so much complexity and randomness that biology can at best offer limited probabilistic
explanations.
A probabilistic explanation, we'll examine this some time after next, presents its own
set of problems, but let's wave those for right now, if evolutionary theory can make
probable the occurrence of a new trait in a species, or of a new species in a particular
time and place, it's done some real explanatory work.
But he's still not letting biology explain as much as biology thinks it can explain.
Physics still comes out much more explanatorily successful than biology does.
And Hemple will, of course, handle psychology and history similarly.
At best, given the state of the laws in these fields, you might get a partial and probabilistic
explanation, if that.
That there's a high probability that drivers cut off by root drivers will exhibit one of
a range of expressive behaviors.
We can only explain the VEGAR fact.
Why?
Because Hemple is insisting that what the theory would not have been in a position to predict
were the facts available then, it is then not in a position to explain.
That's the crucial aspect of Hemple's theory.
That's what makes explanations stringent and yet still testable.
So as applied to biology and psychology and history, Hemple insists that what you cannot
predict, you cannot explain.
That's why these sciences are much less explanatorily successful than, say, physics is.
So next time we're going to turn from this idea that Hemple's model is too stringent
and rules out valuable explanations from biology and allied sciences to the rather surprising
idea that the covering law model includes lots of cases that it should have left out.
