Lecture 35 The Elimination of Persons
After our brief excursions through the philosophy of physics and the philosophy of biology,
we arrive at the other main subfield within the philosophy of science, the philosophy
of psychology.
We've actually already spent the better part of a lecture here when we looked at the possible
reduction of computational psychology of such properties as being able to perform arithmetic
inferences to the level of the physical, to things like neural events.
Some similar issues about reduction in the mental are going to arise in this lecture
as we try to assess the scientific credentials of our common sense psychological categories.
Here the philosophy of science touches very directly on issues central to our sense of
ourselves.
We first have to raise the issue of whether we're entitled to treat common sense psychology
as anything like a scientific theory.
It's certainly the case that not every theory worth treating scientifically needs to be part
of a scientific discipline.
It certainly doesn't need to be written down.
We've seen that the positivist rational reconstructions of scientific theories were not the sorts
of things that scientists themselves used.
So it's one thing to use a theory and it's another to state it.
So it's quite possible that common sense psychology is an unstated but scientific theory on which
all of us rely, but we should address this question directly.
What makes something worth treating as a scientific theory?
Well to a first approximation we might think that something that has a kind of systematic
structure deployed for purposes of prediction and explanation at least looks like it's
a competitor with scientific theories.
It looks like it's in the business of doing the kind of stuff that science does.
And if it's reasonably good at its job, it's worth taking that theory or proto-theory with
some scientific seriousness.
So we didn't commit ourselves at the outset to the claim that common sense psychology embodies
a scientific theory, but there is a sort of prima facie and at first blush case to be
made for the idea that it at least approximates the function of a scientific theory.
So we saw quines say that the Greek gods and atoms are in the same business as posits.
They're both in the business of helping us make sense of experience, helping us predict
in an economical way what's going to happen.
When needn't go as far as quine in thinking that Zeus has about the same status as electrons,
in order to think that a practice that invokes theoretical terms and maybe even unobservable
entities for such purposes as prediction and explanation should count at least initially
as a scientific theory.
So arguably what we'll call folk psychology, our common sense approach to psychological
phenomena, embodies or amounts to a really quite ambitious explanatory theory of human
behavior.
We will sketch folk psychology momentarily, but first we should face the question of what
it might believably be if not a theory, and we'll come back to that at the end of the
lecture as well.
A prominent literary critic, oh five or seven years ago, who had been a Freudian then read
a bit of Karl Popper's work and then spent the next few years going around pronouncing
this or that enterprise unscientific because it seems not to have occurred to him that
by strict paparian standards physics is unscientific as well.
So this was a game that got old pretty quickly, but he did have a good line about Freudian
literary critics, which I'll paraphrase, hell hath no fury like a fallen Freudian.
He said of them, to say that you use Freud but do so as something other than scientific
psychology is like saying that you drink sterno but do so not as a heating element.
The application here is, if folk psychology isn't to be taken seriously as a theory,
what is it?
It looks like a practice that is sort of ungrounded if it's not to be taken as a serious predictive
and explanatory theory.
In a loose sense, science is just about trying to predict and understand the world.
This is science characterized quite informally, but we haven't solved the problem of demarcation.
We're not resting anything on a fancy notion of science, and in an informal sense, folk
psychology at least initially passes the test for warranting scientific consideration.
So let's see what it would look like if we were to treat it as a more formal scientific
theory.
First, the theory appears to have an ontology.
It posits stuff.
Folk psychology posits unobservable states like beliefs, desires, pains, emotions, memories,
sensations.
And it does this to explain observable stuff, behavior, we posit pains to explain why somebody
is making a certain face or screaming to take a very simple case.
It's that at least initially we take these unobservables at face value.
Something like scientific realism seems to pass as untutored common sense for most of
us.
We're not, although we'll revisit this issue, initially inclined to think that we're merely
positing beliefs and desires to make sense of observable reality.
We think there are beliefs and desires.
So perhaps it takes some philosophical or scientific training to beat an empiricist temperament
into one.
We're off as realists if our theory says that there are beliefs and desires, we seem
to think there are beliefs and desires, even if we don't know exactly what they're supposed
to be.
We at least talk as if we take the existence of beliefs and desires seriously.
Well, what are they supposed to be?
Well, keep in mind that I'm not speaking with any special expertise here.
This is supposed to be your psychology as well as mine.
It's common sense property.
But it's at least plausible to suggest that, as standardly understood, the theory posits
thoughts as being modeled on publicly observable sentences, written sentences, or spoken sentences.
And beliefs are enduring versions of thoughts.
So to say that somebody is thinking something is to say something like he or she is thinking
that it's humid outside today.
That's a sentence-sized thing.
If it sticks around, it's a belief rather than merely an occurrent thought.
So thoughts and beliefs are sentence-sized and sentence-structured.
They are, as it were, modeled on sentences, written or spoken.
Sensations are not linguistically structured like thoughts.
They are posited for different explanatory purposes within common sense psychology.
They're interstates modeled on external objects.
So roughly, they're the ideas in that technical sense we saw in Locke, Barkley, and Hume.
When I see my dog playing in my backyard, what I have is a little mental copy of that scene.
That little visual copy is a sensation.
And if abstraction is a legitimate operation, then so are its components.
I can have a sensation of my dog's color, for instance.
So that's a partial look at the ontology of folk psychology.
Like any good or not-so-good theory, it has laws or proto-laws as well.
The theory can be represented, more or less, as the received view of scientific theories
would have it, that is, as a set of sentences including laws and issuing in explanations
and testable predictions.
So some of these laws are relatively low-level.
That means they're reasonably closely tied to observation.
An example of such a law would be, people who are angry are easily irritated.
An analog of this in a more paradigmatically scientific theory would be a relatively low-level
law, like all copper conducts electricity.
Notice that this low-level psychological law can be treated also as a partial interpretation
of the theoretical term anger in observation terms, if we grant, at least for the sake
of argument, that irritation is an observable state.
If not, we'd have to find an observable state in which we're interpreting an ocean-like
anger.
The other low-level laws involving anger, like people who are angry tend to raise their
voices, also help interpret the theoretical terms of the theory observationally.
In addition to these low-level laws, laws that are reasonably closely tied to observation,
there will be higher-level laws which are more fundamentally tied to explanation than
to observation.
Higher-level laws are distant from interpretation via observables.
So for instance, a law like, people will generally choose the means they believe most
effective to realizing their ends is not very closely tied to observation.
That's a theoretical statement.
It might be an axiom of the theory.
It might not derive from anything more fundamental.
It might be an unexplained explainer.
And such high-level laws will help explain other lower-level laws, like, all other things
equal, people will take the job that pays the most money.
We use these laws, tacitly, we don't generally state them out loud, or to each other, combined
with suitable initial conditions to explain a vast and rich range of human behavior.
The examples I've been giving are comically simple.
Philosophers tend to use kind of ridiculous examples for the purposes of clarity.
But I don't mean to condescend to folk psychology as an explanatory theory.
In the hands of a good observer of human behavior, and a good theorist of human nature, like
some biographers, for instance, one gets really quite interesting explanations of apparently
diverse patterns of behavior.
A person's life can get unified around a few interesting theoretical posits.
How testable, how correct these explanations are is a further question.
But this is not a toy theory, though I've been talking as if it was, because I wanted
to get the basic ideas of the theory out there.
And of course, we use this theory to predict one another's behavior and to explain one
another's behavior.
The crew here at the teaching company by now probably has a rich store of explanatory
and predictive knowledge that it uses quite effectively to deal with homoacademicus.
They know how to handle professors around here.
They know what kinds of caffeine and throat lozenges to keep around, and how to deal with
the academic ego.
And in an everyday sense, we use this theory in dealing with our partners, our children,
our parents, our friends, our enemies.
In order to know what to expect from other people, we explain their behavior in terms
of what they're seeing, sensations, what they're thinking, what their intentions on the basis
of what they're seeing and thinking plausibly are.
Now, despite the fact that we all tend to be realists about the ontology of folk psychology,
we talk as if beliefs and desires really exist.
The positivists would much have disapproved of that.
They tended to prefer psychological behaviorism, which reduces, in the philosophical sense
of reduces, unobservable mental states like beliefs and desires to observable behavioral
ones.
Most of us don't go in intuitively for a positivistic reduction.
We think beliefs and desires have a kind of reality.
Nevertheless, I've presented the theory so far in the classic positivist fashion, with
the theoretical terms getting partial interpretations through observables, both to kind of remind
us of this central aspect of the course, and to show how the theory might get a kind
of familiar structure and how meaning might flow into the theory from observation.
But this is not the only way that we could render folk psychology as a scientific theory.
Arguably, we might want to introduce some Coonian elements.
So Coon thinks that a paradigm, which is loosely identical to a theory, needs exemplary applications
of the theory.
Coon needs a set of values that animate the explanatory and predictive projects of the
theory and a kind of vocabulary that sets the problems and allows normal science to
happen.
Notice that normal science here, informally construed, is figuring out what each other
are going to do.
We don't tend to see much of that within normal science, but we do see it in specialized
versions of normal science.
So Freud, for instance, uses the categories of folk psychology and adds a sort of specific
ontology of his own involving the id, the ego, and the superego within a kind of folk
psychological framework.
And Freud offers paradigms in the Coonian sense, case studies that one is supposed to
read and learn how to apply the theory.
The notion of a Freudian slip is a kind of paradigm of a specialized folk psychological
theory.
The way we learn folk psychology probably explains the fact that there aren't exemplary
applications and things like that.
We don't learn this in an academic context, we learn it as children.
So we don't need paradigms to be taught to us, to guide the application of the theory
later in life.
It's an interesting question to what extent we could muster paradigms, exemplary applications,
normal science solutions to guide this sort of explanation.
We don't seem to need them, but if we had to come up with them, it's an interesting
question what they'd look like.
We could also deploy some of the resources of, say, the semantic conception of theories
and could interpret folk psychology through models rather than as a set of sentences
ordered in an axiom system.
Arguably, I understand other people by modeling them on myself.
This is called a mental simulation approach to the mind, and it could provide an interesting
test case for the semantic conception of theories, but it's going to raise some complicating
issues that we don't want to go into here.
Many philosophers contrast understanding other people through simulation and understanding
them through theorizing about them.
So on their view, simulation doesn't provide a theory, it provides a sort of more direct
kind of access to what's going on with them.
So it's not clear that simulation is a model in the sense that matters for the semantic
conception of theories.
Going back to kind of baby examples, we do, in fact, use models to interpret folk psychology.
Think of the kind of classic case from Saturday morning cartoons where a character has a devilish
version of himself appear on one shoulder and an angelic version of himself appear on another
shoulder.
This is a kind of quasi Freudian interpretation of the id and the superego, but it's a model.
It's a toy model, but it's a model that gestures at a kind of explanatory picture of human
behavior.
If we depart from the received view of scientific theories, then our explanations might be offered
in terms of these models or pictures rather than in terms of laws, but that needn't make
them any less explanatory.
It will be a problem for a covering law approach to explanation, but not a problem for explanation
as such, and the covering law view can be modified to try to take account of these complications.
We like to think we do pretty well predicting and explaining each other's behavior using
folk psychology.
But many philosophers think that folk psychology competes with and compares unfavorably to
various kinds of scientific psychology.
Let's just run through some of the major worries about folk psychology.
The laws that figure in folk psychological explanation face the death of a thousand counter
examples.
Many times when people are angry, they get quiet, not loud for instance, and so these
laws in order not to be falsified get hedged by lots of Keteris paribus clauses, by lots
of all other things equal clauses, or by being formulated in terms of tendencies people have
rather than behavior they will exhibit.
So the laws of folk psychology are hardly bold, Popperian conjectures.
They look in some ways more like psychology, predictions that are vague and that are protected
from falsification by sometimes some ad hoc maneuvers.
So it's not clear for instance that we treat a hypothesis like so-and-so is just being
shy as an independently testable explanatory hypothesis about behavior rather than just
as a way of protecting an utterance or prediction we just made from having been falsified.
So the worry is the theory looks more successful to us than it is just as astrology looks more
successful to its practitioners than we think it is.
Because we unselfconsciously protect its claims from apparent falsification.
Furthermore and developing Popper's view in the direction that Lakatos developed, folk
psychology doesn't seem to have made much progress in the last few thousand years.
Critics claim that competing research programs within scientific psychology look enormously
more progressive than folk psychology has.
Folk psychology doesn't appear to explain some of the central phenomena within its domain,
doesn't have much to say about how human creativity happens, how language learning happens, how
certain kinds of mental illness come about.
Explanations in terms of belief, desire and sensation seem not to work very well in these
contexts.
Furthermore, many folk psychological explanations face rather direct empirical challenges.
Experiments with split brain patients, for example.
These are patients in which one hemisphere is unaware of what's going on as it were
in the other hemisphere, seem to suggest that a lot of what look like folk psychological
explanations or predictions are in fact rationalizations.
One hemisphere will find itself observing what the body is doing, and this is explained
by some suggestion or perception going on in the other hemisphere, but the hemisphere
in question will say, oh no, I wanted that drink of water, I'm thirsty, even though we
know that the hemisphere that's saying this wasn't aware that the water was there.
We rationalize, we make sense of our behavior, but we're not explaining how our behavior
is caused, though we think that we are.
We have a kind of psychological need on this picture to see our behavior as caused by reasons,
but it's not clear that this is generally true.
It's often a rationalization rather than a prediction.
The deepest problem many think is that the entities and laws posited by folk psychology
just don't fit very well with those of neuroscience and other parts of scientific psychology.
We saw this very problem when we looked at attempts to reduce the mind's computational
functions to brain states, and we'll see a different worry about reduction in just a
few minutes.
Finally, though, categories of folk psychology seem to bring all kinds of problems in their
wake.
Belief and desire raise a whole bunch of philosophical problems about, for instance,
how we can want things that don't exist, how we get to think about things like that.
So it's a psychological theory that seems to keep philosophers in business, and that's
almost never thought to be a virtue in a scientific theory.
Some people think that the very language of folk psychology raises explanatory problems
that the language itself makes hard to solve.
So if the above considerations are on the right track, admittedly that's a big if, folk
psychology looks like a candidate for what we've called an eliminative reduction.
When we looked at reduction back in Lectures 23 and 24, back then we assumed that the theories
to be reduced did a pretty good job of explaining and predicting within their own domain.
And we found reasons for respecting the explanatory power of theories that don't seem to reduce
to more basic theories.
Seems like we sometimes lose explanatory power when we go down a level to something
more fundamental.
The worry here is such explanatory power as some theories possess does not seem to make
it tempting to salvage the theory's laws or ontology.
The theory that witchcraft happens is one that we don't think explains enough to allow
us to reduce it to sexism, religion, and peculiar rules of legal procedure.
The idea is it's much clearer to say witchcraft gets eliminated and the explanation proceeds
via these really quite different categories.
Oxygen does not reduce to oxygen, but gets replaced by it.
Witchcraft gets replaced by, say, psychological or historical explanations.
And so some philosophers think that folk psychology is in the same boat, though I hope
they would admit that it's not as bad a theory as the witchcraft theory is.
The failure of fit with neuroscience, as I indicated before, looms especially large in
these arguments.
Many neuroscientists think that a connectionist model, and I'll deal with this only in the
broadest of terms, fits the mind better and the scientific data better than does the folk
psychological theory.
On this approach, the brain doesn't think in states or episodes that are at all structured
like sentences.
Thinking happens when variations in patterns of stimulation across large numbers of neurons
produce representations.
Kind of like variations in brightness levels produce an image on a TV screen.
There's nothing linguistic underlying that.
The processing is sub-conceptual.
It's a pattern of distributed excitations rather than a thought that something is the
case.
There's nothing linguistic-ish or sized going on in the brain on this picture.
Similarly, learning isn't a matter of accumulating data stored as sentences, so much as it is
a matter of arranging stimulation patterns in the brain.
That's how categories get embodied by a kind of electrical, difference in electrical potential.
So such an approach is pretty well documented when we want to explain, for instance, how
babies recognize faces.
They don't have language yet, but they're able to recognize faces because the explanation
here is connectionist, not semantic.
So things like pattern recognition as embodied in differential stimulation patterns presents
a pretty different picture of the mind than folk psychology does.
And so some philosophers conclude that there's nothing in the brain answering to the beliefs
and desires that folk psychology posits, and they further claim that folk psychology is
not a good enough theory to stand on its own to overcome the failure of fit it exhibits
with neuroscience.
So this case looks rather different than the case discussed in lecture 24, where the reduction
of computational psychology to the physical was disjunctive and messy, but not completely
unpromising.
Here the idea is the reduction is non-existent, reducing folk psychology to neuroscience would
be like reducing witchcraft to psychology and sociology and history and religious explanation.
The idea is not just that folk psychology is shallow and that neuroscience is deeper,
but that folk psychology presents a misleading enough picture of what's really going on
that we should get rid of it.
So an eliminative reduction of folk psychology would have the consequence that none of us
really has beliefs, none of us has desires, and none of us is a person where that means
the kind of thing that thinks and thinks by using beliefs, desires, that sort of stuff.
Could that really be the case?
Could neuroscience show us that there are no beliefs and that you and I are not persons?
Well, if folk psychology is anything resembling a scientific theory, we need to be open to
the possibility that it is, at least in large part, false.
And the eliminativists are suggesting that folk psychology is like astrology or like
other fundamentally misguided theories.
It's hard to contemplate giving it up if it's deeply integrated into your web of belief,
but if you step outside it and look at it from a neuroscientific perspective, the theory
seems fatally flawed.
Now if it's used for prediction and explanation, folk psychology looks to be making claims
about the world, and so those claims had better be substantive predictive claims than if they
are, then they're falsifiable.
Or at least so it seems, at the end of the lecture we'll revisit this assumption.
Now there's a kind of technical problem here, arguably it's unintelligible to deny the truth
of folk psychology.
Why?
Well you can't believe that the theory is false, because if folk psychology is false,
there's no such thing as a belief.
But there's some reason to think that we can use a theory against itself.
If we found what we'd be tempted to describe as a pre-Cambrian rabbit, that might bring
about enough changes in our geological and biological theories that we would end up jettisoning
the concept of the Cambrian period.
But that doesn't make this string of inferences incoherent, it means some evidence described
in the theory's terms ends up overthrowing the theory.
So the most straightforward way out of the problem would be to defend folk psychology
as a decent scientific or semi-scientific theory, and it's not at all clear that that's
an unpromising task.
So for one thing, some of the failures of which folk psychology is accused might not
be part of its job, it's not clear that folk psychology is in the business of trying to
explain mental illness, that it's supposed to be explaining dreaming, or the function
of sleep, or how language is acquired.
Why?
Because folk psychology is often put forward as a theory of normal, intelligent behavior.
And as a theory of normal, intelligent behavior, it is not committed to claims about perception,
it's not committed to claims about mental illness, those might be susceptible of a kind
of neuroscientific explanation.
When we're trying to explain each other's everyday behavior, we needn't have a built-in
theory of mental illness at work.
Eliminativists think that's a misguidedly narrow approach to psychological explanation.
They think it's like trying to develop a chemistry about a few elements that hang out
together in the middle of the periodic table.
But non-eliminativists might say that it's more like trying to develop a theory of light,
which is only one kind of electromagnetic radiation among others, but it's one that
can be largely, if not entirely, understood on its own terms, and it's something well
worth having its own theory of.
So if normal intelligent behavior is different enough from the psychology of sleep or mental
illness, then it's worth having its own theory.
And folk psychology could be broken up into distinct theories.
We could have a theory of belief, a theory of pain, things like that.
If those phenomena are different enough to require a different ontology or different
laws, then folk psychology could divide itself up.
We want to make sure, though, that it doesn't contract merely to protect itself from falsification.
We want the theory to be reasonably bold and falsifiable, otherwise it can't be a good
scientific theory.
And we have to make sure we don't judge folk psychology by unduly harsh standards.
Folk psychology does not have even the beginnings of a good explanation of human creativity,
but neither does neuroscience, really.
So to criticize folk psychology for that particular failing is mostly a matter of saying psychology
is a very young science.
And the concepts and ontology of folk psychology do, arguably, figure in some successful scientific
psychology.
Rational choice theory, the theory of memory, some parts of learning, not language, but
some other parts of learning, do get handled in part by appealing to concepts, beliefs,
and intentions.
This could get explained away, but if these approaches are at least reasonably successful,
then we could make the claim, as we did about explanations at the ecological rather than
the biological level, that these notions are pulling their own explanatory weight.
And so needn't get reduced to some more basic level.
Furthermore, folk psychology, arguably, should get credit for part of the explanatory and
predictive success that history, economics, anthropology, and sociology have attained.
Because those sciences are just pervaded by folk psychological vocabulary and rely implicitly
on those laws.
So if folk psychology is a pretty good theory, then we might not want to lose explanatory
power, even if it doesn't reduce very well to the neurological level.
We saw the same thing with computational psychology.
We don't want to reduce the ability to add, we don't want to insist that the ability
to add get reduced to the physical level, because we lose too much explanatory power.
And the pessimism about the compatibility of neuroscience with folk psychology might
be premature.
Psychology as a scientific discipline is only about a hundred years old, we've got a lot
to learn still about how the brain works, and a lot to learn about folk psychological
explanation.
So it's far from obvious that the failure of fit has been established.
We don't see how folk psychology fits into neuroscience.
That doesn't mean we see that it doesn't.
Finally, folk psychology could in fact function rather differently than as a scientific theory.
It could be a kind of useful fiction, or in the language of this course, it could get
an instrumental interpretation.
So the philosopher of mind, Daniel Dennett, treats folk psychology instrumentally.
We adopt a kind of predictive and explanatory stance with respect to some creatures and
objects rather than others.
We can use it with respect to a thermostat.
We can treat the thermostat as trying to regulate the temperature in the room, even
though we don't really think thermostats have goals.
It's sometimes useful in understanding a system like that to talk as if it has beliefs
and desires.
And so on Dennett's view, we take this approach with one another.
We talk as if beliefs and desires are real things, but in fact it should get a kind of
positivistic construal.
Belief and desire and categories like that are placeholders.
They're calculating devices.
They're not assertions about how unobservable reality goes, but they're ways of coping with
observable phenomena.
And so we see that it's not clear that folk psychology needs to be a scientific theory
in order to be, in some sense, legitimate.
And if it is a psychological theory, we see that it doesn't have to have its status as
carving the world at its joints convincingly and conclusively established.
We saw that it's not completely clear what answers in biology to the notion of a species,
but species skepticism is still a minority opinion.
So even if we don't quite know the place of belief and desire in the world, if they
look like they might pull their explanatory weight, we might still take them with some
ontological seriousness.
So we've seen another example of about what theories are for and what we're committed
to in taking their ontology seriously.
The very sense we have of ourselves depends in part on what we take a scientific theory
of creatures like us to be in the business of doing.
And next time, we will try to bring it all back home.
