Lecture 28 Realism and Naturalism
We saw in our last lecture that the debate between scientific realism on the one hand
and empiricism on the other looks somewhat inconclusive.
The realist asserts, and the empiricist denies, that inference to the best explanation can
make statements about unobservable reality worthy of scientific belief.
The realist supports this position by appealing to inference to the best explanation arguments
within the observable realm, and by appealing to some reasons for not taking the distinction
between observable and unobservable reality too seriously.
But the anti-realist, and we're mostly concerned with empiricist versions of anti-realism
here, argues that inference to the best explanation arguments are not able to carry that much
of an evidential burden.
And the empiricist will appeal to the pessimistic induction argument and the underdetermination
of theory by data to suggest that inference to the best explanation goes too far beyond
our observational data to be worthy of belief.
It's not that the empiricist needs to think that inference to the best explanation arguments
are worthless, just that, against this philosophical background, they don't provide an adequate
basis on their own for belief.
So the empiricist claims that the realist would have us believe scientific theories on
non-evidential grounds, and the empiricist thinks that's a mistake.
Some empiricists think that explanatory loveliness, the extent to which a hypothesis helps us
make sense of observation, is never a guide to truth.
More moderate empiricists think that explanatory loveliness has some evidential weight within
science, and so think that certain kinds of success can license inference to, say, belief
in electrons.
But they're not persuaded that a global strategy of inference to the best explanation establishes
that successful scientific theories correctly describe unobservable reality.
It's simply hard to resolve at all conclusively this issue of whether and to what extent it's
desirable to tolerate unexplained entities and regularities.
Realists tend to think that science should try to explain as much as it can, while empiricists
think that the choice ultimately amounts to deciding between saying, on the one hand,
stuff happens, there's no explanation, and on the other hand, going in for metaphysics
in order to explain why stuff happens, for instance, why science is as successful as
it is.
Realists opt for the stuff happens version of that dilemma, and claim that we're going
to end up at some point with unexplained phenomena on our hands, and it's not so bad if that
point arrives sooner than the realist thinks it should.
So that's the impasse that seems to characterize the debate about scientific realism.
In the face of this impasse, a number of realists have adopted an interesting line of partial
retreat.
This retreat is not designed really to bring staunch empiricists along with them, but it
does try to, as it were, minimize the controversy over inference to the best explanation.
And it's independently motivated by other developments in philosophy of science in the
second half of the 20th century, in particular the failure of the logical positivists and
their allies to develop a logic or abstract methodology that seemed adequate to scientific
induction and other aspects of scientific reasoning.
So at this point we're bringing in some more material from earlier chapters of our story,
just about evidence and confirmation.
Realism, many philosophers now think, flourishes best within a naturalistic approach to philosophy.
Naturalism abandons the project of providing a philosophical justification for science.
We'll explore the implications of that momentarily.
Naturalism gives up on the idea of any kind of distinctively philosophical knowledge,
notably including a priori knowledge, that is knowledge which does not depend on experience,
and most immediately relevantly, distinctively philosophical principles of epistemic evaluation.
So if we're naturalists, there is no logic or abstract methodology of science, there
is no distinctively philosophical justification for science.
Naturalism thus gives up on the old, grand conception of philosophy as the queen of the
processes that had so annoyed the positivists.
It gives up on the idea that philosophers can attain a priori knowledge through the
use of reason alone.
But it also, and equally, gives up on the positivist conception of philosophy as a fact-free
discipline, one that tries to achieve valuable results through conceptual reasoning alone,
through analysis of language.
The logical analysis of science, central to popper and to the logical positivist, seemed
to many philosophers by, say, the 1960s or 70s no longer to have much left in the tank.
They wanted a different way of thinking about the philosophical issues that arise in science.
Well, what's left if we're giving up metaphysics and we're giving up conceptual analysis?
Science pretty much.
Naturalism is characterized by the rejection of an extra scientific standpoint from which
science can be assessed.
Another way of making the very same point is to say that, for a naturalist, philosophy
and science are continuous with one another.
Philosophy is not prior to science, providing a foundation, nor is it separate from science,
a methodologically different discipline handling conceptual rather than factual questions.
Now, we'll examine this view first as it applies to the issue of scientific realism,
and then we will return to consider philosophical naturalism more generally.
The naturalistic approach to realism puts scientific realism forward as the best scientific
explanation for the success of science.
It no longer attempts a philosophical justification of inference to unobservables.
That sounds like a verbal difference.
Let's see why it's a difference that makes a difference.
Scientific realism now becomes an empirical hypothesis rather than a philosophical thesis.
It's no longer a claim about the nature of justification, it's no longer a claim about
inductive logic, it's not a claim about the logical or evidential status of inference
to the best explanation.
A naturalized scientific realism takes a scientific look at science and asks whether
the successes of science are capable of receiving a scientific explanation.
The realist claims that realism, which as we've seen is, roughly speaking, the hypothesis
that successful theories have a reasonable chance of being approximately true, including
in what they say about unobservable reality, that's the best scientific explanation for
the technological and predictive successes of science.
So the idea is that just as electrons are posited to explain the success of certain
predictions in physics, scientific realism gets posited to explain the success of certain
sciences.
Or to take perhaps a clearer metaphor, just as we can examine the behavior of, say, a
group of monkeys, I don't mean to be insulting scientists here, but we can look at the monkeys
and try to explain their behavior by figuring out which parts of the world they understand
well and which parts of the world they understand poorly, we can turn a similar kind of explanatory
attention on science itself and try to use science to figure out which parts of science
seem to have latched onto reality.
Notice that the only sense of legitimacy appealed to here is derived from scientific practice
itself.
The claim is that the inference from the success of scientific theories to their at least approximate
truth, and this inference need not be made about science as a whole, it's made about
favorable cases, well-tested theories.
The claim is that this inference meets the standards for explanatory inference within
science.
It's not directly claimed that it's legitimate, it's claimed that it's scientifically legitimate.
It's the same kind of inference involved in good science.
So no external standard and no independent defense of the appropriateness of this explanatory
inference is invoked.
Rather than analyzing the notion of justification or evidence, the kind of conceptual a priori
work philosophers would have done, the idea is to make a scientific examination of what
works, of the conditions under which scientific practices seem to be reliable.
And this is reminiscent of the approach of the sociologists of science, whose work we
examined back in lecture 17.
We've seen that the sociologists of science claim to have examined science and to have
no need for the idea that science gets the world, much less the unobservable parts of
the world, right.
They think a scientific examination of science debunks science's claims to be in touch with
reality.
Scientific realists think that this inference turns out differently than the sociologists
of science think it does.
By the standards of current science, scientific realists in the naturalistic tradition think
that the methods of current science can be shown to be more or less reliable.
And they think that these standards, the standards of our current best science, are the best,
if not the only standards, to apply.
We will, in a few minutes, touch on the substantive question here, namely whether scientific realism
is in fact a good scientific hypothesis.
That's roughly the difference between the sociologists of science and the naturalistic
philosophers.
But it's the methodological issues that are really philosophically striking and interesting
here.
What makes naturalism so distinctive is that no attempt at all is made to address philosophical
worries about whether the standards used in science are themselves legitimate.
Now naturalism's utter lack of interest, really, in justifying science, raises two major
worries almost immediately.
The first is, why isn't naturalism troublingly circular?
Doesn't it amount to judging science by its own standards?
Is it likely to do pretty well if we let astrology be judged by the standards of astrology?
How is it any different to let science be judged by the standards of science?
An appreciation of some of the historical sources on which naturalism draws can help
us see that there's at least something of a difference here.
Naturalists are influenced by Kuhn's ideas, which suggest that we have no better grip on
how science ought to be done than the grip we have on how science is done.
The failures and limitations of projects like developing a logic of science deepened
this sense that we won't be able to say anything very interesting about the aughts of science
without drawing quite significantly on the izzes of science.
Science is our best intellectual achievement, people in the Kuhnian tradition think, and
we've got to look at how it gets done rather than imposing some external standards on it.
Of course, this is not to suggest that we can read the aughts of science too directly
off the izzes.
It would have been better had Kuhn more explicitly emphasized this point, but even he understands
that we must have some basis for selecting which actual scientific practices are taken
as typical or exemplary.
So the izzes and aughts are intertwined, but in the Kuhnian tradition the izzes are primary
and the aughts are derived from reflection on the izzes of science.
Philosophicalists are also influenced by Quine's Holism, according to which no part of the Web
of Belief stands apart from the rest.
Less metaphorically, nothing can be known a priori, nothing can be known independently
of experience, and no belief is immune from the possibility of revision.
On such a picture there will be no distinctively philosophical or distinctively secure knowledge
about how to inquire.
Directive logic, deductive logic, any of these principles could be modified in the course
of experience.
So just as for Quine, nothing important turns on whether force equals mass times acceleration
is a definition, which broadly speaking in the tradition would have been a philosophical
claim, or an empirical law instead of a definition, which broadly speaking would make it part
of physics rather than philosophy.
That's not a difference that makes a difference, according to Quine.
Nothing important turns on whether a bit of methodological advice is philosophical
or empirical, and a claim is just a bit of methodological advice about how to run your
Web of Belief.
We saw Quine say that positing atoms and positing Greek gods are attempts to do the
same kind of thing, namely to allow us successfully to predict phenomena without having to make
needless modifications to the Web of Belief.
The only difference is, we tend to think, positing atoms does a better job of this than
positing the Greek gods.
In this vein, Quinean-inspired naturalists developed the idea that philosophy and science
are in the same business, namely the business of efficiently updating the Web of Belief
in the light of experience.
Against this background, we can see that circularity is not quite the issue, though it was a fair
worry.
If one were using science to defend the epistemic credentials of science, a charge of circularity
would be well founded.
If we used astrology to argue for the legitimacy of astrology, we're arguing in a circle.
But that's not, in fact, what the naturalistic philosophers are doing.
They are repudiating the project of justifying science's epistemic credentials in the first
place.
Now, rejecting the demand for a philosophical justification is not to be confused with having
answered such a demand.
Science cannot be vindicated by appealing to science.
That would be to argue in a circle.
What the naturalists do is refuse to worry about vindicating science.
They treat the epistemic specialness of science roughly like the hypothesis that we're not
inhabiting a dream or living in the matrix.
They're not trying to defend the reality of the external world.
They're not trying to defend the epistemic importance of science.
They take it for granted.
A more straightforward issue than scientific realism can provide a helpful illustration
here.
A kind of sub-discipline called evolutionary epistemology appeals to evolution to help
explain human knowledge.
It asks and answers questions about what our eyes, brains, and such evolved to do well,
and also what they seem perhaps to do poorly.
Most versions of evolutionary epistemology offer at least a modest assurance about our
basic cognitive abilities.
These abilities are too important to the survival of creatures like us for them to be significantly
inaccurate.
Our ancestors would never have survived and reproduced if too many of their beliefs had
been false.
As before, the substantive merits and demerits of this argument are less important to us
than the methodological issues raised by these arguments.
The arguments of evolutionary epistemology have no chance of convincing somebody not
already convinced of the basic reliability of our cognitive faculties, because the truth
of evolution, which is presupposed in the explanation, can only be known by using the
faculties that are being vindicated.
So a proponent of an evolutionary epistemological argument is not trying to establish, from
minimal presuppositions, the reliability of our cognitive faculties.
That's presupposed in the argument.
The approach assumes that the scientific picture of the world is more or less accurate
and tries to see how philosophical questions look from such a standpoint.
The idea is to use the results of science to help answer philosophical questions.
This brings us to the second major worry about philosophical naturalism.
Doesn't it threaten to turn philosophy into some kind of mix of biology and psychology,
or maybe other parts of science?
Doesn't it threaten to turn philosophy into the scientific study of how perception and
inference actually happen?
Where are the aughts?
It's all is's.
And in doing so, doesn't naturalism lose sight of the distinction between descriptive
and normative questions?
The precursors of this movement are once again illuminating.
We've already seen Kuhn's skepticism about the usefulness of separating is questions
from aught questions.
So the distinction between the normative and the descriptive is not one that Kuhn thinks
will bear any interesting weight.
Quine took a pretty interesting position here.
He initially defended a very strong naturalism along just these lines.
He suggested in the late 1960s that philosophers get out of the knowledge business.
Epistemology should become the study of how science generates such ambitious theories on
the basis of such modest inputs, and that's more or less a branch of psychology.
Other philosophers in the naturalist tradition have not been as reductive as Quine was, perhaps
because we'd like to keep our jobs.
Philosophers have seen themselves asking traditional philosophical questions from within a framework
that starts by assuming a roughly scientific picture of the world.
Philosophers raise questions about how well certain scientific pictures of the world fit
together with others.
So for instance, physiological psychologists tend to think that human attraction is entirely
explained by pheromones, while social psychologists tend to think it's entirely explained by certain
kinds of affinity in background, interests, perception of oneself and others.
Are these competing explanatory pictures?
Do they support one another?
Which of them is more basic?
That's a kind of philosophical question about the status of these scientific explanations.
Similarly, philosophers raise questions about the relationship between the picture of the
world offered by various sciences and that of common sense.
As we'll see in our next to the last lecture, philosophers wonder whether psychology actually
will allow us to retain a sense of ourselves as persons with beliefs, plans and desires.
Some developments in psychology suggest that those categories are misguided.
And in so far as there's a tension between, say, our thinking of ourselves as free versus
our thinking of ourselves as determined scientific objects, how are we to decide whether it's
the scientific or the common sense picture of ourselves in our world that should yield?
Most naturalistic philosophers still think that philosophy has a distinctive role in addressing
normative questions.
Philosophers generally worry a lot more than scientists do about what goals we have and
how well they fit together.
So naturalized epistemologists try to help us get clear about the different things we
might mean by a term like knowledge and try to help us reflect using the results of science
on which of these terms has a useful role to play for assessing our belief forming practices.
Cognitive science tells us how we form beliefs while philosophy helps us ask and answer questions
using cognitive science about how to assess and improve our belief forming practices.
In all of these ways, then, philosophy can use science to answer philosophical questions
without thereby replacing itself with science.
The work of philosophers remains distinctively conceptual and distinctively normative, but
it draws unashamedly on empirical results.
A solution to Nelson Goodman's New Riddle of Induction, better known as the Gru problem,
can be used to illustrate how naturalism might work in practice.
You may recall that our observations of emeralds seemed to support indefinitely many inductive
conclusions.
All observed emeralds are green, but they are also grue, they're gred, they're grac,
you name it.
Some traditional philosophical approaches tried to banish these gruesome predicates based
on their logical form, and there's still work being done in this area.
Even if you're a naturalist, you needn't think that all philosophical work has to be naturalistic.
But the naturalistic defense itself claims that it's an empirical, not a conceptual
matter, which inductive generalizations, if any, are justified.
We won't find a philosophical notion of a real property that will get rid of grue.
But if we can work out an argument supporting the claim that green is a scientifically
legitimate predicate in a way that grue isn't, that provides a reason within this assumed
naturalistic framework for favoring the hypothesis that emeralds are green over the hypothesis
that they're grue.
Notice that fitting with the data can't be the notion of scientific legitimacy here.
Grue fits with the data every bit as well as green does.
What we're looking for is some kind of support from an assumed scientific theory, not just
from observation.
If science tells us that green things have something important in common that grue things
lack, then we have a reason for preferring the green hypothesis to the grue hypothesis.
It's not by any means clear that science says any such thing, by the way.
More generally, we use our best scientific theories to figure out which predicates are
legitimately employed in inductive arguments.
If the best explanation, scientifically speaking, for the success of certain theories is that
they employ the right categories, then those categories can reliably, though of course
not infallibly, figure in inductive arguments.
This naturalistic approach refuses to take on Hume's general challenge to induction.
And by doing so, it gets the ability to appeal to science without having to justify that
appeal, and so it uses science to tell us which inductive arguments are likely to work.
On this view, science can't help us answer the biggest epistemological questions, like
whether the future will resemble the past, but if you assume, in some small respects,
favorable answers to such questions, science can then help us answer pretty big epistemological
questions like which inductions look more reasonable than others.
The anti-naturalist will point out that there's a circularity involved here, that we're appealing
to science in order to vindicate some scientific claims.
The naturalist is going to reply by asking how we're supposed to justify any interesting
claims about the world without using our best theories of the world, and so the naturalist
will be unapologetic about the appeal to science.
We've actually seen a somewhat similar naturalistic move when we examined the causal or historical
approach to meaning and reference.
The idea there was that our best scientific theories determine at least big parts of the
meaning of certain terms.
It's science that tells us what the structure is that makes something a whale, and which
thereby determines which creatures fall under the term whale when somebody points at a whale
and says, wow, what a big fish.
Even though whales aren't fish, they're talking about whales, and science tells us which creatures
are being talked about.
Now if it were automatic that naturalism would vindicate current science, then we'd more
or less be helping ourselves feel better about our inability to answer Hume's challenge,
our inability to develop a scientific logic.
We'd just be patting ourselves on the back by assuming that our best scientific theories
are onto something.
But fortunately it's a lot more interesting than that.
Just as an observation statement couched in the language of a theory can nevertheless
have the power to undermine the theory, a naturalistic approach to inquiry can threaten
as well as support our confidence that current science is reliable.
It's for this reason that naturalistic philosophy preserves much of the liveliness of classic
philosophy of science, much of the sense of asking fundamental questions about how inquiry
ought to be conducted.
So for instance it's not clear to what extent assuming naturalism really gets us very far
towards solving even modest versions of the problem of induction.
If we're to muster a scientific defense of our inductive practices, we at least need
to begin from a scientifically defensible description of those practices.
But even that modest sounding task of describing which inductive arguments we use in science
is quite beyond us so far.
Because we use a kind of weird mix of inductive arguments in the narrow sense, more of the
same inferences, we use some explanatory inferences, we appeal to simplicity, to fruitfulness,
to scope, to a variety of evidence.
And logically equivalent hypotheses like those that figure in the Raven paradox don't seem
equivalent to us.
And as Kuhn pointed out, our various inductive norms often compete with one another.
So it's not clear what part of this package the success of science is supposed to vindicate
or how it can do so.
A naturalistic approach to the problem of scientific induction is not clear whether
it supports or undermines our confidence in our inductive judgments when we turn science
on our inductive practices to a certain extent we see a mess.
On a related note, many studies in social psychology appear to show that humans reason
quite badly in certain systematic ways.
They violate basic norms of logic and probability theory.
Here's an example due to the social psychologists Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman.
They gave subjects some background information about a young woman.
The background information says that she's very bright, she's outspoken, she's deeply
concerned with issues about discrimination and social justice.
Then they ask their subjects to rank a number of statements about which descriptions are
most likely correctly to apply to this young woman.
And about 85% or so of subjects thought it more likely that the woman is a bank teller
who is active in the feminist movement than that she is a bank teller.
Now there are a bunch of different replies you could have given, some of them are merely
irrelevant.
This one can't possibly be right.
The response given by 85% of people is necessarily wrong.
There is no conceivable way that it's more likely for something to have both properties
A and B than it is for it to have property A alone.
That's not possible.
But this is a very high percentage of people who gave such an answer and it's a surprisingly
robust result when you modify the experiment in certain respects.
So naturalized epistemology and philosophy of science can thus raise in a scientifically
informed way issues about which norms do govern our reasoning and issues about what norms
should govern our reasoning and how we're supposed to figure out what the relevant norms
are given that there's some reason to think each of us is tempted to reason badly in
pretty systematic ways.
It's far from true that the way we do think lines up unproblematically with the way that
we ought to think or at least with the way that we think we ought to think.
Even assuming that science is more or less an epistemically special practice does not
vindicate our most basic reasoning practices.
Similarly, as we've seen, evolutionary psychology or evolutionary epistemology generally suggests
that our intellectual and perceptual faculties have to be reasonably well attuned to our environment
or else our species would not have survived.
On the other hand, it also suggests that we might well be wired for some false beliefs
about fundamental physics.
Some experiments suggest that human beings have a kind of intuitive physics which is
Aristotelian.
It's a kind of impetus theory.
It says that if you were to put your arm in a circular motion and let a ball go it would
continue in an arc rather than, as Newton correctly says, often a straight line tangential
to the circle.
Similarly, we might be wired for a kind of Euclidean geometry of space which is probably
not the correct geometry of space.
And our difficulties in getting our heads around relativity theory, quantum mechanics,
string theory, all of these suggest that we might not be well suited to understanding
some parts of the universe.
Science might suggest that parts of our common-sense worldview are, for evolutionary reasons, likely
to be reliable, but other parts are likely to be quite unreliable.
Irrelevant to our survival and perhaps beliefs that are relevant to our survival impede our
ability to understand other aspects of the world.
And as we noted in our earlier discussion, many sociologists of science think that their
empirical work deflates certain myths concerning the rationality and objectivity widely thought
to be characteristic of science.
A naturalistic approach to science, in their view, is incapable of vindicating something
like scientific realism.
Because the categories of truth and objectivity are not properly scientific, they don't figure
in legitimate scientific explanations.
Naturalistic philosophy of science can thus seem like kind of an awkward hybrid to such
people, of the old philosophical aspirations to ground science, and the newer, more scientific
approaches to science.
With these challenges in mind, we're going to turn in our next lecture to see to what
extent a naturalized approach to the philosophy of science vindicates science's special
place in our intellectual life.
If we examine science in the way that the sociologists suggest, turn a scientific eye
to how science works, do we vindicate science as epistemically special, or do we see through
some of its pretensions?
