Lecture 3 – Further Thoughts on Demarcation
Last time we examined Karl Popper's striking proposal that its riskiness and falsifiability,
not evidential and explanatory support, that distinguished science from other enterprises.
Popper's approach to the demarcation problem has been more popular with scientists than
it has with philosophers.
Most philosophers are not persuaded that it can distinguish between scientific and pseudoscientific
theories.
As we saw last time, it's difficult to interpret his falsificationist view so that physics
clearly passes the test, and Freud, or insert your favorite example of pseudoscience here,
fails the test.
And the fact that Popper is not offering a strict definition of science really doesn't
help solve the problem.
The issue is whether his necessary condition for doing science has a tendency to rule out
good cases if it is to rule out bad cases.
So this time we're going to examine other proposed demarcation criteria, keeping in
mind that each faces the same difficult challenge that Popper's proposal faces, that is each
risks failing to exclude reasonably clear cases of pseudoscience, or alternatively failing
to include reasonably clear cases of genuine science.
Or both.
First as usual, a bit of clarification.
It's easy to get confused about whether pseudosciences do in fact make testable predictions.
Often a pseudoscience makes many predictions that are admitted even by its practitioners
to be false, but the theory is not taken to be falsified.
And so we find critics of say astrology saying in one breath that the theory has made false
predictions, and in another breath that it's unfalsifiable, and hence unscientific.
But this is a problem.
Making false predictions just is a way of making testable ones.
And we can't simultaneously reject a theory as false, and as unscientific, especially
if our criterion of scientificness is falsifiability.
A great number of debates about scientific status get muddied here.
You can't reject something both as falsified and as unfalsifiable.
It's not fair.
So the way out of this is to realize that it's not clear that a false prediction is
actually a sufficient basis for rejecting a theory.
Striking though that might sound.
The unreliability of astrological predictions was understood for centuries.
But astrology was thought to be a science that permits some mistakes.
Why?
Because it's complex, like meteorology or medicine.
When your subject area is sufficiently complex, you're going to make some false predictions.
It doesn't automatically undermine the entire theoretical framework.
In fact, almost all of our best current theories face significant problems.
That's what it is to do science is to try to solve these problems.
For instance, our two best theories in physics, general relativity, which is an excellent
theory about big stuff, and quantum mechanics, which is an equally excellent theory about
small stuff, cannot, at least as they're classically formulated, both be right.
If you put them together, as you must if you want to deal with stuff that is simultaneously
very small and very big, what does that mean?
Mean something that is massive but takes up a tiny amount of space, like the area near
the center of a black hole or the universe a little while after the Big Bang.
If you put quantum mechanics and general relativity together in such circumstances, the theories
go crazy.
They give you predictions that are wildly false.
So we cannot require that a theory be rejected, either as bad science or as pseudoscience,
merely because of persistent failures of fit with the evidence.
It seems like we should be able to reject a theory if it doesn't fit the evidence, but
if we did that, we would have virtually no science left.
A great deal of scientific work involves trying to resolve these failures of fit.
Now I hasten to add that I'm not saying that there's no difference between astrology and
quantum mechanics.
The way in which astrology permits and tolerates false predictions seems much more global and
much more persistent than the way in which quantum mechanics permits itself to have problems.
But notice that this sounds more like a suggestion that astrology is a poor scientific theory
than like a suggestion that it's an unscientific theory.
This is a clear difference of degree.
One could try to appeal to a criterion like vagueness to distinguish astrology from quantum
mechanics, but it's not clear that the vagueness of astrology is a sufficient basis to undermine
its claim to being testable or to being scientific.
Again, not a good scientific theory.
But one thing vagueness can be tricky to measure.
And clearly successful sciences have their fair share of vagueness.
Part of physics might predict a black hole of a size within an enormous range will be
found in a very vaguely characterized area.
Or a biologist might predict that a certain trait will eventually at some point disappear
from a given species.
These are vague claims.
And a good science tolerates unclarity about its fundamental conceptions in addition to
about its specific claims.
So for instance, biology has a hard time with the notion of a living thing.
It's not clear whether viruses should count as living things.
If viruses do count as living things, it's not clear that computer viruses shouldn't
count as living things.
Again, I am far from denying a difference between astrology and, say, biology.
My point is that the difference is hard to state.
We're back to our I Know It When I See It problem about science and pseudoscience.
And in addition to being hard to state, it's hard to tell whether we're talking about a
difference in degree, theories that are doing the same kind of thing, some of them less
well than others, or a difference in kind, which is what our original problem of demarcation
was asking for.
So these kinds of quasi-Paperian criteria about falsifiability and testability don't
seem to do the trick by themselves.
What else have we got?
Well, one interesting kind of criterion is historical.
The idea here is that pseudosciences tend not to make much progress.
Astrology has not gotten a whole lot better than it was, say, a thousand years ago.
Now, progress can be tricky to characterize, much less, to measure.
Astrology has surely changed.
It had to change considerably when new planets, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto, were discovered.
It'd be interesting to see what they're going to do with this new 10th planet.
And some of these changes maybe aren't mere changes.
They might plausibly be considered improvements.
Contemporary astrology is probably more complex and more internally consistent than it was
a long time ago.
So on what basis exactly can we deny astrology's claim to make progress?
Furthermore, a science, if there were one, that correctly accounted for all of the phenomena
in its domain could then hardly be expected to show much progress.
Arguably, one could try to say something like this about chemistry.
The basics of chemistry have not changed in a long while.
They've been delved into and explained more deeply through connections between chemistry
and microphysics.
But the fundamentals of chemistry, depending on how you pick it out, arguably haven't
changed very much.
And if progress is our measure of genuine scientific status, chemistry would then not count.
And that seems, shall we say, counterintuitive.
Now a more sophisticated version of this approach might fault a pseudoscience in comparison
to competing theories.
If a competitor makes substantial progress while the theory in question remains stagnant,
we could then say that the unprogressing theory is pseudoscientific.
Now one consequence of this that isn't obviously an objection is that a theory's scientific
status can change over time without much change in the theory itself.
Astrology might, on this view, have become pseudoscientific only when astronomy, and
then later psychology, started performing decisively better at the very tasks of prediction
that astrology had set itself.
So astrology loses its scientific status when psychology gains scientific status.
Maybe we can live with that result.
But this criterion appears to have the consequence, that theories that lack serious competitors
cannot be pseudosciences.
And that's hard to live with.
In the 19th century, this peculiar enterprise called Pyramidology arose.
It's very hard to characterize briefly and accurately.
It roughly tried to explain deep facts about the universe through geometrical inferences
about pyramids.
Now, I'm not a big fan of pyramidology, but it's not clear it has any competitors.
I don't know that there are any other theories trying to explain everything in the universe
using the geometry of some figure.
So on that view, Pyramidology couldn't be disqualified as a science since there's no
superior competitor.
A different criterion might complain that pseudosciences lack any clear mechanism.
The problem on this view with astrology is there's no clear account of how stars, which
are so far away, and constellations which are composed of stars that aren't near each
other, according to astronomy anyway, how those sorts of things can influence our day-to-day
lives.
And that does seem a little crazy.
But note that many legitimate and successful theories have also lacked mechanical accounts
of crucial processes.
As we saw in our first lecture, Isaac Newton provided no mechanism for the action at a
distance of gravity.
He said the moon all the way up there can pull on stuff down here, and he had no idea
how it could happen.
Similarly, the term gene and the basic laws involving genetics were widely accepted before
people had any idea how genetic information was physically realized in organisms.
So we don't want to disqualify a view as scientific whenever it lacks a mechanism by
which its influences can be transmitted.
What else can we do?
We could try developing a more sophisticated descendant of the I know it when I see it
view.
We could say that a practice counts as science if the right people call it a science.
And if its practitioners do the right sort of scientific-y things, like publish journals
and get jobs in universities.
But like many other proposals, this one is probably going to be both too strong, it would
exclude cases that shouldn't be excluded, and too weak, it'll include cases that shouldn't
be included.
So for instance, we don't want this to be a sufficient criterion for a scientific status.
Why?
Trophim Lysenko in the middle of the last century managed to convince Stalin that communism
required an account of evolution that allowed acquired characteristics to be passed on to
offspring.
Lysenko repudiated the contemporary science of genetics, and it became the official biological
view of the Soviet Union.
But Lysenkoism looks like pseudoscience if anything is.
But if you look at the universities, if you look at the journals, it had all the social
trappings of science one could possibly ask for.
Similarly, we don't want the social trappings to be a necessary condition for scientific
status if we want to allow that isolated, unrecognized thinkers can count as doing genuine
science.
They don't have the social trappings, but we think they might be doing genuinely scientific
work.
So far we're in some trouble, and there have been a number of other criteria proposed,
but many of them don't even look remotely promising.
So we could say that many pseudosciences have very dubious origins.
Astrology associates Mars with violence because it's red.
This doesn't look like much of a basis for a theory of personality.
But chemistry originated in the pretty dubious enterprise of trying to transmute lead into
gold, alchemy.
We don't want to blame a discipline for having kind of dubious origins.
Almost everything arose from some kind of speculation.
Similarly, there don't seem to be any forms of reasoning that have much of a chance of
distinguishing science from pseudoscience.
You can find a pseudoscience that uses the most advanced mathematical, including statistical
reasoning, causal and explanatory modeling.
Mathematical trappings are not going to do much of a job of distinguishing science from
pseudoscience.
And genuine science use the kind of inferences that we find in pseudosciences with some frequency.
Arguments from analogy are thought to be somehow sort of soft and disreputable.
So comparing the universe to a watch and inferring that there must be a watchmaker seems pseudoscientific
to many people.
But comparing gas molecules to little tiny balls doesn't seem pseudoscientific.
So the kind of reasoning involved doesn't look like a very promising basis for distinguishing
science from pseudoscience.
There's lots of good evidence that astrology is not a particularly good theory.
When you give some astrologers a lot of data, ask them to make predictions about whether
people are introverts or extroverts, the professional astrologers have a success rate about equivalent
to tossing a coin.
Now, I'm not saying that's conclusive.
The astrologer can deny that the psychological personality tests are as accurate as the astrological
predictions.
My point is that there's data that bears on astrology and it doesn't look particularly
good for astrology.
Suppose that's right.
Fans of astrology, please note these suppose.
The question is, why, if at all, that has a tendency to show that astrology is a pseudoscience
rather than an inferior science?
We've run through a list and we haven't found any criteria, necessary criteria, sufficient
conditions, whatever, that even handedly applied appear to do a good job of sorting
cases into the scientific on the one hand and the pseudoscientific on the other.
So I'm not denying that astrology is a pseudoscience.
My point is it's awfully hard to explain why it's a pseudoscience if it's a pseudoscience.
We might want to say that it's not falsifiable in the right way, that it doesn't have evidential
support in the right way.
I am sympathetic to all of these ideas, but they aren't proposals until we know what
the right way is supposed to be.
Now let's pursue these questions further by getting into creationism, which is the occasion
for the biggest debates about science and pseudoscience in this country anyway.
And at the outset we should note some important distinctions within creationism.
I cannot by any means try to do justice to this complex and varied movement in an introductory
discussion about the problem of demarcation.
I will settle for focusing on the extremes within the creationist movement, and I'll
make clear what that amounts to in a moment.
At one end we've got young earth creationism, which makes relatively specific assertions
about the creation of the universe from nothing, about the age of the earth being only about
6,000 years, hence the name.
Young earth creationists emphasize the historical reality of the Noachian flood.
And they also claim that every kind, the notion of a kind is a technical term in young earth
creationism.
It's supposed to be distinct from the notion of a biological species.
Every kind of creature that has ever lived was present at the creation, according to
young earth creationists.
There's been some variation within these fixed kinds, and there's been some extinction.
But there are no genuinely new kinds of creatures, according to young earth creationists.
So they accept, for instance, that humans and dinosaurs coexisted.
Now, one should note something about the marketing of these views.
It appears to be something of a mistake to see the quarrel that young earth creationists
have as primarily concerning Darwin.
As the name suggests, it looks like they have a bone to pick with geology, cosmology, and
other parts of biology.
So Darwin is not the only target of young earth creationism, though that's the way these
debates usually get played out.
At the other extreme within the creationist camp, we have what's sometimes called intelligent
design creationism.
This is a view that refrains from making claims as specific as those put forward by young
earth creationism.
We can see young earth creationism as a kind of thick version of creationism, an intelligent
design as a thin version of creationism.
Intelligent design theorists focus on what they consider the core, the minimal creationist
principles, that there is a personal, supernatural creator of the universe who continues to influence
creation and who does so for some purpose.
Now those doctrines by themselves don't strictly require that one reject Darwinian evolution
as, say, the means by which the creator is revealing its purposes.
But nobody calls him or herself an intelligent design theorist while also accepting evolution.
So we can add that, that none of these people think that Darwinian evolution is the mechanism
by which the designer works.
Intelligent design theorists sometimes resist being called creationists, but that's mostly
because they don't want to be too closely associated with people like young earth creationists
or even old earth creationists.
They grant in the general sense that they're creationists.
Why?
Because an intelligent designer who designs and then causes something surely counts as
having created it.
So I don't think it's any slur on them to call them creationists.
Now young earth creationists and intelligent design creationists can unite on certain negative
arguments against Darwinism and against other parts of what they sometimes call the naturalistic
worldview.
These negative arguments concern such matters as the limitations of the fossil evidence
for evolution.
Are there too many gaps for the evolutionary story to be persuasive?
Can evolution account for the explosion of life in the Cambrian period?
They also object to the supposed inability of natural processes to account for certain
kinds of complexity.
These issues raise some deep questions like whether science can explain something while
still recognizing that it is highly improbable.
What kind of an explanation is that?
That's the kind of question that will concern us later in the course.
We don't need to answer it right now because we're not evaluating young earth creationism
or intelligent design creationism.
We're not trying to figure out whether these views are true.
You decide that for yourself.
Our issue here is whether they're scientific or not and why.
So one question that arises is can the negative arguments against another scientific view
say Darwinian evolution, suffice for scientific status.
In one sense you're doing science if you're arguing that a scientific view is false.
So on the one hand it seems plausible that one could spend a valuable scientific career
entirely devoted to research aimed at falsifying say the wave theory of light.
That wouldn't be an unscientific way to have spent one's time in the 19th century anyway.
On the other hand there is surely no scientific discipline called the wave theory of light
is wrong or evolution is wrong.
You can't have a scientific discipline that is entirely negative in that kind of way.
So it seems fair if we're asking about the scientific status of young earth creationism
and intelligent design creationism seems fair to insist that this status depends at
least in part on the status of their positive proposals.
It can't entirely rest on their negative claims.
Maybe the work of an individual could be scientific and entirely negatively directed
but demarcation might apply differently to individuals than it does to disciplines.
A point about the logic of this part of the discussion is worth making at this point.
It is true that one often argues for one's position by criticizing competing positions.
But this is more complicated than a lot of people realize, I think.
It was generally assumed, though it turned out to be false, that any argument against
the wave theory of light was automatically an argument for the particle theory of light.
That's not true, they both turned out to be wrong.
Similarly, it's far from automatically true that any argument against the naturalistic
worldview, whatever exactly that amounts to, is automatically an argument in favor of creationism.
There are lots of other possibilities.
There could be naturalistic stories that are incompatible with the Darwinian one, and there
could be intelligent designers incompatible with the theistic one, say intelligent extraterrestrials.
So when we realize how many possibilities there are out there, we'll see that to argue
against one's primary opponent is not necessarily to support one's own position.
Young Earth creationism has not fared well in the American courtroom.
It has generally and repeatedly been pronounced pseudoscientific there.
Our question is, what are the arguments for this conclusion, and how good are those arguments?
One common complaint against this theory, it's often taken to be quick and decisive, is that
it explicitly invokes supernatural causes, and whenever you invoke supernatural causes
you disqualify yourself from doing science.
The interesting thing about this complaint is it runs a risk of begging the question.
It runs a risk of assuming what it is trying to prove.
Why?
Because we need some way of drawing the natural supernatural distinction that is independent
of the scientific unscientific distinction if this objection is to work.
If we characterize nature as the thing properly studied by science, and then object that they're
invoking supernatural causes, we haven't shown anything.
We've assumed what we were trying to show in the outset.
So this objection might work if you can find a way to draw the distinction between natural
and supernatural causes independently of the distinction between that which science properly
studies and that which it does not.
Intelligent design creationists, on whom more below, have tried to make this argument
that you can't draw that distinction.
Now, it might be true, and if it's true, it's important, that young Earth creationists
refuse to treat any evidence as falsifying their theory.
But this should not be allowed to be too decisive too quickly.
We must distinguish criticisms of the proponents of theories from criticisms of the theories
themselves.
Would a group of physicists refusal to treat any evidence as falsifying quantum mechanics
show quantum mechanics to be unscientific?
If it wouldn't, then it doesn't appear to be obviously fair to say that a group of creationists
refusal to treat any evidence as falsifying their theory shows creationism to be unscientific.
Any theory can be misused.
The threshold here appears to be showing that the theory must be misused, that it cannot
be used scientifically.
And that's a very high hurdle to try to clear.
So these quick arguments against the scientific status of creationism, arguably, are less
successful than they're generally taken to be.
Another example.
Most young Earth creationists would, I think, admit to having religious motivations for
their work.
They make the claims they do for religious reasons.
But many scientists have been motivated by religious beliefs.
Newton, for instance, clearly wanted to understand God's plan.
And some scientists are motivated by money.
And none of these cases do motives render the work unscientific.
We wouldn't want to say of somebody that the work is unscientific because they do it for
the money.
It seems like a non-sequitur.
Now young Earth creationist explanations make relatively little use of natural laws and
mechanisms, and this might well be a problem.
But we must be fair here.
Many scientific theories also make little, at least explicit use of laws and mechanisms.
Some parts of biology, for instance, are mostly descriptive and classificatory.
They divide things up.
They don't talk about what causes what.
And we've seen that many good scientific theories lack crucial mechanisms.
Gravity.
Genetics.
Put forward without any story about how these influences get transmitted.
In addition, young Earth creationists do appeal to natural laws.
They try to argue, for instance, that if the moon was as old as astronomers say it is,
there would be lots more dust on it than there is.
That's an appeal to natural laws.
Now the mere fact that you sometimes appeal to some natural laws does not seem adequate
to call your theory scientific.
But on the other hand, it's not a fair requirement to insist that a theory explain everything
in its domain in terms of natural laws.
Any healthy science tolerates and wrestles with phenomena that it does not yet know
how to explain.
So that can't be a requirement on scientific status, or physics and biology are out the
window.
Now, from the standpoint of mainstream science anyway, young Earth creationism makes falsifiable
claims about something like the age of the Earth.
And the way we can tell is that their claims are false.
Geology sure seems to have some powerful arguments that the Earth is older than young Earth creationism
suggests.
But this raises issues we've talked about before.
And the theory makes apparently false predictions.
At what point do we have to, if we're going to be doing science, drop the theory?
At what point can we claim these are problems that the theory needs to develop and solve?
So if a theory makes some false predictions, at what point do they show it to be a pseudoscience
if the theory isn't dropped?
At what point do they show it to be a not yet very successful science?
That's the distinction we need to draw.
Turning now to intelligent design creationism.
These theorists, as we've noted, have a much thinner research agenda than young Earth
creationists do.
They're not trying to show any specific age of the Earth.
That doesn't interest them.
The thinness of the research agenda raises quite different demarcation questions.
Intelligent design creationists argue, rather plausibly one might think, that there need
to be nothing unscientific about the search for intelligent design.
There's a broadly astronomical project called the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence.
These are people trying to find empirical evidence that there's intelligence out there.
How do they do it?
They're looking for a signal.
That somebody's perhaps trying to communicate with us.
How will they tell that it's an intelligent signal, rather than a kind of signal that
would arise naturally, like from a pulsing star?
While there's certain evidence of complexity, certain signals we think couldn't just happen,
they have to be made.
And the first point that the intelligent design creationists want to make is that can be a
scientific argument.
If it couldn't, then the search for extraterrestrial intelligence would have to be an unscientific
search.
And that seems too stringent.
The next step in the intelligent design creationist argument, though, is the crucial one.
They then want to say that certain kinds of complexity found, for instance, in earthly
organisms, provide evidence of intelligent design.
They want to say that DNA, for instance, carries information, evidence of purpose.
And so is a kind of signal, like that, that we would receive from extraterrestrials that
would provide evidence of intelligence.
Again, it is not our place to evaluate how good this argument is.
One thing to note is, it's very like the old design argument for God's existence,
the watch and the watchmaker argument.
And back in its pre-Darwinian heyday, this was an argument that seemed to have one foot
in science and one foot in religion.
Our question is whether it can have a foot in science today.
If it's to be a good argument, it needs to do some work to try to show that it provides
a better explanation for how things like DNA came to have the role they have than accounts
that put more weight on randomness and mechanism.
And again, even if you could show that life couldn't have arisen by quite the purposes
that contemporary science thinks, that wouldn't automatically show you that it was intelligently
designed.
That's the logical fallacy we pointed to earlier.
Now, the problem with intelligent design creationism is it seems to be dominated by big questions,
philosophical sounding questions.
And it doesn't seem to have much going on in the way of the little questions that can
get answered in labs.
They don't seem to have much of a straightforwardly scientific research agenda.
Now, the question is, can that be a basis for comparing it not so much to philosophy,
but to young sciences or to highly theoretical parts of physics?
Is there anything to that argument saying that intelligent design creationism should
count as science?
How tightly do esoteric parts of physics, like string theory, need to link themselves
to experimental work if they're to count as science?
And as we've seen before, it's not clear that it's fair to object to intelligent design
creationists' proposals on the one hand as untestable, and on the other as lousy scientific
hypotheses.
If they are tested and do badly, then they seem to be testable.
So for reasons like these, most philosophers think the demarcation problem has not received
an adequate solution.
Many I think would go farther, and suggest that the task, at least as classically formulated,
is hopeless.
The classic formulation asks whether a theory is scientific.
But the question of how a theory gets handled, rather than the question of the scientific
character of the theory itself, might be the more important question.
And as we've seen, demarcation questions about a scientific career might be different
than demarcation questions about a scientific discipline.
So again and again, we've been tempted to describe a supposed pseudoscience as doing
the very same kinds of things the scientific theory does, but doing them less well.
And it's worth noting that if we take this task, we are more or less abandoning the demarcation
problem.
We're claiming that the difference between a science and a pseudoscience can't bear
the weight it's been asked to bear in the classic demarcation problem.
What weight was that?
The main motivation behind the demarcation problem had been to decide which theories
merit the kind of serious consideration we give to scientific theories.
At least to scientific theories we think good, if not necessarily right.
Now the question is, could that be done by saying that a theory is scientific, but not
a good scientific theory?
Notice that we don't spend research money on scientific theories we think are false.
We don't give them much attention in science classes.
So back to our Olympics analogy, the question is how important is the difference between
seeing astrology as a theory that competes and loses badly in the scientific race versus
seeing it as a theory that shouldn't be allowed into the competition in the first place?
Now that analogy can be misleading here, since I would love to have finished last in an Olympic
event.
But we're not interested in it from the point of view of the contestants, but of the practice.
Now I won't have much to say about the legal and educational implications of such a move.
The Constitution doesn't bar teaching inferior science, granting for the sake of argument
that that's a description that can fairly be applied to creationism in our schools.
But on the other hand, if you grant that creationism has scientific status, but not necessarily
good scientific status, that's not a very powerful reason for giving it equal time.
There are too many views that can count as scientific, once we lower our standards in
a certain sense and realize that we can't solve the demarcation problem.
So we can't give every scientific theory equal attention.
We still need to solve the problem that the demarcation criterion was invoked to solve.
Nobody would watch the Olympics if everybody got to compete.
We still have to find some way of distinguishing views that should be taken seriously, that
should receive our resources from views that shouldn't.
If the old demarcation problem won't do it, we need some other way of doing it, and that
might be between good and bad theories.
I close by noting that it's not clear that no solution to the demarcation problem is
forthcoming.
As we learn more philosophy of science, we will develop more resources for distinguishing
what makes something scientific from unscientific.
Maybe we can put these together in a way that will be satisfactory.
Next time we'll look at scientific practice and start focusing on what can be learned
from a classic example like Einstein's theory of relativity about what's special about science.
