These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by The Teaching Company.
These lectures are titled, Philosophy of Science, Part 3.
Chapter 25 New Views of Meaning and Reference
We've now surveyed the classic positivist views of explanation, of causation, of laws of nature, and of scientific reduction.
And we've looked at some of the major challenges these views face.
At this point, we can begin bringing our two narratives together, not that we ever kept them all that far apart,
but by integrating issues about meaning and reference more fully and directly into the discussion.
This will allow us, in the next lecture, to begin to develop scientific realism,
the major contemporary alternative along with a kind of Kunian historicism or constructivism,
to the views of the positivists with which we began.
The difference between meaning and reference figured in our discussion of reduction.
Temperature, we learned, doesn't mean the same thing as average molecular kinetic energy,
but it is, as it were, the same stuff. The two terms co-refer.
Technically speaking, noun-like terms, names and descriptions, refer to things while adjective-type terms technically don't refer.
These are predicates they hold of or are true of things rather than referring to them.
So Albert Einstein and discoverer of special relativity refer to the same person, though they don't mean the same thing,
while chordate, which means creature with a heart, and renate, which means creature with kidneys, hold of all the same things,
though they don't mean the same thing.
But I'm not going to respect this technical notion about holding of versus referring to very much.
I'll talk rather informally about such matters.
Now, phrases as well as words can refer.
As we saw in our discussion of Bertrand Russell's Present King of France case,
a phrase like the favorite physicist of the logical positivists has to pick out a unique individual in order to refer.
That's why the phrase, the present king of France is bald, is false, it doesn't pick out a unique present king of France.
If a description picks out a unique individual, let's say that Einstein is the favorite physicist of the logical positivists,
then the description, the favorite physicist of the positivists, refers to the individual whom it correctly describes.
But now suppose that Werner Heisenberg, the great theorist of quantum mechanics, actually turns out to have been the favorite physicist of the logical positivists.
In that case, I might think I'm using that phrase to refer to Einstein, but in fact I'm referring to Heisenberg.
Similarly, if I in fact refer to oxygen when I use the phrase substance responsible for combustion,
but if the phlogiston theory had been correct, then I would have been referring to phlogiston rather than oxygen.
Our words rather than our intentions pick out what it is that we're talking about.
Sometimes we're not talking about what we think we're talking about, that's a reasonably common phenomenon.
Now as we've seen, the positivists treated meaning and reference as relatively unproblematic for observation terms,
but as quite problematic for theoretical terms.
We also saw them starting to modify that view a little bit by acknowledging at least some of the holistic pressures that were later emphasized by Quine,
by Kuhn, and by Fireobbent.
But the sort of radical hardcore positivist approach does not provide reference for theoretical terms at all.
The parts of scientific theories that aren't about experience don't directly refer to the world and don't aspire to truth, they're only partially interpreted.
Talk of Quarks serves not to describe the world, but to systematize and to predict observation.
There are less stringent empiricists, and some of the positivists became less stringent empiricists,
who allow theoretical terms to refer and treat them in the standard sort of way.
So a phrase like smallest unit of the chromosome capable of undergoing mutation refers to whatever thing if there is one uniquely meets that description.
This is also the approach taken by Kuhn and like-minded thinkers, though with an important difference.
For Kuhn, reference is surprisingly easy to secure, because for Kuhn, a term refers only to the world as described by a paradigm.
So in Kuhn's view, a term like phlegiston does refer to something.
Standardly, we might think it doesn't refer to anything at all since there is no phlegiston.
But it refers just as surely as oxygen does.
Both refer to paradigm constructed worlds rather than to some notion that Kuhn thinks is empty of the world.
Kuhn's view threatens to make successful reference a little bit too easy.
Within a certain theory, the little green men who are out to get me does refer to something real, something real within my paranoid delusion.
Now I'm not accusing Kuhn of lacking resources for distinguishing a serious scientific paradigm from a paranoid delusion.
But even with a serious scientific paradigm, most philosophers find it more natural to say that phlegiston never existed,
and so the term phlegiston never referred to anything, as reasonable as it might have been to think it once referred.
Most philosophers think it adds an unnecessary layer of confusion to talk about referring to something within a paradigm.
It seems simpler and logically cleaner to just talk about whether there's any such stuff.
But that's not Kuhn's view.
On the other hand, if you stick with the more intuitive notion of successful reference to the world, not to the world as described by a paradigm,
then this descriptive conception of reference makes it very hard, where Kuhn had made it very easy, to secure legitimate reference.
So if Benjamin Franklin misdescribes electricity while performing some of his experiments,
then since there's nothing at all in the world, as opposed to in the world as described by his paradigm,
that actually meets his mistaken description of electricity, it turns out he's not talking about electricity at all.
He's not referring to anything, because in order to refer to anything, he has to pick it out correctly in his description.
So poor Ben isn't talking about anything at all.
Similarly, this descriptive conception of reference looms large in the, as we've seen, somewhat exaggerated incommensurability arguments put forward by Kuhn and Feierabend.
If enough descriptive content of a theory changes, reference is likely to change with it.
So, as Kuhn emphasizes, when descriptions of mass change across theories, the new theory refers to something new,
mass as conceived by the new theory, rather than a quite different stuff, mass as conceived by the old theory.
So Kuhn argued that Einstein isn't offering a better theory of the same mass that Newton had been theorizing about,
but rather a theory of a different mass.
And it's in part for that reason that Kuhn and Feierabend thought that progress and accumulation were very rare if ever instantiated in science.
But those arguments seemed to us at least a bit exaggerated.
What we'd like is a view that allows us to refer to something real, even when we have some false beliefs about it,
and use false descriptions about it,
and also a view that makes reference a matter of the way the world is, rather than the way our theory says the world is.
In short, what we need is a conception of reference that is less closely tied to our current theories than the descriptive account presents references being.
A new approach to reference emerged mostly in the 1970s that makes it much easier to talk about unobservable reality,
to talk seriously about unobservable reality, in fact.
And, not accidentally, to keep talking about the same things or properties, even across major changes in scientific theories.
On this view, reference, at least for certain kinds of terms, is secured through a historical or causal chain rather than through a description.
This is often called the causal theory of reference, and two American philosophers, Saul Kripke and Hilary Putnam, are the main innovators here.
The easiest way to start understanding this theory is to begin with the notion of proper names.
Few of us can offer much in the way of true descriptions of James Buchanan.
How is it that we can refer to James Buchanan, even though we can't say very much about him other than that he's a former president?
In addition, somebody who uses the name along with some false descriptions,
so, for instance, somebody who says, James Buchanan, the 14th president of the United States, is referring to James Buchanan,
not to Franklin Pierce, who is actually the 14th president of the United States. Buchanan is the 15th.
So how is it that even when we misdescribe somebody, we count as referring to that person rather than the person who actually fits the description?
That's a problem on the descriptive theory, which says that our reference is to whatever fits the description.
If I say James Buchanan, the 14th president, I'm talking about James Buchanan, not about the 14th president.
The idea is that Buchanan's name got attached to him not via a description, but via a kind of baptismal event.
The idea is there's a stipulation. His parents, or some authority in some sense, said, let's call this person James Buchanan.
And my use of that name is linked to previous uses in a causal chain that terminates in this original baptismal stipulation.
I intend to refer to the same guy as the person from whom I learned the name, some history teacher and junior high or something,
and so on back through the causal chain. My reference is secured through the reference of other people.
Turning to more scientifically relevant cases, the idea is that similar notions of reference apply to what are sometimes called natural kind terms.
The main exemplars of natural kind terms are biological species and chemical elements.
A natural kind is a grouping with a deep scientifically relevant structure.
It's objects that share a scientifically real property. If nature has any joints, natural kinds carve the joints.
So for instance gold, which is a chemical element, would be a natural kind.
Precious metal might be a legitimate term for some purposes, say economic purposes, but it's not a natural kind. Precious metals need not have any deep structure in common.
So we'd like with natural kind terms to have a theory that allows us to say that people who thought whales were fish, nevertheless, were referring to whales,
especially if they're pointing at a whale when they say, wow, what a big fish.
The fish description does not fit the whale, but we'd like them to be saying false things about the whale rather than referring to non-existent great big fish.
A species term isn't quite like a proper name in that it designates a class or a kind rather than an individual.
So the reference of the term gets fixed via a kind of archetypal specimen.
You point at a whale and say, you'll have to literally say it, but what's going on with the baptismal event is something like, I mean creatures like this one.
And the like this one means having the same deep or essential properties.
For chemical elements, it will be their atomic number.
What it is to point to a sample of gold and say, I mean to be talking about that kind of stuff is stuff that shares the atomic number,
not stuff that shares superficial properties like being yellowish.
As we'll see later in the course, it's not clear that species really fit this bill of natural kinds all that well,
though philosophers constantly use species as examples of natural kind terms.
Another interesting aspect of this view is that there's a division of linguistic labor involved in how reference is secured.
I don't have to know very much about James Buchanan in order to talk about him.
I just have to be connected to the causal chain in the right sort of way.
Similarly, I don't have to know the deep facts about what makes a whale a whale in order to succeed in talking about them.
My community's experts, certain biologists in this case, help fix the reference of my terms.
Our best science decides what the deep structure is that constitutes the kind.
So science tells me in part what I mean when I point at whales and say, I mean those kinds of creatures.
Now as on the descriptive view, there's room for people to not know what they're talking about,
which is a good thing since we'd like our discourse to outrun our knowledge.
I don't need to know what I'm talking about when I talk about whales.
Somebody in my linguistic community can say, here's what makes a whale a whale.
I don't need to know it in order to be talking about whales.
This new conception of reference had some unexpected consequences.
It helped make metaphysical discourse look more respectable than it had to the positivists.
And this is part of the beginning of the end of positivism.
If Hesperus and Phosphorus are two different names, rather than descriptions, descriptions raise different issues.
For the planet Venus, then it's necessarily true that Hesperus is Phosphorus,
since it seems necessarily true that anything is itself.
But this is not a necessity that is conceptual.
It's not analytic. It's not knowable a priori.
It was a discovery that the morning star was the evening star, that Hesperus is Phosphorus.
So, room is made for a notion of metaphysical necessity that doesn't reduce to conceptual necessity.
Most philosophers agreed that identity seemed like a solid enough basis for a necessary truth.
But it's not a necessity grounded in the meanings of terms, but instead in their references.
And so, there's a kind of necessity that's not grounded in meaning,
as the positivists had claimed that all necessity would have to be.
There's a kind of necessity out in the world.
This does not by any means establish the kinds of physical necessity that we've appealed to in the past in this course.
For instance, the physical necessity by which some philosophers think being made of copper necessitates conducting electricity.
But it does open up the idea of necessity out in the world rather than in our language,
and that's a real problem for positivism.
Now, this talk of a deep structure shared by all members of a natural kind, like a chemical element,
also to a significant extent rehabilitates the old notion of essences,
which had long been thought the very model of metaphysical excess.
A kind of structural essence that figures in scientific explanations looks scientifically respectable.
Explaining gold in terms of its atomic number looks like the essence of gold, what makes gold gold.
So, positivism again had to start retreating.
The idea is experience doesn't mark some properties as essential to a substance, leaving others as accidental.
We don't see what makes gold gold.
But the role of some properties in science suggests a difference between deep properties and superficial ones,
between essential and accidental properties.
Yellowness is an accidental property of gold, the atomic number is an essential or deep property of gold.
This is almost a reversion to Aristotle.
Now, this approach to reference also makes the incommensurability arguments of Kuhn and Feierabend
look much less threatening than it had.
Insofar as this approach can be made to work, theory change, even across deep scientific revolutions,
can be said to involve competing theories about the same stuff, rather than just theories about new and different stuff.
It's a pretty big change if we go from thinking of light as a particle to thinking of light as a wave.
If we're adopting the descriptive conception of reference, it looks like we're talking about two different things.
But on the causal or historical approach, it's pretty straightforward to insist that both are theories about light.
Both theorists, or theorists of both camps, intend to refer to the stuff that previous theorists of light were talking about.
So they are competing theories about the same stuff, so one can be a better theory of this stuff than the other.
This historical chain approach also offers a set of alternatives to those who had felt hampered by the empiricist strictures on meaning.
Including those, for instance, who thought that empiricist notions of meaning, things that were common to Kuhn and the positivists,
made incommensurability a bigger problem than it needed to be.
But the causal historical approach is not itself without problems.
Of course, by now, you know no philosophical view is without problems.
When we try to apply it to theoretical terms, we're going to run into some difficulties.
This approach does make it relatively unproblematic to refer to some aspects of unobservable reality.
On the assumption that water has a deep structure responsible for its nature, the historical chain approach allows me to talk meaningfully about that structure.
I point at some water and say, I'm talking about stuff like that.
To a first approximation, I can refer to anything that is directly, causally responsible for anything I can observe.
I can get behind observation, at least one level, through something like causation.
But we can never encounter specimens of some of the purported objects of theoretical terms.
We can't point at an electron and say, I mean to be talking about stuff like that.
Because the way an electron manifests itself in experience is incredibly messy.
There are all sorts of mediating links in the causal chain.
To point at a cloud chamber and say, I mean whatever is responsible for that, there are too many ways the apparatus could be misfiring.
You could end up being talking about some experimentally induced artifact rather than the electron.
The historical chain approach can also make it too easy to refer to unobservable reality.
This is a kind of positivistic worry about the approach.
Phlegiston might count as referring to oxygen if we're not careful.
Because if we mean to be referring to what's causally responsible for combustion, well that's oxygen.
But we don't want to say, by phlegiston I mean oxygen, they're supposed to be competing theories of the same phenomenon.
Similarly, it might have been possible for the ancient Greeks to refer to electricity.
If they got a shock of static electricity and said, I wonder what that stuff is,
on the causal chain approach they might count as referring to electricity.
But they knew nothing of electricity.
It's not clear that we want to let reference float entirely free of connections to descriptions.
Arguably you need to know something about the kind of stuff electricity is before you count as talking about it.
Maybe you don't have to know much, but you need to know something about it.
Because of the problems just noted, descriptive accounts of reference have been making a comeback in recent years.
Aspects of the descriptive and historical chain approaches to reference can in fact be combined.
So for instance you might think that you need enough of a correct description to pick out a unique object that is causally connected to what's observed.
That's to combine some of the descriptive requirements with some of the causal historical requirements.
But it's not as easy as it sounds.
If too much descriptive content is built in, then the term might not refer to anything because nothing will satisfy the description.
We don't want Newton's term mass to refer to nothing at all,
even though there's nothing in the world that answers to all of Newton's descriptions about mass.
But if too little descriptive content is built in, then there will be no unique satisfier of the description.
We want a term like cause of combustion to refer to oxygen, but not to flogiston.
So the causal historical approach provides some promising resources for enriching our notion of semantic access to the world.
We can talk about unobservable reality in a way that we couldn't under the positivist conception of meaning.
But the reintroduction of descriptive requirements, as had figured in positivism,
means that we have not entirely escaped the problems with which we began.
There's still some room for incommensurability worries, and we still have rather modest resources for talking about unobservable reality.
That's at the level primarily of terms.
A similar broadening of semantic resources occurs through a new conception of scientific theories.
As we saw way back in lecture 7, the received view of theories treats them as deductive systems.
The statements of a deductive system are themselves uninterpreted.
They are purely syntactic.
They exhibit logical relationships, but nothing more.
The deductive system then gets interpreted when observational terms get explained experientially.
All interpretation for the positivist comes through observation.
The logical structure of the theory then lets meaning flow around the system.
And many statements of the theory only receive a partial interpretation in observational terms, so they're not straightforwardly true or false.
Statements involving theoretical terms are construed as something like inference tickets, not as descriptions of the world.
This newer conception of theories draws on the notion of a model.
Models represent things by exhibiting structural similarities to the things they model.
So a modeling relationship is a type of analogy.
It displays certain similarities between phenomena of different types.
So for instance, a model can be formal.
A wave equation can be used to model waves of sound, waves of light, waves of water.
Models can also be material, in which case they are interpreted in terms of objects, real objects, or imaginary objects,
rather than abstract structures as in a mathematical model.
In the classic cases, gas molecules are modeled as small balls of plastic or something like that,
and atoms are modeled on the solar system, with electrons orbiting the nucleus.
Models have been around in science for a long time.
The philosophical questions concern their status and role.
The positivists didn't ignore models, but they assigned only a fairly modest role to them.
Models for positivism serve a kind of heuristic function.
They are pictures or analogies that are useful for understanding a theory,
and may be helpful for using it in say, experimental design.
But they belong to what the positivist called the context of discovery, not the context of justification.
It's fine to think of gas molecules along the lines of little wooden balls.
If that'll help you picture what's going on, it can help you figure out how to test hypotheses and how to draw some connections.
But the model is not part of the theory, and the theory is the only thing that says what gas molecules are like.
The model is an add-on that might help you do some things with the theory, but it's no part of what the theory says.
One impetus for an increased role of models in thinking about science was their pervasiveness in actual scientific practice.
It's much more common for scientists to present their theories through models than through deductive systems.
And in keeping with the post-Cunian emphasis on actually representing scientific practice accurately,
models started to receive more attention than they had in the heyday of positivism.
So for critics of the received view, model theorists of scientific theories,
a model might start out as just a way of picturing or thinking about an experimental situation.
But if the model continues to be useful enough in enough different contexts,
it becomes more than just an aid or a supplement to the real theory.
So to take an example from Marshall Spector, a philosopher of science,
nobody would mistake acoustical flow for electrical flow.
They're clearly different things, but the analogy between them starts to seem more than just a kind of mathematical similarity.
The notion of impedance or capacitance seems to mean the same thing in both theories,
and the notion as it figures in one theory can be used to illuminate the notion as it figures in another.
The received view of theories has a hard time saying that the notion of flow or capacitance
means the same thing in two different theories.
So the model starts to say things that the theories in the received view have a hard time saying.
If the model is good enough, it more or less becomes the theory.
That won't happen in the case we were just talking about.
We'd never think our theory of electrical flow is our theory of acoustical flow.
But at some point, we stop just picturing gas molecules as little balls.
That's how the theory actually functions in scientific practice, at least within a certain range.
That's what scientists think gas molecules are like.
They don't think the gas molecules have color like a plastic ball does,
but they think they are little balls undergoing in elastic collisions.
The model is not an aid to the theory, it's closer to being the theory.
So the semantic conception of theories, this is the new approach to scientific theories,
identifies a theory with the entire class of its models.
This is a part of philosophy of science that gets very technical very quickly.
We're going to skate over the technicalities.
The theory includes all the ways in which it can be modeled.
A correct theory will have the real world as one of its models.
A correct interpretation of the theory in terms of the real world means that the theory is true.
So an ecological theory can be interpreted, for instance, through patterns of shapes and colors on a computer screen,
through mathematical equations, or through actual patterns of fox and rabbit populations.
Each of these is a legitimate way of giving literal content to the theory's laws or claims.
This represents a major departure from the received view of theories,
because this semantic approach to scientific theories allows theoretical terms,
terms that can't get cashed out directly through observation,
to acquire full-fledged literal meaning through the notion of a model rather than through observation.
The notion of flow in acoustics gets genuine meaning from the notion of flow in electrical circuit theory, for instance, or vice versa.
The semantic conception of theories thus allows a role for analogical and metaphorical reasoning to do genuine work in science.
These types of reasoning can provide literal content to what our theory says about unobservable reality,
and this had been forbidden on the received view.
All literal content had to ultimately get cashed out in observational terms.
So an approach like this will seem promising to someone who felt hemmed in by the empiricist's strictures on meaning.
But as always, there's a price to be paid.
We are helping ourselves to enriched resources for referring to unobservable reality.
In doing so, we run a risk of falling into the mistakes the positivists had tried to warn us about.
How are we to restrict the permitted types of analogical reasoning?
We don't want to be able to claim to model absolute simultaneity on local simultaneity.
This would be to have unlearned the lesson that Einstein was trying to teach us,
that we shouldn't help ourselves to some understanding of absolute simultaneity,
because it can't be cashed out experientially.
The motivation for the empiricist project was that we'd confuse ourselves
if we think meaning can be stretched too far beyond experience.
But the semantic conception thinks we can stretch it farther beyond experience than the received view allowed.
Now with some theories, most notably quantum mechanics,
there do seem to be powerful reasons to resist taking models too seriously.
This is a theory such that it's dangerous to interpret it much beyond its mathematical content.
Even heuristic models that are only pictures to help us understand the theory
threaten to introduce elements that are incompatible with the mathematics of the theory.
There are some models of quantum mechanics that are suggestive and careful,
but if you're not extremely cautious as you try to picture or model what's going on,
you're going to find yourself tempted to posit what physicists call hidden variables,
something behind the scenes to make the theory more deterministic
and so more intuitively comprehensible,
then the mathematics as classically interpreted will let you interpret it.
It's hard to model quantum mechanics on anything less weird than quantum mechanics itself.
If we do model quantum mechanics on something less weird,
we face the danger of giving a particle a definite position and momentum,
which it seems intuitively like it would have to have,
but which the classic interpretation of quantum mechanics says it can't have.
If we model quantum phenomena, we're tempted to try to find a model
according to which the electron passes through one slit or another
because it seems to us that it's got to behave that way.
But the mathematics of the theory, as classically interpreted, don't permit that interpretation.
So there's a danger in using these enriched semantic resources
to bringing in causal intuitions that the theory says are unsupportable.
So there are advantages and disadvantages to these enriched semantic resources.
These new conceptions of meaning, of reference, of scientific theories
hopefully will extend our semantic reach beyond what the positivists had permitted.
In doing so, we'll start to see the difference this might make to the aims of science.
Can science aim to describe unobservable reality correctly?
And once we start taking that claim seriously,
we're going to witness more or less the end of logical positivism.
