Lecture 6 Logical Positivism and Verifiability
We return now from our temporal, though not conceptual, detour through the British empiricists
of the 17th and 18th century back to Karl Popper's Vienna of the 1920s.
A group that called itself the Vienna Circle was meeting there, and the name of the view
that emerged from their discussions is logical positivism.
I'll try to explain the name shortly.
Rudolf Carnap is the member of the Vienna Circle from whom we will hear the most, but
the movement was not localized in Vienna for very long.
It didn't take it long to go international.
They quickly made contact with a similar-minded group meeting in Berlin, and Karl Hempel
is the figure from this group whose work we will address most intensively.
But the most influential single statement of positivism is a book called Language, Truth,
and Logic, which came out in 1936, a brash, youthful book, written by a young Englishman
named A.J.
Eyre, who had gone to Vienna to study with the members of the Circle.
Most members of the Vienna Circle were anti-Nazi, anti-nationalists.
Many of them were Jewish or socialist, and so with the rise of Nazism, they fled, mainly
to the English-speaking world, and many of them had an enormous impact on philosophy
in the United States.
In the English-speaking world, at least, they helped make philosophy of science a major
subfield for the first time.
There had been philosophy of science done as part of general philosophy, but it did not
have its own momentum as a field, and as a result, the agenda of the positivists dominated
philosophy of science for decades.
The positivists were highly impressed by Einstein and some of the other developments in early
20th century physics, and they were highly unimpressed by a number of the developments
in late 19th and early 20th century German philosophy, so we need to try to understand
this contrast.
Physics not philosophy seemed to them to be where the action was.
On the conceptual action, Einstein had revolutionized our concepts of space and time, quantum mechanics
about which we'll have a few things to say later, revolutionized our conceptions of causality
and determinism.
While the philosophy of the day in contrast seemed mostly like armchair speculation.
Sometimes it seemed worse than that.
Much of it was incompatible with these exciting new developments in physics.
Philosophers were arguing from their armchairs that Einstein couldn't possibly be right,
and this got under the skin of the positivists.
Philosophy of the day in their eyes committed sins even worse than that.
In fact, Hans Reichenbach, the founder of the Berlin group of positivists, begins one of
his books with a quote from the 19th century German philosopher Gottfried Wilhelm Friedrich
Hegel.
Reason is substance as well as infinite power, its own infinite material underlying all the
natural and spiritual life, as also the infinite form, that which sets the material in motion.
And this seemed like clear nonsense to the positivists.
Students would encounter this and think they were supposed to understand it.
They have a weakness for quoting other philosophers out of context and mocking them, but this
sentence does not have any clear content, it's not doing any intellectual work that
we can get our heads around, and it's the sort of thing that gives philosophy a bad
name.
So, Karnapp at least picked a fight with somebody who could fight back, their contemporary
Martin Heidegger, who wrote such things as the nothing itself nothings.
Now, they overreact to German philosophy, but they wanted a scientific philosophy, the
sorry state of philosophy in the eyes of the positivists, and the need to make philosophy
scientific together motivated the positivists to develop a criterion of demarcation.
Their project is similar to Popper's project, which we've already examined, but they have
different central cases in mind.
The positivists are less worried about Marx and Freud, more worried about Hegel and Heidegger,
and about philosophy getting in the way of the sciences, especially physics.
The name positivism gets its place in logical positivism from the 19th century French thinker
Auguste Comte, and it reflects this hostility towards traditional metaphysics.
Philosophy, Comte claims, passes through three phases.
There's a religious phase in which personalized creatures are behind and responsible for most
phenomena of interest.
Then there's a metaphysical stage where the world gets depersonalized, but there are still
mysterious forces like gravity and magnetism that are required to animate or explain observable
processes.
So, it's like the religious phase, but with less personality behind the scenes.
Finally, in the positive stage, nature gets demystified, there's nothing behind the scenes
at all, and observation gets taken at face value.
So, the positivists drew a sterner lesson from the Einstein case than Popper had.
Remember, metaphysics is not necessarily bad for Popper, it's just not science.
For the positivists, metaphysics is generally a dangerous impediment to doing positive science.
So that's how positivism comes to figure in their name.
What about the logical part of logical positivism?
Well, mathematical logic had been rejuvenated in the period beginning around 1870.
The new logic was immensely more powerful than the traditional logic, which mainly goes
back to Aristotle.
It could express much more complex thoughts than were previously possible, and this new
complexity could be captured in a mathematically clear and precise way.
So, the new logic had tremendous power to disambiguate and clarify ideas.
So it was very attractive to deploy in philosophical and in scientific contexts, where, as Einstein
showed, conceptual confusion seemed to be rampant.
We need to clean up our ideas of space and of time, and logic seemed to provide an excellent
tool for this.
Bertrand Russell, an older contemporary of the positivists and something of a hero to
them, had shown how logic could be used to help one avoid doing metaphysics, and this
was an inspiring example to the positivists.
Let's see how that worked.
It's reasonably clear what a sentence like Aretha Franklin is bald means.
It says, of a great soul singer that she lacks hair, and I hasten to add that so far as I
know it is quite false.
Now let's turn to a different sentence.
The present king of France is bald.
That seems equally false, but to whom does the sentence ascribe baldness?
Nobody.
There is no present king of France.
But then how does the sentence come to be meaningful?
The sentence isn't like, the world spirit of absolute nothingness is bald, which is
a kind of parody of Hegel, it doesn't mean anything at all.
Here, we know what's being asserted, the sentence is meaningful, it's not gibberish,
and since we know what's being claimed, it looks like the sentence needs somebody to
be about.
But that somebody is going to be a peculiar dude, because just as it's false to say the
present king of France is bald, it's false to say the present king of France is hairy.
So cases like this seem to lead to metaphysics, to philosophy in the pejorative sense, for
the positivists, because it tempts one to talk of beings that sort of exist but really
don't, like a possible present king of France.
And the next thing you know, you find yourself saying something like, the nothing itself
nothings.
The positivists are anxious to avoid doing this kind of philosophy.
Russell showed how, using mathematical logic, we can distinguish between the function of
a name, like Aretha Franklin, and that of a description, like the present king of France.
Predicating baldness of the latter amounts to saying, there is exactly one person who
is presently king of France, and that person is bald.
We don't, as in the case of a name, need a person to, as it were, point to, in order
to make sense of the sentence.
The present king of France is bald because the part of the sentence that says, there
is exactly one present king of France is bald.
The logical structure of the statement can be brought out and we can see that we don't
need fancy metaphysical entities in order to understand it.
So with the tools of mathematical logic at their disposal, the positivists thought that
a new and improved version of empiricism could be manufactured, one that would make the world
safe for science and unsafe for metaphysics.
This new version of empiricism then grasped the other option presented by Hume's Fork.
When we saw that last time, Hume's Fork asks us what the status of philosophy could possibly
be such that it can escape the charge of sophistry and delusion.
We saw that Hume says philosophy concerns matters of fact, it's a kind of quasi-science.
For the positivists, the philosopher deals in relations of ideas, not matters of fact.
The positivists thought that a conception of philosophy as a kind of speculative science
had gotten it in a lot of trouble.
It had led to people saying space and time couldn't possibly be as Einstein says they
are.
So instead, philosophy is to clarify linguistic problems and to exhibit the relationships
between scientific statements and experience.
In order to see how this is supposed to work, we need to get some key positivist terms and
doctrines under our belt.
The central principle of the positivist program says that any cognitively meaningful statement
— I'll explain what that means in a moment — must either be analytic — I'll explain
what that means in a moment — or it must be a claim about possible experience.
A cognitively meaningful statement is one which is literally true or false.
Now imperatives and questions are meaningful, but they're not statements in the relevant
sense.
They're not candidates for truth or falsehood.
Close the door is not the sort of thing that can be true or false.
It's not trying to describe the world.
We find statements in the grammatical sense anyway in poetry, but they likewise do not
aim for literal truth.
And when they do seem to aim for literal truth, it's more charitable to read them otherwise.
So when a sportscaster says that the team literally fell to pieces at the end of the
game, we should understand him as making unintentional poetry.
It's an abuse of the term literally, but that's not an attempt to describe the world
in a full-fledged sense.
Public statements concern what Hume had called relations of ideas.
They are true or false in virtue of their meanings and have no factual content.
Consequently, they are knowable a priori, or a priori, philosophers abuse Latin with
some regularity and we hope impunity.
We don't need empirical evidence in order to know the truth of a logical or a mathematical
proposition.
Such propositions can be known by meaning alone.
A proposition is what a sentence says.
Schnee ist weiß and snow is white express the same proposition, but they're two different
sentences because one is in German and one is in English.
Sorry for the philosopher speak there.
Note that to say that a proposition or sentence is analytic concerns its evidential status.
And to say that it's knowable a priori concerns the kind of evidence that bears on it, not
its actual history.
You might in kindergarten have learned that 2 plus 2 equals 4 by observation by being
shown two apples and two oranges.
The point is that you don't need empirical evidence, not that you didn't have empirical
evidence.
If you seem to add two apples and two oranges and get five pieces of fruit, that is not
counter evidence against 2 plus 2 equals 4, it's a miscount.
Arithmetic does not get subjected to experimental disconfirmation.
So analytic truths hold necessarily in addition to being knowable a priori.
It isn't merely true that no bachelor is married, it must be true.
Such a statement is to use a metaphor of which philosophers are fond, true in all possible
worlds.
Try to imagine a square circle or a married bachelor.
We can thus be certain that every effect has a cause, but this is no great metaphysical
insight into the nature of the world, it's a fact about how we use the word's cause
and effect.
The statements of traditional metaphysics, on the other hand, purport to be synthetic,
that is, the opposite of analytic, they purport to have factual content.
And yet they also purport to be knowable a priori, knowable independently of experience.
That's why they're not ordinary empirical statements that are verified by the methods
of science.
Such statements try to make factual claims that are supposed to hold no matter what
experience seems to show.
So if a traditional philosopher says not just that every effect has a cause, but that every
event has a cause, that philosopher is not saying something that can be refuted by experience.
The philosopher will just say that we haven't found the cause yet, there must be one there.
This is supposed to be a truth of reason.
But it's not subject to experimental tests.
As Popper would put it, such statements are unfalsifiable, they're compatible with any
experience because you just plead, the cause must be out there, we just haven't found
it.
It's supposed to be a kind of philosophical insight into the true nature of the world,
a truth of reason that holds necessarily and can be known apart from and in advance
of experience.
But the only things that can be known apart from and in advance of experience for the
positivists are analytic statements.
No experience will convince us that we're dealing with a married bachelor, as opposed
to a married man claiming to be a bachelor, that of course is an entirely different matter.
But the statements of the metaphysicians don't pay the needed price.
A statement can hold necessarily and can be knowable a priori only at the price of being
a tautology, a statement empty of factual content.
Experience as Hume taught us does not show us any observable necessity, it just shows
us one thing after another.
So necessity is always within language, not out there in the world.
So metaphysical statements are not false for the positivists, they're not candidates for
being true or false, at best they are unintentional poetry, because they're trying to say what
cannot literally be said, they're trying to make claims about the factual nature of
the world that are not grounded in experience, and that cannot be done according to the positivists.
Einstein's work here is once again crucial.
Geometry, as we've seen, was supposed to be the shining example of solid knowledge.
It was taken by many people to be knowable a priori and to be synthetic.
We could reason out the properties of space.
We could have a deductive science that could tell us about the physical world.
But it turned out that Einstein's general theory of relativity provides excellent reasons
for thinking that the geometry of Euclid, the geometry that had been around for millennia,
does not accurately characterize physical space.
So following Einstein once again, the positivists say we must distinguish between mathematical
geometry, which is analytic, necessary, and knowable a priori, and physical geometry,
which is synthetic, contingent, and knowable only on the basis of experience.
Parts of geometry now go with physics, parts stay with mathematics, but the methodology
in the two cases is deeply different.
It's worth emphasizing the price the positivists pay for this attractive scheme.
Philosophy now becomes a purely verbal discipline.
Its truths are unempirical, they're necessary, they're knowable a priori, but this is not
a product of some philosopher's rational insight into the nature of the world, but
merely teasing out consequences of definitions.
All philosophers can do is help scientists see how they use their terms and help them
avoid certain kinds of confusion.
At the end of the day, philosophers are clearing out the linguistic underbrush for the scientists,
helping them state their points more clearly and explicitly, but philosophy is about as
far as you can get from being the queen of the sciences.
It nevertheless seemed to the positivists that there was important work to be done,
and in the beginning they went after it with missionary zeal, to try to stamp out metaphysics
among other things.
Job one involves clarification.
We're philosophers, it's who we are, it's what we do, we clarify things.
Certification of positivism's very own basic principle.
How are we to tell when we're dealing with meaningful statements?
How do we distinguish metaphysics from science and philosophy?
Well metaphysics and pseudoscience are to be committed to the flames as cognitively
meaningless, as incapable of being true or false.
That's the demarcation criterion that's going to be deployed by the positivists.
As we've seen with the demarcation criteria we've examined so far, the trick is to keep
in the good stuff while jettisoning the bad stuff.
And we've also seen it's no easy trick.
So the positivists wanted to explicate meaningfulness in terms of verification.
By verification they mean a method for ascertaining the truth or falsehood of the statement in
question.
Since to be cognitively meaningful is to be either true or false, if there's the right
sort of method for testing truth or falsehood, then a statement's going to be meaningful.
Alright, we've reduced it to the problem of finding the right method for testing truth
or falsehood.
Well for analytic statements the model is going to be something like logical or mathematical
proof.
We start from definitions, we use logic to show that the statement is a consequence
of definitions.
The definitions in turn are just stipulations.
By bachelor we're going to mean something like unmarried adult male and you tease out
the consequences thereof.
Why does logic have a special status?
Well we'll sometimes call it deductive logic, foreshadowing a contrast with inductive logic
that will happen in a couple of lectures from now.
The symbols of logic or if then get unambiguous definitions, we make very explicit what we
mean by them so that we can show on the basis of these definitions that the rules of logic
are truth preserving.
They will never go from true inputs to false outputs and that's a matter of meaning alone.
So we'll never, as long as we stick with deductively valid arguments, we will never
go from true premises to a false conclusion.
So that's the special status that logic gets via its explicitness.
So an analytic statement is verifiable and hence meaningful if it can be traced back
in the appropriate way to its source which is ultimately some kind of linguistic convention.
The trickier case concerns synthetic statements.
What counts as empirical verification?
The analog of proof for empirical statements about observation and the world.
Notice it's going to be a weaker notion because we don't generally think that empirical statements
can be conclusively established in the same way that mathematical statements can.
Any empirical statement is fallible.
You might not be listening to this lecture right now but might really only be having
a very peculiar dream.
So there's a level of fallibility in empirical statements.
And keep in mind that to say that a statement is meaningful is to say that it's capable
of being true or false.
False statements are as meaningful as true statements are.
Let's begin exploring this by noting some ways in which the positivists made advances
on previous attempts to link experience and meaning that we've already examined.
Classical empiricism tried to establish meaningfulness by tracing a concept or ideas origin in experience.
You have an idea, you try to find the impression in Hume's language from which it arose.
The linguistic version of an idea or concept is a term, and so since the positivists want
to make philosophy about language, we'll talk about terms and statements.
The verificationism of the positivists instead makes empirical meaningfulness not a matter
of the term, but the matter of a statement's ability to confront experience.
And this resulted from the same revolution in logic and in philosophy of language that
started in 1870.
Bridgeman and the classical empiricists had assumed that every term, one by one, has to
either be a term of logic or has to get grounded in experience, or traceable two terms that
are grounded in experience, and we build up out of those.
Logic and philosophy started taking the statement, not the term, to be the, as it were, the
atom of meaning in the composable in this sense.
The shift to statements considerably liberalizes the permitted connections between language
and experience.
The idea is you don't have to already attach an explicit meaning to a term like litmus
paper prior to it figuring in sentences about experience.
The term litmus paper can get its meaning through its role in such sentences.
We'll see in detail how this works next time.
But it's easier to link a statement, like acids turn blue litmus paper pink, to experience
than it is to link each of those terms one by one to experience.
Our experience is, as it were, more sentence-sized than word-sized.
It's the interactions with certain sorts of liquid that give litmus paper some connection
to experience.
It's its role in such sentences.
We start off with litmus paper just being a bare name.
We could have called it bubba or something like that.
It gets its meaning from the work it does in sentences.
It doesn't have to have meaning apart from sentences.
So the positivists realize that empiricists need not, in order to stay true to their principles,
ground every term in experience.
And the model here is really what Russell had done with the present king of France case.
He's not explaining the word the in isolation.
He's showing what work it does in complete sentences.
And that is a good way of explicating that term's meaning.
And since sentences, though not terms, can bear logical deductive relationships to each
other, this opens up new possibilities for empiricism.
The next respect in which empiricism of the 20th century represents an advance over the
earlier empiricists is the result of a kind of major disagreement within the positivist
program.
Many of the positivists had agreed with the classical empiricists that what we directly
perceive are sensations, sights and sounds rather than physical objects.
The other camp agreed with Bridgeman that talk of objects rather than talk of sensations
is basic for doing science, in part because talk of objects is public, while sensations
are private and mind dependent.
This is an enormous issue in philosophy with which we're not going to concern ourselves.
The main point is it's a whole lot easier to do philosophy if you start from objects
rather than from sensations.
We're going to help ourselves to this advance, which was controversial even within the positivist
camp, on grounds that philosophy of science is hard enough.
So we're not going to worry about how to build physical objects up out of sensations.
We need the notion of an observation statement framed in terms of observable objects.
So we can directly see that a meter gives a particular reading, though we can't directly
see that a solution is acidic.
That's something we infer on the basis of observation, not something directly observed.
But we don't have to directly observe only sensations.
With these advances under our belt, we can put them to work and see how the liberalization
of empiricism gives us some more resources for trying to insist that meaningful statements
must be connected to experience.
But we're going to see that trying to get rid of bathwater while keeping the baby is
still pretty hard.
The central idea here is that the verifiability of an empirical statement involves finding
possible observations that bear on its truth.
So it's statements that we're trying to verify, and we don't have to go all the way down to
the level of sensations, but only to the level of observable objects in order to verify them.
And we only need possible observations, because if we were to require actual observations,
we'd be assessing the truth or the falsehood of the statement, not its capability of being
truth or falsehood, or true or false, which is its meaningfulness.
So we know what observations would count in favor of, toyotas grow on trees, so we know
that it's meaningful rather than metaphysical.
We're not trying to establish that it's true, we're trying to establish that it bears the
right sort of connection to experience so that it has meaning.
It's not poetry or metaphysics.
And we don't want to demand that it be currently possible for us to verify the statement, because
we want to think it's scientifically meaningful to talk about what's happening in distant
galaxies that we can't observe.
So it's got to be a possible observation in a somewhat attenuated sense of possible.
But that notion of possibility had better not be too attenuated, because if we could
move at infinite speeds, which is logically possible, we could give sense to the notion
of absolute simultaneity.
But that mere logical possibility is not enough to establish that we mean anything by absolute
simultaneity, that was the lesson of the Einstein case.
So whenever you talk about possibility, you have to realize possibilities come in a variety
of flavors, and it's unclear what sense of possibility is at work.
Well, one way you could minimize this problem is to deploy perhaps the most obvious way
to be sure that a statement is verifiable.
And that would be to determine a set of possible observations in some intuitive sense of possible
here that would conclusively show the statement to be true.
You get a bunch of observation statements if they're true, your theoretical statement
must be true.
But this is far too demanding.
No finite number of observations could ever conclusively establish the truth of all copper
conducts electricity.
There could always be more copper out there.
Statements are almost never literally proved on the basis of experience.
We talk as if there's experiential proof, but that's not quite accurate.
We saw in lecture two that Popper's rather similar proposal in terms of conclusive falsifiability
also fails.
A statement like there is at least one non-conductive piece of copper somewhere in the universe
is not conclusively falsifiable on the basis of any finite amount of experience.
It could always be right around the next corner.
So an interesting way of weakening the requirement for verifiability would be to require that
the statement be either conclusively verifiable or conclusively falsifiable.
That's not going to work though because it rules out a statement like every metal dissolves
in some acid, which cannot be conclusively verified or falsified on the basis of a finite
amount of experience.
And yet that seems like a scientific statement.
That seems like it's something we want to count as empirically meaningful.
Perhaps most importantly, statements about unobservable objects seem to get ruled out
by this criterion.
How could observations conclusively establish that that streak in the cloud chamber was
produced by an electron?
We want that to count as scientifically meaningful, but its connection to experience is too indirect.
So we need a weaker version of the verifiability principle.
And the most influential one was due to AJ Air, who suggests that a statement is verifiable
if we can describe observations that are relevant to, that bear on, its truth or falsed.
Put more explicitly, a statement is verifiable if we can use the statement to derive observations
that can't be derived without it.
And so this will allow statements that connect to experience somewhat indirectly to still
count as scientifically meaningful.
But the worry is, once we weaken this requirement, it might get too weak.
And this version of Air's verifiability principle surely is too weak.
It doesn't impose any restrictions on the auxiliary hypotheses, the other statements
we can use, along with the statement in question, to derive observable consequences.
So from the statement, everything proceeds according to God's plan, and the statement,
if everything proceeds according to God's plan, then this litmus paper will turn pink
when placed in this solution.
It's easy to derive an observational prediction.
Furthermore, in order to get the observational prediction, you needed the statement about
God's plan.
And so on Air's criterion, everything proceeds according to God's plan comes out as scientifically
meaningful.
Derive observation statements using it that you can't derive without it.
But that's a paradigm of the kind of statement the positivists wanted to exclude as meaningless.
Air modified his principle to try to impose requirements like the auxiliary hypotheses
need independently to be established as empirically meaningful.
But it was shown that that's not going to work.
Any three or four well-chosen statements still show that Air's criterion lets almost
anything in.
So it turns out to be devilishly hard to figure out what a statement must say, how it must
connect to experience in order to count as scientifically meaningful and hence not metaphysical.
Perhaps surprisingly, positivism was not actually derailed by all of these difficulties.
The idea that empirical meaningfulness had to be construed in terms of how a statement
connects to observation was so powerful that it just seemed like one of these nitpicky
objections would eventually get overcome and we'd be able to state clearly what we
knew must be true.
Turns out they were never able to state clearly a verification principle, but nevertheless
the project had enough momentum because of the need in the wake of Einstein to connect
scientific meaningfulness to observation that the project was assumed to work in a way that
it hadn't been shown to work.
So next time we'll focus on the positivist conception of scientific theories, the same
issues will arise that we'll see a different approach to them from within positivism.
