Lecture 27 Success, Experience, and Explanation
Last time out we sketched scientific realism and made at least an initial examination of
some of the obstacles the view must confront.
We approached this view through the obstacles that it must overcome because it would otherwise
seem like a rather uncontroversial claim.
Prior to a major dose of philosophy, many people would have thought it completely unproblematic
to assent to the claim that scientific theories can reasonably aim at depicting reality correctly.
But against the background of empiricism that dominated 20th century philosophy of science,
it's easy to see that serious problems arise about how data could support claims made about
unobservable reality.
At this stage of the course we've dropped the empiricist inspired semantic worries.
We're granting that it's fully meaningful to talk about unobservable reality.
But the epistemic issue, we called it epistemic presumptuousness last time, remains.
Is it reasonable to think that science can give us knowledge of a reality we do not encounter
through observation?
The main argument that's been offered in favor of scientific realism has, like scientific
realism itself, a kind of common sense feel to it, though philosophy, as you know by now,
has a way of making common sense feelings dissipate rather quickly.
The argument is a version of an inference to the best explanation.
This is an argument form we examined back in lecture 12.
Such arguments say that it's reasonable to adopt a hypothesis when it does a good enough
job of explaining observations and when no competing hypothesis does a comparably good
job.
Inference to the best explanation is the main style of argument for moving from observable
to unobservable phenomena.
Unlike induction, which is sometimes called a horizontal inference, it's more of the
same inference.
Inference to the best explanation is a vertical inference.
We can go from observable phenomena to something behind the phenomena.
This straightforward inference to the best explanation style argument for realism is
often called the no miracles argument.
The idea is that the natural sciences have been tremendously successful, and a fairly
strong version of realism, roughly the claim that our best scientific theories are at least
approximately true, including what they say about unobservable reality, that's the best
explanation for the striking fact that the natural sciences are so successful.
The notion of success at work in this argument calls out for explanation.
Lysenko's misguided biology might have served his interests rather well, but that's not
the kind of success at issue here.
And to the extent that Darwinism caught on in large part because it served the interests
of powerful people in the 19th century, that kind of success also not an argument for the
truth of the theory which succeeds in that way.
Two kinds of success do seem to matter for purposes of the no miracles argument, predictive
success and technological success.
But again, the issue needs to be handled with some care.
Predictive success can come from luck or from vagueness.
Astrology is not without its predictive successes, though generally we might credit those to
the vagueness of its predictions, and a lucky guess is a genuine predictive success.
So the no miracles argument has got to set the bar a little bit higher than that if it's
going to claim that it would be a miracle that science could do what it's done without
its theories being at least approximately true.
So the defender of the argument can appeal to the idea that you find particle physicists
but not astrologers testing the implications of their theories with quantitative precision
out to 10 decimal places.
The idea is how could a theory make a prediction that accurate without the theory being at
least approximately true?
And a similar argument gets applied to technological successes.
How can laboratories cook up designer microorganisms if molecular biology is not at least approximately
true, and how can you land a satellite in a particular place on Mars if physics is not
approximately true?
Understandably, this has been an enormously influential argument both within philosophy
and outside it.
But it runs squarely into the argument we called the pessimistic induction last time.
That argument claims that predictively accurate and technologically fruitful theories from
the past have now been shown to be false.
So the idea is that other generations would have been just as entitled to use the No Miracles
argument as we are, but they would have been wrong, so we should not be willing to help
ourselves to the No Miracles argument.
Now building on a point that we at least touched on last time, the pessimistic argument shows
that the realist needs to adopt more demanding criteria of success, or the realist needs
to restrict what the No Miracles argument claims to accomplish, or both.
Taking the first horn of the dilemma, the realist can require novel predictive success
before a theory can justifiably be considered at least approximately true of unobservable
reality.
If a theory only explains data that are already in, a competing explanation is readily available
for that theory's success, namely that the theory was designed to accommodate the data.
It's taken the data into account and otherwise might not have gotten it right.
Novel predictions preclude this explanation, and thereby favor the explanation that the
theory works because it's true.
Now some philosophers have gone so far as to argue that only novel predictions count
as evidence that a theory is true.
That's a rather extreme claim.
The evidence about how tides work and cannonballs and planets was all in before Newton unified
all of these phenomena.
But intuitively we think that his theory should get credit for explaining all of those different
kinds of motion as well as the theory did.
So we do think that data that are already in can support a theory.
This restriction of the No Miracles argument to novel predictions runs into the problem
that novelty is rather tricky to characterize.
It's not a purely temporal notion, because if there's old data that the theory was not
able to take in when it was formulated, that serves as novelty in the relevant sense.
It looks just as good for the theory, because the theory can't have been designed around
data of which it was as it were unaware.
We don't want to appeal to a kind of psychological notion of surprisingness, because that's too
person relative.
What we want is some kind of reasonably objective measure of the extent to which a prediction
was unexpected from the standpoint of competing theories.
That's a hard notion to formulate.
Even if we can find ourselves to novel predictions and help ourselves to a notion of novelty,
the No Miracles argument is not out of the woods yet.
The wave theory of light generated precise, surprising, and correct predictions, but it's
false.
The bright spot in the middle of a shadow of a disk is unexpected by just about any standard.
It's exactly the sort of thing that a theory should get credit for.
The wave theory made the prediction turn out to be true, but the theory is false.
To some extent, this just requires backing away from excessive rhetoric.
This is the strand of the response that tones down what the No Miracles argument can claim
for itself.
One must admit that, as it were, miracles sometimes happen.
A theory can make precise and surprising predictions without being true.
That doesn't necessarily undermine the idea that, in general, those sorts of predictive
successes are indicators of truth.
Another response along these lines is to argue that the success of the prediction is due
to a part of the wave theory that is in fact correct, and that error elsewhere in the theory
doesn't disqualify part of the theory from counting as true.
This revisits some issues going back to our discussion of quine and wholism about theory
testing.
The realist needs to figure out some way of determining which parts of a theory have been
subjected to suitably various and suitably demanding tests if the realist is going to
focus on part of the theory as having been vindicated by its successes.
And of course, it's easier to make such determinations about past theories than it is to make them
about present ones.
So there's at least a kind of anti-realist warning at work here that we shouldn't be
too comfortable applying the No Miracles argument to our present theories.
Maybe for the highly tested parts of a theory, will the realist's explanation of success
seem like the best one?
And even then, though an example of the wave theory of light reminds us that these arguments
are fallible.
So maybe we can grant the realist a limited success in answering the pessimistic induction
argument.
And perhaps we can grant the realist a limited success in addressing the problem of the underdetermination
of theory by data, which as we saw last time, tries to make hay from the idea that for any
set of observations, an infinite number of theories will be compatible with those observations.
So let's grant for the sake of argument that under favorable conditions, a scientific
realist can plausibly claim that one theory is better supported by that data than others,
even though an infinite number of theories are compatible with that data.
Scientific realism is still not out of the woods.
Empiricists can challenge the whole appeal to the strategy of inference to the best explanation
in the first place.
This kind of an argument can come in two parts.
First, the empiricists can ask whether the success of scientific theories needs to be
explained at all.
In addition, the empiricists can ask whether positing the truth of what scientific theories
say about unobservable reality is in fact the best explanation of scientific success.
We're going to take the second issue first.
We've seen that Boss von Fressen does not think any context-independent standards for
what counts as an explanation or what requires explanation are in place.
A good explanation for von Fressen is just a good answer to a why question.
So if someone asks about the striking fact that scientific theories are predictively
and technologically successful, von Fressen is willing to answer that why question.
He appeals to a kind of evolutionary analogy in order to do so.
We don't need to credit gazelles with any deep understanding of predator-prey relationships
in order to explain why they run away from cheetahs.
Gazelles that didn't run away from cheetahs did not survive and reproduce, so such gazelles
are no longer around.
Similarly, scientific theories that generate false predictions tend to get discarded, so
it comes as no surprise that the only theories that are still around have mainly generated
true predictions.
This is an explanation, it's an answer to the why question, but it does not vindicate
the approximate truth of what scientific theories say about unobservable reality.
This is a powerful argument against simple versions of the No Miracles argument, because
it suggests there's a serious explanation that the No Miracles argument hasn't ruled
out.
But the evolutionary analogy might not be able to account for novel predictive success.
If gazelles knew enough about the habits of unprecedented predators, we might have to
rethink this kind of deflationary explanation of their cognitive skills.
But this leads into the more radical challenge to the whole strategy of inference to the
best explanation that empiricists pose for scientific realists.
As we saw back in lecture 12 when we introduced inference to the best explanation, many empiricists
regard this argumentative strategy as questionable when used within science.
Given that, it's unsurprising that they consider it even more questionable when it's used
about science.
Do we have adequate reason for thinking that the world upholds our explanatory ambitions?
Inference to the best explanation involves thinking that explanatory loveliness is a
mark of truth.
In other words, the hypothesis that makes the best sense of things to us, that best unifies
our knowledge for instance, or at least the hypothesis that makes the best sense to us
at our best, that hypothesis is likely to be true.
The realist is committed to this, the empiricist questions this commitment.
In defense of realism, it can be noted that we appeal to this argumentative strategy to
inference to the best explanation in lots of ordinary cases as well as in lots of scientific
ones.
As we saw, this was the kind of reasoning favored by Sherlock Holmes and pretty much
every detective ever since.
Until one is hit with a good sized dose of philosophy, we tend to think that it's reasonable
to infer to the truth of a sufficiently good explanation.
On the empiricist side however, we've looked at various promising but troubling accounts
of explanation, and it's not clear that we've seen one that vindicates this strategy of
inferring to the best explanation.
We are attracted to hypotheses that unify, or that provide a causal mechanism, or that
derive from the laws of nature, but appealing to any of these hypotheses also goes well
beyond the observational data, and that's the source of the worry for empiricists.
So this is another version of the deep tension we've seen between science's ambitions
to understand and explain on the one hand, and the caution and modesty with which it
approaches the notion of evidence on the other.
On the one hand, we're inclined to go beyond observation in order to explain phenomena,
and we think our explanations get the world right.
On the other hand, we're cautious about going beyond direct observational data.
The same point can be made via the Aquinean notion of the underdetermination of theory
by data.
Suppose we think that the best explanation of certain observations is the truth of our
current scientific theory.
But if underdetermination holds, it appears that the truth of any of the other theories
that fit the data equally well could also serve as an explanation of the observations.
How is it that we can narrow down to one the theories that explain the truth of the observation,
given that there is an infinite number of them?
It was for reasons like these, as we saw back in lecture 18 when we first started talking
about scientific explanation, that hardcore empiricists suspect that explanation tends
to lead into metaphysics.
They think that we must not posit some fact behind the phenomena to account for every
striking regularity, not everything needs to be explained.
If we try to explain everything in scientific cases, we'll find ourselves positing unverifiable
ether pervading the universe as a way for light waves to propagate.
Or we'll seek an explanation for the number of planets, and we saw people explaining the
number of planets via an appeal to the number of holes in the head.
Pushing the demand for explanation too far leads to metaphysics, at least empiricists
fear that that's the case.
The status of inference to the best explanation within science itself is thus controversial.
There are powerful considerations in favor of some such inferences, but also powerful
reasons for thinking that it's not a general requirement that science explain as much as
it possibly can.
Empiricists then are not persuaded by the realist's appeal to inference to the best
explanation to underwrite scientific realism.
Someone who is skeptical about the inference from a streak in a cloud chamber to an unobservable
electron is not going to be impressed with the much more general and much more abstract
inference that we can reason our way to the truth of what our scientific theories in general
say about unobservable reality from the predictive and technological successes of science.
So a major empiricist alternative to scientific realism has arisen.
This is as it were what's going to be left of logical positivism when we dropped the
semantic doctrines we dropped last time.
And this view is due to Bas von Fressen, it's called constructive empiricism.
Von Fressen agrees with realists about semantic issues, scientific theories, posit unobservables
in fully meaningful ways.
Our theories are committed to the existence of such things as electrons.
Electron talk is not a disguised way of talking about observational predictions, we've rejected
that legacy of logical positivism.
But it doesn't follow, says von Fressen, that we are or should be committed to the
existence of electrons.
Our theory is so committed, but we needn't be.
Von Fressen parts company with realists on epistemic issues, though not on semantic ones.
All of our evidence, he says, is observational evidence, and this means that we should not
think of ourselves as in a position to gain knowledge of unobservable reality.
But since our best theories do make fully meaningful, aspiring to truth claims about
unobservable reality, we should not believe parts of what our best theories say.
That's a peculiar point, we'll return to it shortly.
While von Fressen agrees with realists that no interesting distinction can be drawn between
the parts of our language that concern observable reality and the parts of our language that
don't, he insists that there is a crucial difference between unobservable objects and
observable objects.
Von Fressen grants that the distinction is contingent and somewhat vague.
It depends on facts about how human beings happen to work.
Some things are just barely too small to be seen.
Some things might be observable by you, but not by me, because you have better vision than
I do.
And it's just a contingent fact about our size and our sensory equipment that determines
in the first place what counts as observable by us.
In full recognition of these facts, von Fressen nevertheless maintains the epistemic importance
of this distinction.
From the point of view of science, he says, human beings are a certain kind of measuring
or detecting device, and our evidence is tied to our size and our senses.
Observable, he says, is a term that works like portable.
Some things might be movable by you, but not by me, and the Empire State Building might
be portable for a sufficiently strong extraterrestrial, but that will make it portable for human
beings like us.
Like portable, observable has its meaning tied to human abilities.
Scientific realists tend to think that telescopes and microscopes can be thought of as extending
the reach of our senses, extending what counts as observation.
Someone like von Fressen thinks that such devices are sufficiently mediated by theory
by talk about unobservables that they should be thought of more as inferences than as observations.
And this distinction matters because von Fressen insists that belief should go only where evidence
can lead, and all evidence is observational evidence.
So we should, at most, believe our best scientific theories to be empirically adequate.
That is correct in everything they say about observable reality.
Again we're going back to Ossiander's preface to Copernicus's theory of the Solar System.
The idea is that the job of a scientific theory is to save the phenomena.
It is to describe, correctly, all of the possible as well as actual observations.
It's to tell you where you're going to see the planets.
It's not to provide a true description of the unobservable reality behind the observations.
That's von Fressen's conception of what makes a scientific theory a good one.
Now note that von Fressen is not a skeptic about scientific inference in general.
He permits horizontal inductive arguments from observed phenomena to other observable phenomena.
And he permits explanatory inferences, inferences to the best explanation, when they can find
themselves to observable reality.
It's perfectly reasonable, von Fressen thinks, to infer the existence of an unobserved mouse
from observed mouse-like phenomena.
It is inferenced to unobservable's, which induction will not by itself license, about
which von Fressen is skeptical.
To say that a theory is empirically adequate is to go enormously beyond our evidence, and
von Fressen's okay with that.
But to say that our theory describes unobservable reality correctly, according to von Fressen,
is to go beyond all the possible evidence, and he thinks realism makes a mistake by going
that route.
von Fressen nevertheless thinks it's okay for scientists to be guided by the pictures
of unobservable reality embedded in their theories.
You can take, in a certain sense, say the Copernican picture of the solar system quite
seriously.
You can take it seriously for designing experiments, and doing other things to try to make your
theories more empirically adequate.
So, and this is one of the peculiarities of von Fressen's position, though he agrees
with realists that the theory asserts the existence of unobservable objects, von Fressen
agrees with positivists that the epistemic point of making claims about unobservable
reality is only to help you make claims about observable reality.
By using your theory to make predictions to design experiments, etc., you are not yet
committing yourself to the truth of the theory.
It's not yet belief.
We can let ourselves be guided by an Earth-centered picture of the solar system when we talk about
the sun rising in the morning.
We know better, but we can talk that way, and it does no harm as long as we're clear
about the conditions under which we endorse being guided by such a picture.
Similarly, in one's capacity as a scientist, you should treat good theories just as if
you believed them to be true.
You should apply for funding to test them.
You should be guided by the picture of unobservable reality presented in the theory.
But when you step out of your scientific practice and raise epistemological questions, you're
making an assessment of evidence and reasons for belief, and you should only believe your
theory to be empirically adequate because that's all your evidence supports.
This raises some interesting questions about the various attitudes one might take towards
scientific theories.
One can believe a scientific theory.
One can think it probable that it's true without believing it.
One can adopt the theory as a working hypothesis.
One can be uncommitted to but guided by the picture that the theory presents.
And we've seen some views near the various extremes on this spectrum.
Popper suggests that scientists are not at all invested in their hypotheses.
They treat them as conjectures rather than as beliefs, ready to drop them the moment
experience turns against them.
Tune, on the other hand, emphasizes a kind of dogmatic commitment within normal science
and treats paradigms as both widely and deeply held beliefs.
One's scientists are enormously reluctant to give up.
Though it can appear that way, since von Fressen allows scientists to inhabit theories without
believing them, he's drawing on a distinction that is not merely verbal.
Von Fressen thinks it is seriously unscientific to believe where there is no observational
evidence.
It's not unscientific to act as if we believe where there is no scientific evidence.
That can seem like a quibble, but for von Fressen it makes all the difference in the
world to a kind of scientific ethic of belief.
Unfortunately, it would take us too far into relatively pure epistemology to pursue this
general issue.
I am particularly fascinated by this part of philosophy of science.
There seem to be some cases in which nothing less than full-fledged belief is appropriate.
It is not okay merely to adopt the working hypothesis that you love your spouse or that
all observable phenomena are as if you love your spouse.
Sometimes a cautious, distanced epistemic attitude is appropriate, sometimes a more
committed epistemic attitude is appropriate.
Von Fressen sees no need for the more committed attitude with respect to unobservable reality.
The realist finds von Fressen's distanced attitude unreasonably tepid about good scientific
theories.
The realist thinks a scientific theory like, say, a friend has earned more trust than von
Fressen is prepared to offer.
Von Fressen wants to confine the commitment to observable reality.
One's personal, as it were, ethics and aesthetics of belief is likely to play a role in your
evaluation of whether von Fressen's view is a sort of thoroughly epistemically motivated,
sensible view to take to the distinction between observable and unobservable reality,
or whether it's a sort of bizarrely distanced attitude to take towards good scientific theories.
What is clear is that von Fressen has shown that the demise of logical positivism does
not mean that empiricism about scientific theories is doomed.
Nevertheless, his position is subject to a number of questions.
Perhaps the most central one is, can the distinction between unobservable and observable reality
bear the weight that von Fressen requires of it?
From the fact that all of our evidence is observational, it doesn't immediately follow
that we can only count as being reliably in touch with observable objects.
Realists will argue that, despite the fact that we can only directly check what a theory
says about observable reality, we can take methods that we know are reliable with respect
to observable reality and apply them to unobservable reality.
The question is whether the burden of proof is on empiricists to give us a reason to think
this extension is illegitimate, or on realists to establish the legitimacy of this extension.
The philosopher of science Philip Kitcher compares this to Galileo's strategy, where
he first used the telescope to convince his opponents that it was accurate about terrestrial
phenomena on Earth.
If it was accurate about terrestrial phenomena, he thought the burden of proof should shift
to his opponents to give a reason to think that it wouldn't be accurate when applied
to the heavens.
Does von Fressen draw the line about what is susceptible of explanation in approximately
the right place?
When we ask why a theory that posits unobservables is predictively accurate and technologically
successful, the realist says because it's at least approximately true.
Von Fressen says it's because the theory is empirically adequate.
There is another sort of ethics of belief, an ethics of explanation point.
Von Fressen's is a likelier explanation than the realists, but it's a much less
lovely explanation than the realists.
A theory can't be true without being empirically adequate, but a theory can be empirically adequate
without being true.
So von Fressen is going less far beyond the actual evidence than the realist is.
The unloveliness of the explanation is, for many people, hard to swallow.
We want to know why the theory is empirically adequate.
Von Fressen thinks that it is no part of science to have to explain the success of science.
The job of science is to succeed, not to succeed and then explain its own success.
Von Fressen is part of an anti-metaphysical tradition going back to at least Newton's
discussion of gravity.
Theories that I don't know why gravity works this way, I don't know what gravity is,
I'm just describing how observable reality is going to behave.
Only metaphysics, according to Von Fressen, is going to be able to explain the success
of science, and metaphysics is a bad idea because of how far beyond observation metaphysics
goes.
Theories that aren't empirically adequate get rejected, so the theories that aren't
rejected are going to tend to be empirically adequate, and that's all of the explanation
we should want.
Finally, we can raise some questions about the balance between epistemic modesty and
epistemic presumption that Von Fressen strikes.
Why if we're to be so cautious about venturing beyond the observable, shouldn't we be comparably
conscious about venturing beyond what's actually observed?
Von Fressen is perfectly prepared to let us generalize our theories to all of observable
reality.
But believing that our theories are empirically adequate goes enormously beyond the evidence
as the problem of induction shows.
So what exactly is the difference?
Von Fressen thinks it's the difference between what all possible evidence can show, and what
all possible evidence still can't show, namely how unobservable reality goes.
But we don't have all possible evidence.
Why aren't we restricted by all actual evidence?
So many observers think that this battle between realism and empiricism ends in a kind of impasse.
The realists can't show that our procedures for investigating unobservable reality are
reliable without assuming some version of the No Miracles argument, the claim that empirical
and technological success is best explained by the truth or reliability of our theories.
But that's the very kind of inference that seems so questionable to empiricists.
In our next lecture, we'll see whether we can at least partially wriggle out of this
impasse by appealing to a less ambitious version of realism's inference to the best
explanation strategy.
