Lecture 15, Assessment of Kuhn
In this lecture we turn to assessing the work of Thomas Kuhn.
He is probably the most central and most controversial single figure in the course.
Something Kuhn seems uncontroversially to have accomplished is that he has compelled philosophers to pay more careful attention to the history of science than they had.
Everyone these days at least pays lip service to the idea that philosophical theses about science have to take serious note of scientific practice.
In the past philosophers would just mine the history of science for examples that seem to favor their view and would toss them in as kind of rhetorically effective illustrations.
But this renewed emphasis on the history of science has led to what one might think of as Kuhnian inspired criticisms of Kuhn.
What do I mean by that? Some have found Kuhn's historical work, his descriptions and explanations of actual scientific practice unconvincing.
We can first ask whether normal science works the way Kuhn says it does.
We saw in the lecture before last Kuhn emphasizing against conventional, especially paparian wisdom, the dogmatism of normal science.
And surely Kuhn is at least partially right about this.
Anyone who goes to graduate school in one of the sciences is assigned to one corner of an ongoing research project.
I'm oversimplifying a little bit, but the essential point stands.
Your advisors surely do not teach you to try to overthrow the major theories in the field.
Scientific education has at least some of the flavor of indoctrination to it.
But perhaps scientists are neither as open-minded as Popper took them to be, nor as close-minded as Kuhn took them to be.
Now this possibility comes in a descriptive version and in a normative version.
Descriptively one might wonder how fair it is to call scientific training indoctrination,
even while granting that scientists are not exactly encouraged to be skeptical of the paradigms that dominate their field.
But I don't want to get bogged down quarreling about the word indoctrination.
It's provocative, but let's grant that Kuhn's onto something there.
The deeper point is that the attitude of scientists towards their theories could be more complex than Kuhn seems to allow.
One could imagine somebody sticking pretty tightly to a working hypothesis, letting it govern a scientific project,
without being entirely committed to its truth.
So Kuhn seems to suggest that scientists are committed by an act of faith to the accuracy of their paradigms.
And they might have more distance from the truth of their paradigms than Kuhn lets on.
We saw the opposite worry in Popper.
Popper has a problem of how to get scientists to stick to a theory in the face of apparently falsifying evidence.
In both cases we might want to allow a little more complexity.
Stick with a view without thinking that it's exactly right.
So that's a kind of descriptive possibility that Kuhn doesn't take into account.
A similar point arises about the odds rather than the izzes of science.
Kuhn seems to think that disagreement about fundamental issues is as such paralyzing and distracting for the practice of normal science.
But perhaps we could have scientists agree to set aside some big questions without thereby thinking that they've answered them.
They could proceed on certain assumptions without being committed to the truth of those assumptions.
Disagreement needn't automatically be paralyzing.
One could also wonder about Kuhn's insistence on intertwining the contexts of discovery and justification that Popper and the positivists so strenuously tried to separate.
This is going to lead us into some philosophically deep waters.
It's going to lead into questions about the very notion of a reason.
And for that reason, these are questions we're not going to be able to settle here.
My point is just to raise them and show how they bear on Kuhn's work.
So we saw Popper and the positivists insist that how one comes to a belief or a hypothesis has no bearing at all on how justified the hypothesis is.
Kuhn, on the other hand, rejects this separation.
He thinks that exemplars, paradigmatic examples of how science should be done, teach scientists how to see problems as similar to one another.
And thus figure both as causes, or causes of, and reasons for, hypotheses and decisions within science.
As before, Kuhn seems to be on to something in his criticism of received opinion.
But again, there's a question about whether he's going to end up overplaying his hand.
Kuhn does seem right there is a need in understanding science for making some room for a notion of intuited similarity.
And this happens not just in science.
In, say, art, connoisseurs are able to see differences between originals and copies that are invisible to the Hoy-Polloy like myself.
They give reasons that are persuasive to other people who have similar training, but are completely unpersuasive to people like me.
They just say, oh, the way that foot is painted looks different in these two cases.
Yet their judgments are pretty reliable, and it seems unfair to do what the positivists and popper tend to do,
which is to suggest that an experienced but unexplicit judgment is subjective, is something like taste, rather than reason.
Philosophers as a group have never known quite what to do with people who can't or won't make their reasons explicit and principled.
But just because we have a hard time knowing what to do with such people, it's unfair to suggest that anything that's not explicit isn't a reason.
Training and experience help one to see things, even if one can't say them.
And Kuhn's right that part of scientific education involves learning how to see things as one's field needs one to see things,
and that that's not always explicitly made out, either by individual scientists or within the field.
On the other hand, Kuhn tends to under-emphasize the role of judgment, deliberation, and reflection in scientific practice.
It's one thing to grant that connoisseurs can make justified judgments about artworks, even when they can't offer justifications for their judgments.
But that doesn't mean that there isn't a justification that, as it were, is out there and could be offered, or that the existence of such a justification doesn't matter.
An experienced mathematician might be able to see how a proof goes, but the theorem is a theorem only if there's actually a proof, even if nobody bothers to give it.
The connoisseur may not be able to explain to the philosopher's satisfaction on what evidence the judgment is made,
but there's evidence, even if it's not stated, and Kuhn tends to undercut the importance of evidence.
Neither Kuhn nor the positivists makes room for the idea that we need here, namely that a belief can sometimes be justified if there's a justification out there,
even though the believer doesn't necessarily have it.
I don't remember where I learned that Kuhn was born in Cincinnati, so I can't justify it by showing that I learned it from a reliable source.
But I bet I'm right, and if I am right, the belief is justified even though I can't give the justification.
So scientists probably don't proceed as methodologically self-consciously, as the positivists would have them behave, nor as intuitively and implicitly as Kuhn has them behave.
To a great extent, a Kuhnian exemplar, a model, can itself be turned into an inductive argument, which would explicitly claim that other puzzles can be solved in the way this puzzle was solved.
Kuhn is rebelling against the methodological explicitness, the rules of the positivists.
But in doing so, he asks the distinction between seeing two things as similar on the one hand, and asserting and defending the claim that they really are similar on the other to bear more weight than it can bear.
Arguments and assertions are closely connected to seeing the world a certain way, and seeing the world a certain way involves assumptions about how the world is.
So the positivists might have overestimated the role of explicit reasoning in science, but Kuhn seems to have underestimated it.
Another descriptive worry about Kuhn's work is that he arguably ties the elements of a paradigm too tightly together.
Kuhn thinks that paradigms work as tightly integrated packages, with particular claims about what the world contains, explanatory theories about how to solve new problems,
methodological rules for choosing among competing theories, and overall abstract scientific values that work together to tell you how science is to be done.
And it's an inseparable package, as Kuhn generally writes.
But sometimes, at least, it seems like parts of paradigms can float free of each other.
The idea that we saw way back in the first lecture that science should be modeled on geometry, that it should be systematic and start from indubitable premises
and lead to unquestionable truths, it got dropped virtually across science during the 19th century.
A whole bunch of different disciplines, a whole bunch of different paradigms, all dropped this aspiration for scientific work,
which suggests that that aspiration wasn't an inseparable part of any particular paradigm.
It could be pried out and discarded while the paradigms retained their identity.
Now that's a complicated historical thesis that I'm not qualified to defend as an intellectual historian.
The point is the conceptual point that if parts of paradigms can be pried apart from each other, it might be possible to minimize some of the big gestalt shifts,
some of the incommensurability that Kuhn emphasizes across scientific revolutions.
We might be able to distinguish some of the elements and compare them point by point and have reasons bear more or less decisively in favor of one or the other,
at least sometimes.
On that note, we can turn to another descriptive question, namely whether normal and revolutionary science are as distinct from one another,
as Kuhn sometimes seems to say they are.
There's a historical argument that's of some importance here.
Some episodes of revolutionary science do not appear to have been preceded by crises, though that's part of the definition of revolutionary science, according to Kuhn.
Kuhn picks out revolutionary science by using multiple criteria, and here's a methodological point for you.
Whenever a philosopher offers multiple criteria for a term, it's worth asking whether these criteria will always stand and fall together.
In this case, it seems like they might well come apart.
It's worth noting that sometimes major change in a paradigm, which is one of Kuhn's criteria for a revolution,
happens without anything that looks like a preceding crisis.
The discovery of DNA had revolutionary consequences.
In biology, it's probably the discovery of the century, for the 20th century, of course.
But it didn't arise from any widespread sense of crisis.
There was no significant resistance from the old fuddy-duddies.
It just added to the body of scientific knowledge.
It allowed genetics and molecular biology to become unified.
And so it revolutionized the practice of biology, but it didn't undo any previous knowledge.
This puts pressure on the vagueness and ambiguity.
Those are different notions.
I won't bother to distinguish them here.
Of Kuhn's conception of a scientific revolution.
And it reminds us that some revolutions, in science as in politics, can proceed surprisingly rationally and painlessly.
A revolution needn't involve considerable upset.
Arguably, though, this does not by itself undermine Kuhn's emphasis on the more drastic revolutions
and his argument that those undercut the case for the cumulative progressive nature of science.
If there are a few big incommensurable revolutions, then the history of science as a whole doesn't build it as it were starts over a couple of times.
So the Kuhnian critic needs to establish that revolutions are never quite as drastic as Kuhn suggests,
not just that they sometimes aren't as drastic as Kuhn suggests.
Now, if at least sometimes revolutions aren't as revolutionary, as Kuhn says they are,
this raises the prospect that normal and revolutionary science might not be as different from each other as Kuhn sometimes suggests they are.
It's fair for any distinction to face some borderline cases.
There is no particular number of hairs you go from when you lose one, you've gone from having hair to being bald.
There's a range in between.
Any distinction is allowed to have a borderline cluster of cases.
But Kuhn does lead us to expect most scientific work to cluster either around the normal science poll or the revolutionary or crisis science poll.
Again, it would be a very complicated endeavor in the history of science and other intellectual work to try to establish whether this is true or not.
But there is a worry for Kuhn that can be appreciated without undertaking such an ambitious survey.
We can just trot out a couple of cases because there seem to be a few different dimensions of variation that allow for a lot of stuff to emerge in the middle.
So we see scientific work that had revolutionary consequences but required little or no change in previous beliefs.
We just talked about that with the structure of DNA.
That's a straightforwardly, you might think, additive cumulative scientific advance, but no less revolutionary for that.
We see work that required major changes in previous belief but doesn't seem to have been preceded by a crisis or to have caused much tumult in the scientific community.
When in 1929, Edwin Hubble presented very convincing data that the universe was expanding, astronomers went along even though it was really quite shocking to their conception of the universe.
They went along without a lot of fuss because the data seemed to them to be very good.
Again, I'm oversimplifying these cases in their historical richness, but these are reasonably uncontroversial descriptions of the history and they suggest that you can have crisis revolutions with very little crisis or incommensurability.
You also have work that was highly controversial, highly revisionary, but seems to leave paradigms more or less intact.
Wilhelm Röntgen's discovery of x-rays in 1895 was mostly just additive at the level of theory.
The existence of x-rays was not incompatible with any part of the physics of the day.
It was just unimagined on the basis of the physics of the day.
But x-rays did really revolutionize the practice of that part of physics because they made mischief for experiments involving cathode ray tubes.
Because it seemed like more than cathode rays were being emitted by such tubes, and so you had to wonder whether the experiments showed what their practitioners had thought they showed.
Is that revolutionary change or not? It rewrites scientific practice while leaving the paradigm more or less intact.
Such reflections raise worries for Kuhn's whole argument. I'm not saying they undermine it, but they put pressure on Kuhn's argument.
Since they undermine the pattern he sets out to explain, he's trying to explain a pattern of normal science punctuated by big revolutions.
If a lot of science seems to happen in between, then the very thing he's setting out to explain doesn't seem to have existed, and so the explanation is undermined.
Some other issues in the history of science will emerge as we start looking at the more purely philosophical aspects of Kuhn's position.
It's this side of Kuhn's work that has attracted the largely unfavorable attention of philosophers. They have found him excessively deflating of scientific rationality.
So we need to raise the question of, is he in fact as deflating of scientific rationality as he's often taken to be, and if so, is that okay or not?
How good are his arguments for this position?
One thing to note is Kuhn doesn't seem to have a whole lot to say about why science has the values it has, why it values simplicity, why it values explanatory power.
He suggests that this is just part of what it is to do science, as Popper had suggested that falsifying your theories and sticking with corroborated theories is just part of what it is to do science.
But some of Kuhn's opponents think these values can receive a deeper rationale, a link to something like truth or predictive accuracy.
And if Kuhn's opponents can defend this kind of a connection between, say, explanatory power and truth, that's a big if, because when we looked at explanatory inference, we saw it's not clear why lovely explanations should lead to the truth.
So there's real work to be done for Kuhn's critics here.
But if they can suggest that scientific values link up to some paradigm independent notion of truth, then they're in a position to challenge some of Kuhn's readings of the history of science.
And they can offer a reading of the history that's a little more rule governed, a little more cumulative than Kuhn suggested.
So again, returning to Kuhn's favorite example, he presents the choice between the Sun and the Earth-centered conceptions of the solar system as strongly undetermined by the data.
Some of his opponents suggest that that picture is misleading.
While both theories fit the data, we saw with Popper fitting the data as pretty cheap.
The Copernican theory, according to Kuhn's opponents, explained things like the retrograde motion of Mars, that Mars appears to start moving backwards in the sky when viewed from Earth, and that the best explanation of why the Copernican theory gets this prediction right is that it's true.
Again, we don't have time to go into the historical cases in great detail.
It's the general issue that's of most interest to us.
Philosophers who think that scientific values are linked to truth have an explanation of why scientists value simplicity or explanatory power.
Of course, they've got to establish the link.
Our question is whether Kuhn needs an explanation of why science values what it values.
Since he denies the legitimacy of truth talk outside of a paradigm, we can talk about what's true according to a paradigm.
He can't link any scientific values to extra-paradigmatic truth.
That seems to leave two options open to him.
He can either say, these values are traditional to science, it's what scientists do, or he can say they have some connection to puzzle solving.
But many find the former explanation unsatisfying.
We want some reason for thinking scientists should care about simplicity or explanatory power.
And if Kuhn goes the other route of trying to link these to puzzle solving power, he runs the risk that his opponents will say these values are connected to puzzle solving because they're connected to truth.
Because they are links to the way the world is apart from any particular paradigm.
And this can be supplemented with some of the considerations we've already examined.
If you can break paradigms down into their components, then you might be able to make piecemeal close comparisons of the explanatory power of two different theories, the Copernican or the geocentric theory,
rather than treating them each as a take it or leave it package that can only be evaluated in its own terms.
Those comparisons then might seem a little more rationally motivated.
Turning to a new problem, the problem of communication across paradigms, which Kuhn thought was surprisingly fraught and difficult, is another issue about which one might think Kuhn is vulnerable to some historical objections.
Because when you look at the letters scientists write to each other, you don't see very clear evidence of what on earth are you saying sorts of letters.
You don't find clear evidence that they don't understand what each other are saying.
And there seem to be plenty of cases in which people who have very different beliefs manage to understand how the world looks to people on the other side.
People can go from seeing the world in a duck-like way to in a rabbit-like way.
Again, not being a historian, I'm not going to try to persuade you about particular cases.
The methodological point would have Kuhn responding that at least in part, scientists aren't going to be aware of the extent of the miscommunications.
Since a Newtonian is using mass in the way that Newtonian physics says it should be used, and we'll be assuming that an Einsteinian is using it in the same way, we won't find much self-conscious frustration or exasperation.
Speaking more philosophically then, one might think that Kuhn is again overreacting to some genuine problems he's discovered within positivism.
Given the way positivists tie meaning to observation, strictly speaking the meaning of mass does change when it gets linked to incompatible observations.
It also gets changed when it gets linked to other theoretical notions like energy.
But it's not clear that meaning change in this respect will lead to the levels of misunderstanding or incommensurability that Kuhn is talking about.
To take another of Kuhn's favorite examples, he suggests that the meaning of planet, the word planet, changes once you move from the Earth-centered to the Sun-centered conception of the solar system.
The term had meant something that orbits the Earth, and now it comes to mean something that orbits the Sun.
The Earth became a planet.
The term started to apply to different objects. The Sun ceased to count, the Earth started counting.
This argument is too quick. It might be right, but it's too quick.
It's not clear that we want to even admit that the meaning of the term changes.
A term can preserve its meaning while applying to different things.
One could make a case that the term means something like an object that orbits the center of this local system.
You can change beliefs about which things fall under a term while keeping the meaning of the term constant.
That happens all the time when we change our factual beliefs about something.
Even if we grant that the meaning of the term has changed.
It's not clear that it produced the kind of misunderstanding between proponents of the Earth and the Sun-centered conceptions that Kuhn suggests it does.
Doesn't each side understand what the other is claiming pretty well?
They disagree about the facts, but they're not speaking gibberish to each other.
They understood what was at stake, which is why Galileo got in trouble with the church, for instance.
They understood what he was claiming.
Now we can turn to the big issue.
Is Kuhn right to reject the idea of paradigm neutral observations that can bear evidential relations to two competing paradigms?
And to the extent that Kuhn is right, does that fact undermine the idea that observation has the power to undermine theory?
Or could an observation that can't be stated outside the terms of a paradigm nevertheless undermine the paradigm itself?
And my tune about Kuhn is starting to sound a little familiar by now.
There's something he's on to, but he might be overselling his point.
Our concepts and our prior experience do influence our perceptions.
The anomalous playing card experiment from last time shows that.
It's harder to see what is incompatible with your theory than what your theory leads you to expect.
But it doesn't follow that the influence of theory on observation is all that powerful or all that pervasive.
The sun still looks like it moves even when we know it doesn't.
Some optical illusions, which suggest that two lines that are the same length are actually different lengths, still look the same way even when you know they're illusions.
Our perceptual experience doesn't bend to our beliefs in the way that Kuhn sometimes suggests.
He muddies the terminology here unnecessarily.
Kuhn tends to talk of seeing things, where a more cautious philosopher would talk about having a visual experience of something.
Now the reason for drawing what might sound like a kind of nitpicky distinction here is that we sometimes use the verb to see as a success term.
There is a sense in which I'm teaching right now, no matter what else happens.
If nobody ever listens to this, I'm still teaching right now.
But there's also a sense in which I'm not teaching unless somebody eventually is learning.
That's the success term of to teach, in that sense you can't teach without somebody learning.
Similarly, in the success sense of to see, one cannot see what isn't there.
One can have a visual experience as if something that isn't there is there.
But in that sense, nobody has ever seen the sun move around the earth because there's no such thing to be seen.
It can't be seen. It can only seem to be seen.
Through such terminological sloppiness, Kuhn sometimes finds himself saying things that are hard to understand, much less to believe.
And he really says this. He says that one scientist looks in a jar and sees deflegisticated air. What does that mean?
The old theory of combustion had said that combustion is caused by this stuff called phlegiston, which allows for combustion.
It's its own kind of chemical object in things.
While the new theory said it was oxygen that caused combustion, something in the air, not in the object itself.
The details of this don't much matter.
What you've got are two different transparent jars full of supposedly two different things.
But neither of them has any appearance.
If you knew for sure one jar was full of oxygen and the other was full of helium, they would still look exactly the same.
For Kuhn to say that one of them, one scientist sees something different than the other sees, is from a certain standpoint crazy.
Even if you know you're looking at two different things, they don't necessarily look different from one another.
Kuhn is abusing the concept of to see. He's conflating descriptions of visual experiences with the visual experiences themselves.
So just as the positivists were wrong to help themselves to the notion of an observation language that is completely pure of theoretical influence,
Kuhn is also wrong to insist that theories thoroughly pervade observation.
This issue will crop up a couple times as we move through the course, but the terminological messiness that Kuhn seems not just to impose but to insist on
adds to the confusion that we faced when trying to figure out what Kuhn means when he claims that scientists across paradigms inhabit different worlds.
It can't just mean that they believe different things about the world, that's no problem for a realist or a positivist or anybody.
It also can't mean that some scientist literally in the success term sees what isn't there.
There is no such thing as phlogiston, there is no such thing as deflogisticated air.
In the success term, no scientist could ever see it because it's not there.
Kuhn seems to insist over and over on alighting this distinction, denying that there is anything out there to be seen that floats at all free of the theory in which it's presented.
Now, surely some sense can be made of Kuhn's provocative comments about the idea that the world changes when a paradigm changes.
There is a sense in which our world changed after Darwinism became more or less orthodox.
We have a different sense of our place in the scheme of things.
But Kuhn insists that this talk means something more literal and more dramatic than that.
It's not just our experience that changes, it's not just our concepts or our beliefs that change across paradigms.
Kuhn explicitly insists that the world itself changes when paradigms change.
It's hard to know exactly what to make of this, he seems to be denying that there's any use at all for the notion of the real world.
But don't we want to say that we're still in the same world people were before Darwin, our conception of the world has changed radically and dramatically.
Kuhn, that's not enough.
We will pursue this issue in the lecture after next.
At this point, the most important thing to notice is that even if we insist that observations inevitably are couched in a theory's terms rather than some theory neutral way,
they don't thereby lose their ability to falsify the theory in which they're couched.
Creationists often challenge biologists in a broadly paparian way by asking what would be falsifying evidence for Darwinian evolution.
And the standard answer evolutionary biologists give is a pre-Cambrian rabbit fossil.
Why? Because in the pre-Cambrian period, according to evolution, there were only invertebrates running around.
If you could find something that sure looked like a mammalian fossil in pre-Cambrian rock, that's a serious, serious problem for the geological and biological theory in question.
Now that notion of a pre-Cambrian rabbit is stated in terms of the geological and biological theory that's up for grabs.
But nevertheless, if you found a pre-Cambrian rabbit fossil, that would have a strong tendency to falsify the theory.
We don't need observations to be independent of our theory in order for them to have a chance of falsifying it.
From the fact that our theories influence our perceptions, it doesn't follow that we can only see what our theories say is there.
Finally, let's ask ourselves how persuaded we are by Kuhn's skepticism about scientific truth.
He inherits a model of what real knowledge would be from the positivists and their fellow travelers.
Ideally, knowledge would be purely definitional, purely analytic, or purely observational.
We've seen over and over so far in the course that things are a good bit messier than that.
Observation and definition aren't as pure as we might have thought, and even if they were, we have to go way beyond observation in order to do science,
to have any interesting knowledge.
So if science is going to be thought of as putting us in touch with the truth or as giving us real knowledge,
a different model of knowledge is going to be required.
We're going to need the idea that having knowledge does not require stepping out of our theories,
observing the world unproblematically, directly, with nothing in between.
On such a picture, a theory won't be understood as an impediment between us and the world.
It'll be thought of more as a tool, a way of interacting with the world,
that allows us to build on and extend observational evidence.
We'll develop a project like that towards the end of the course.
It's a competitor to the views we've been examining, but it, like everything else, is going to face its own problems.
So, in sum, Kuhn provides a needed antidote to much of the positivist program,
but many of his problems stem from aspects of his view he shares with the positivists,
a conception of knowledge as direct, unproblematic observation, for instance.
So it's surprising how much Kuhn shares with the people he's criticizing.
In our next two lectures, we'll start examining the post-Kuhnian aftermath.
How did philosophers and sociologists deal with the Kuhnian Revolution in the history and philosophy of science?
