Lecture 22 Laws and Necessity
In this lecture we take a very different look at what laws of nature might believably be.
In our last approach to laws of nature and throughout the course we've been more or
less assuming a starting point of a kind of hume-inspired empiricism, according to which
observation just presents occurrences.
And laws of nature, on such a view, can only be patterns or regularities in experience.
We saw the best shot that this kind of classic empiricist approach can take to laws of nature
last time.
For empiricists, laws don't say anything different than accidental generalizations do.
They are both true statements of universal conditional form.
A law and an accidental generalization each say of all A's that they are B's.
What makes some statements of true conditional form laws rather than accidental generalizations
is that they get used in a certain way or fit into a certain system.
It is what is done with a true statement of a certain logical form that constitutes its
as it were lawfulness.
In addition to its truth and logical form.
But laws themselves have, as a matter of their content, just relations that are asserted
among objects.
All objects that are made of copper are objects that conduct electricity.
That's a pattern that we can observe in experience and, if we could solve that nasty problem
of induction, we're entitled to project that pattern into the future.
And so the empiricist credentials of such a view look pretty strong.
We're taking observation and we are generalizing it, and then we do something with certain
observation statements that allow us to treat them as laws.
Or our theories on the systems approach do something with certain statements about observable
reality that allow them to serve as laws.
And this generalizes somewhat to statements about unobservable objects like electrons
via the received view of theories and the empiricist approach to how meaning goes from
observation up to the theoretical parts of our theories.
Necessitarians about laws, on the other hand, take them to describe not the behavior directly
of observable objects, but tendencies or powers, not themselves observable, that explain observable
phenomena.
On this view, laws have a different logical form than they do for empiricists.
A law does not assert a relationship between objects.
It does not say, of all copper things, that they are electricity conducting things.
Instead, it asserts a relationship between properties.
It says something like, being made of copper makes for, or makes you, conduct electricity.
It's a relationship between copper-ness and electricity-conductivity.
But that sounds weird, it's because, against an empiricist background, it is weird.
You don't see the property of copper-ness, at least in the usual sense of seeing, and
if we follow Hume at all, we certainly don't see copper-ness making things conduct electricity.
Hume had insisted that experience only gives us one damn thing after another, and that,
as presented in experience, each event is distinct from any other event.
This view insists that some properties make other properties hold, some things make other
things happen.
So these necessitarians understand that they're going well beyond what the empiricist scruples
of somebody like Hume and the empiricist scruples of ordinary philosophy of science permit.
They are going behind or beyond observation, but they think they have solid reasons for
this.
They think that if there are laws of nature, they will not be the sorts of things that
can respect these empiricist scruples.
So necessitarians admit that experience only shows this piece of copper-conducts electricity,
that one conducts electricity, at best experience in a reasonably direct way, with induction
and some other friends, can show us that all copper-conducts electricity.
Necessitarians freely admit that experience does not, in a full-fledged sense, show us
that copper must conduct electricity.
Nevertheless they say, if it's a law that copper conducts electricity, we've got a very
different kind of statement than just that all copper does conduct electricity.
If all we have are generalizations about objects, if all we have are statements of the form,
take everything in the universe, if it's an A, then it's a B, then there are no laws
of nature.
So they insist on going beyond observation because they think it's at least plausible
that there are laws of nature, and that laws of nature go beyond observation, in a way
that the traditional empiricist view has trouble with.
According to this theory, laws do not describe or report patterns in experience, or they
at least don't merely do that.
Laws govern experience.
Laws don't just say what always happens, they say what has got to happen.
No matter how universal or how true a generalization is, all copper conducts electricity, all the
beer in my fridge is American, it doesn't say the same kind of thing that a law says.
We're here at the level of semantics, we're not talking about what we do with a statement,
we're talking about what the statement says.
And for necessitarians, a law says not just that you won't find any non-conductive copper,
but that you can't find any non-conductive copper.
Because being made of copper means you must conduct electricity.
So there's a kind of physical necessity.
Remember we've seen a couple times in this course, necessity comes in various flavors.
There's logical necessity or possibility.
It's supposed to be impossible in a very strong sense that there be a round square.
How many corners would a round square have?
And there's different kinds of lesser kinds of possibility and necessity.
If I played a one-on-one game of basketball with Shaquille O'Neal, it's no accident that
he'd beat me.
He sort of got a win in a certain sense.
But here we're talking about an in-between kind of necessity.
Physical necessity, such that being made of copper is not a matter as a matter of meaning
entailing conductivity, but it physically makes something conduct electricity.
And empiricists are mystified by this notion of necessity.
They think all necessity is linguistic necessity.
My dissertation advisor, when he was chair of the department, said the strongest kind
of necessity is administrative necessity.
It's much tougher than logical necessity.
It's much easier to make a round square than it is to convince a dean to do something that
the dean says is administratively impossible.
So empiricists want to know what we could mean by this idea of something physically
rather than logically requiring something else.
The idea of necessity or requirement is for them a conceptual notion.
Necessity happens within our theories or concepts or language, not out there in the world.
Necessitarians on the other hand assert that laws, anyway, if there are any, require relationships
of physical making.
This is the very notion that AJ Air had mocked as a kind of metaphysical hangover.
Air said the only reason we're tempted to talk this way is this sort of lingering idea
that the deity or some force behind nature laid down the laws and said, no, no, no, you
particle don't get to travel faster than the speed of light.
And that, he thinks, is an unfortunate remainder of intellectual history, not a sort of scientific
insight.
So nothing scientifically respectable could forbid things from happening or require things
to happen.
Science just talks about what does happen.
So necessitarians are talking a different kind of language from our classical empiricists.
A necessitarian says, given a contingent fact, it could be otherwise, right?
God could have made copper so that it didn't conduct electricity.
But given the contingent fact that being made of copper makes for conducting electricity,
it is necessary that a given bit of copper does conduct electricity.
So there's a contingent truth that makes other truths physically necessary.
And it's this notion of physical necessity that empiricists like air claim not to be
able to understand.
So the challenge for necessitarians is to try to make sense of this notion in somewhat
scientifically, if not directly experientially terms, experiential terms, sorry.
So one of the metaphors that Fred Dretsky, one of the leading necessitarians appeals
to is legal.
And remember, this was the very kind of metaphor that air had mocked, that to talk about a law
of nature sounds like a kind of decree.
And science doesn't study decrees that somehow linger behind the natural world.
So in Dretsky's model, the Constitution needn't have said, needn't have required, that the
President consult Congress before declaring war.
The Constitution is contingent on this.
It could have said something different than it does say.
But given what it does say, it's no longer discretionary for the President, the President
must consult Congress before declaring war.
The Constitution requires it, makes it happen.
That's the model here.
Something in nature makes something else in nature happen.
Like the systems approach, the necessitarian approach has certain virtues because it makes
laws of nature robust in a way that the simple regularity accounts, according to which a
law of nature is just a pattern in experience, couldn't distinguish laws from accidental
generalizations.
So the necessitarian account can handle the problems that plague to the simple versions
of regularity accounts.
So for instance, vacuous laws, laws that don't have any instances, looked like they counted
as genuine laws of nature on a simple regularity account because they were true statements
of the right form.
So there was trivial that all particles traveling faster than the speed of light are pink turns
out to be true on a simple regularity account.
For a necessitarian, that's no law of nature at all because of how demanding the notion
of a law of nature is.
For a necessitarian, a law says that the property of traveling faster than the speed of light
necessitates the property of being pink.
And that clearly is false.
Now empiricists are going to want to know how we know that that's clearly false.
We'll come back to that kind of worry.
But it's not a law, we have no problem excluding it from being a law if we're necessitarians
because it doesn't fit our conception of what a law is.
There's no relationship of making between the property of going faster than the speed
of light and the property of being pink.
So because this is a demanding conception of laws, we're generally not going to have
problems excluding flimsy looking apparent laws.
There's a problem that plagues simple regularity views, not demanding necessitarian views.
Their problems are going to come from the other side, as it were.
Like the deductive systems approach, the most sophisticated version of the regularity view
with which we ended last time, this view will permit laws that don't have instances if
they pass the stringent test.
There probably are no objects in the universe that actually slide down frictionless planes.
If there were any, they would meet a certain sort of law because the property of being
an object sliding down a frictionless plane does necessitate certain claims about how
an object moves.
So even if the property is never fully instantiated, there can be a law because there's the right
sort of relationship between the property of being on a frictionless plane at a certain
angle, of course, with a certain motion, and obeying certain laws.
Similarly, if the universe were Newtonian, which it isn't, being inertial necessitates
having zero acceleration.
There's the right sort of relationship between the properties.
And so laws that don't have instances can still be laws on this view because laws are
not directly about objects at all.
They're about properties that objects have.
So on this view, there's relatively little problem distinguishing laws from accidental
generalizations.
Being made of uranium necessitates, requires, being less than a mile in diameter.
Because you'll blow up if you try, as it were, to be uranium and more than a mile in
diameter.
But being made of gold does not require being less than a mile in diameter.
It might be the case that nothing is both gold and less than a mile in diameter.
But it's not required to be the case.
And so the former is a law and the latter isn't.
Now it's clear on this kind of a view that laws are discovered, not made.
The system's view has a very interesting position on this issue, right?
Laws are not made courtesy of any actual theorizing we do, but laws do fall out of our best possible
theory.
So they're kind of on the border between being made by us and discovered by us.
The Necessitarian view takes a clear stand on this.
The law is out there, it's a metaphysical kind of critter, and we discover it.
These views are metaphysically and epistemologically ambitious.
They refuse to constrain themselves within the limits of what experience more or less
directly shows.
And they think they're entitled to do this because of the payoff for good theorizing
of discarding these constraints.
So these relationships of necessity, of one property making another property obtain, explain
for instance why laws support counterfactuals.
On the regularity view, a law is something like all copper conducts electricity.
And it's not clear how we get from all copper does conduct electricity, which is a statement
in the indicative mood, it's a statement about what happens, to a statement if this pen were
made of copper it would conduct electricity.
So empiricists say that a law does support a counterfactual, but they don't have much
of a story about how the law supports a counterfactual.
We talked about this a little bit last time, their best explanation here is counterfactuals
are to be evaluated in terms of a kind of nestedness or importance in our web of belief.
But the necessitarians want to point out that the law is a statement about what always happens
in the world.
All copper does conduct electricity.
The counterfactual is a statement about what would happen in a different possible world.
And there's an inferential move there that's a little tricky for regularity theorists,
empiricists to explain.
And necessitarians think they have a much easier time here.
It's easy to see how we can get from being made of copper, requires, necessitates, makes
something conduct electricity.
That does seem to imply if this pen were made of copper it would conduct electricity.
Because we got the premise that coperness makes for, requires conductivity.
Relations between properties carry across possible worlds.
Any world in which something is copper is a world in which it conducts electricity.
If coperness carries with it conductivity.
And this same necessity explains explanation.
Necessitarians think that empiricists or regularity theorists have a hard time explaining why explanation
works.
Let me see if I can make that clear.
The fact that all copper does conduct electricity implies that a given piece of copper will
conduct electricity.
But to imply is not yet to explain.
Even to be implied by the best system of generalizations is not yet to explain according to a necessitarian.
The best system of generalizations just says, according to our best theories this sort of
thing always happens.
That's all the explanatory oomph, that's all the explanatory juice that an empiricist
can have.
And a necessitarian says that's not enough.
We need more for laws, we need more for explanation.
Being deduced from something, even being deduced from a lovely generalization, doesn't show
why something is true.
It doesn't explain.
Being deduced from something won't explain you unless you're being deduced from something
that already has explanatory force.
So for instance, if I said every marble in the universe is red, that doesn't imply that
I can't find a non-red marble, it implies that I won't.
But laws of nature say, make claims about what must happen.
It doesn't just say I won't find some non-conductive copper, it says I can't.
And that's a very different kind of claim.
One that goes farther beyond experience than the empiricists are quite willing to bite
the bullet and admit, according to necessitarians.
So for a necessitarian, laws explain precisely because they are not generalizations about
what always happens.
They are much stronger claims about what must happen, and the necessitarians think we should
get over that and discard the empiricist's scruples.
So this controversy between the systems approach and the necessity approach raises deep issues
about what is fundamentally explanatory.
Is it enough to say of something that it's the kind of thing that always happens?
Or to really explain do we have to in some sense say this sort of thing must happen?
And there are costs and benefits to each approach.
Empiricists and necessitarians have strong disagreements about the epistemology and the
metaphysics of a notion like necessity, of making happen.
Empiricists will raise the epistemological issue.
How can we ever see when something makes something else happen?
You're bringing in some kind of platonic forms, some notion of a thing called coperness that
must have some weird kind of existence in some platonic heaven or something like that.
We shouldn't be taking a notion like that scientifically seriously.
We should require that science constrain itself by what it sees.
You want to know how we can tell when we see something make something else happen or necessitate
something.
Any relationship of making has got to be grounded in some fact about what actually happens according
to empiricists.
Counterfactuals have to hold in virtue of something.
Coperness making for conductivity has to hold in virtue of some more basic fact.
And the way they would press this point is saying we know, at least sort of, what grounds
the must in the president must consult Congress before declaring war.
It's some kind of sanction.
The Supreme Court will slap the president on the wrist or the president won't get reelected
or something.
There's got to be some basis according to which the must holds.
And notice that's back to that metaphysical hangover idea that musts can only be some
notion of decrees, a law giver or a sanction.
So empiricists think that laws cannot float free about particular facts about what happens.
Necessitarians think that to say that something is a law is to say it imposes requirements
on what can happen and that goes well beyond what does happen.
Empiricists don't want us in science to be going that far beyond what does happen.
The empiricists will maintain that we have to build our laws and our conception of what's
physically possible.
What would be the case if the laws of gravitation were different?
All of that's got to be grounded pretty tightly in what's physically actual.
One way of making this point is to say any two worlds that have the same facts have got
to have the same laws.
The idea is if the laws can outrun the facts we'd have no way of factually testing laws.
We'd be slipping into metaphysics in the pejorative sense.
The laws would outrun any factual constraint on them.
So there's no change at the level of laws without some change at the level of more basic
facts.
The necessitarians are going to reject this requirement though.
The necessitarians are going to say, isn't it possible that the facts about what actually
happens are insufficient to determine the laws about what can and can't happen?
So imagine there are two particles that are extremely rare and have never been studied.
They have never interacted and they never will interact.
There is no actual fact about what will happen when they interact, but isn't there room for
the idea that the laws of nature tell what would happen if they ever were to interact?
They think the ambitions of science push it beyond the kinds of constraints of the possible
by the actual that empiricists require.
So there's deeply competing intuitions about whether science is constrained by all of the
actual facts.
Or whether sciences need to explain, to impose order and laws on things, requires it to stretch
evidence about what actually happens into claims about what could and couldn't happen.
Or what would happen if things that never will happen were to happen.
The necessitarians make a conditional claim.
If there are laws, there are true statements about relationships between, say, copperness
and conductivity.
These things go way beyond observation.
But if we can't make legitimate claims like that, then there are no laws of nature.
And so they rest on the intuition that science can discover laws of nature.
And so they find empiricism timid in its unwillingness to go beyond observation and say, we can think
our way on the basis of observational evidence to facts about what would happen in different
circumstances than the actual ones.
Which raises the question of whether, in fact, there are laws of nature.
And an important related argument offered by the philosopher of physics Nancy Cartwright
emerges here.
She suggests either that the laws of nature are false, but can be used to explain things,
or that they're true, but are useless for explaining things.
It's an unpalatable dilemma.
What does she mean?
Our most fundamental laws, she says, don't describe the actual behavior of bodies.
The law of gravitational attraction, put forward by Newton, only says how bodies would move
if only gravitational forces were acting on them.
But that's almost never, if at all true, there are generally, say, electrical forces
acting on bodies.
So almost never will we be able to say of an actual body that it will obey this law.
For the law to be true, it would either have to be tremendously restricted, it would have
to apply to only those bodies on which only gravitational forces are acting, and there
might not be any such bodies.
Or the law would have to be what philosophers call hedged protected by a Keteris Paribus
clause and all other things equal clause.
So we can make the gravitational law come out true.
But the strategy we use to make the law come out true threatens to rob it of any application
and of any explanatory power.
We need the law to apply to bodies if it's going to explain what happens with their motion.
And since all other things are hardly ever equal, a law that just says, here's how bodies
move according to the gravitational force, all other things equal, doesn't tell us much
about the actual behavior of bodies since all other things are hardly ever equal.
Cartwright thinks her approach is friendly to a necessitarian construal of laws.
On her view, laws of nature, or laws of physics, don't describe what actually happens.
They describe tendencies or powers that underlie or explain what happens.
The gravitational law does not talk about the actual motion of bodies, it talks about
gravity's tendency to produce motion in bodies.
And that is not itself a directly observable thing because they're usually interfering
forces.
So if the law were true about observable objects, it could explain them.
What it's true of is not about the observable behavior of objects, but tendencies of objects
to behave in certain ways.
And the tendency is not the behavior.
We saw this way back when we realized that fragility, a tendency or disposition property
doesn't reduce to actual instances.
It's something behind the instances that explains the instances.
It outruns experience.
Now Cartwright's opponents have a few options available to them.
They can try to say that the laws describe actual things rather than powers or potentialities
or tendencies.
The actual thing would be a component force.
What's the difference between saying that a gravitational law describes a real component
force versus saying it describes a tendency for bodies to behave in a certain way?
Cartwright's argument, which is enormously controversial, says that you can't treat
component forces as fully real.
Because if they were fully real, they would be forces in addition to net forces.
You'd be double counting your forces.
Net forces explain how objects actually move, but net forces are products of multiple tendencies
of objects.
The way an object actually moves is a product of a bunch of forces acting on it.
But you don't want to treat each of those forces as a different thing on top of the
net force.
But many of Cartwright's opponents think you can find a way, it gets metaphysically
a little tricky for our purposes, to count a component force as a thing that's not an
additional force that has to be added on top of the net force.
I think there's a more interesting approach here, which is we can use context to preserve
the truth of the unhedged law that here's how an object behaves if only the gravitational
force is acting on it.
So if I'm moving out of my house, I can say my house is empty, and if you and the real
estate agent come in and say, no, your house isn't empty, look, there are light bulbs
in the fixtures.
Well there's something in my house, and in a certain sense if there's something in
my house it's not empty.
But what counts as a thing in the relevant sense is specified by context.
To say that your house is empty in the real estate context is to say it's got no furniture
in it, it's not to say it's got no air molecules in it.
Or light bulbs.
Similarly, you don't falsify a law, like metal bars expand when heated, when you point
out that if somebody is hammering on both ends of the metal bar while it's being heated
it won't expand.
The law still holds what counts as holding is specified by context.
You don't falsify a law by saying that other things can override or impede it.
So in that view, gravitational forces have the effects they have, maybe they describe
tendencies, maybe they describe actual behavior.
But what the gravitational law says is specified by a context in which the theoretical statement
is connected to observation.
In the same way that whether I've said something true or false when I say my house is empty
depends on whether I'm doing a bizarre physics experiment, in which case it's got to be a
vacuum, or whether I'm just showing my house to a prospective buyer, in which case light
bulbs don't count as falsifying the emptiness of the house.
What really matters here is this is our deepest take so far anyway at the tension between
science's urge to constrain itself to the observational evidence, to not make claims
that themselves cannot be cashed out in experiential terms.
That's what stands behind the empiricist view.
You never see anything having to happen, you only see it happening.
And so they say if there are laws they'd better obey these empiricist constraints.
A law has got to be some kind of pattern in experience or something we can deductively
build up out of a pattern in experience.
But there's an equally genuine competing strand in science which says science explains, it
explores the structure of the world, it talks about how things would be if the universe
were different.
Science is ambitious and the ambitions of science suggest that something like a law
of nature doesn't just talk about what does happen, it talks about what must and what
cannot happen.
And if that's the legitimate role of scientific claims then we might have to jettison the
idea that science is strongly constrained by observation of what does and doesn't happen.
This tension, we've seen it recur in talks about meaning and about evidence and we're
going to see it throughout the remainder of the course because these are both internal
legitimate aspirations of science deeply difficult to reconcile with one another.
And we'll turn to a new kind of metaphysical problem here in our next lecture about whether
and in what sense things like biology might reduce to physics.
