Lecture 34 – Species and Reality
Last time out we got a small taste of what the philosophy of physics looks like and also
what issues about laws of nature, explanation and reduction look like from a standpoint
a bit closer to ongoing scientific work than that provided by our general survey of philosophy
of science.
We could of course have pursued a number of equally fascinating issues within the philosophy
of physics.
There's the issue about what the correct geometry of space is, whether and in what
sense space-time is a kind of object thing or stuff rather than a set of relations, and
a host of problems that arise within quantum mechanics.
We turn now to the philosophy of biology, probably the most rapidly expanding part of
the philosophy of science, and again we find a kind of embarrassment of riches.
There are questions about what the units of selection are.
Is it organisms or genes or species that get selected among, or sometimes do each of these
categories figure in selection explanations?
Do genes code for phenotypic traits, for traits at the level of observation, or is the relationship
between genes and proteins and traits more complicated than would allow us to say something
as straightforward as the idea that a gene codes for a trait?
We don't talk about the environment coding for a trait, even though it helps determine
what traits an organism has.
There's issues about to what extent our biological nature helps explain human behavior.
And there's the issue about the extent to which we have a conceptual grip on the notion
of what it is to be alive, or to be a living thing.
This is just a sample of course, and not all of those issues lend themselves equally well
to a half hour lecture.
So we're going to focus our attention in this lecture on the notion of a species, and
we'll use that as a window into several aspects of the philosophy of biology, and into general
issues in the philosophy of science, about classification, and the ways in which classification
tries to hold itself responsible to reality.
What is it for a classification to be legitimate, or correct, or to be scientifically applicable?
And what does that show us about the things classified in that way?
The species concept figures centrally in our thinking about biology.
That sounds like an empty truism, but it's a bit more interesting than it seems.
Because as we'll see, many people think that the higher level biological classes, sometimes
called higher taxa, genus, family, kingdom, that sort of thing, don't have any particular
role in biological thinking.
So the idea that the species is the classification that's of biological importance is noteworthy.
What kind of importance do species have?
Well, for one thing, they are fundamental units in the story of evolution.
Species are the actors in evolution.
Evolution is not especially concerned with individual organisms.
It's species that are born, that split into new species, and eventually become extinct.
Species are also fundamental to biological classification.
Species are supposed to have something biologically important in common.
Again, this sounds like a truism, but there's more going on here than meets the ear.
It's not obvious that the notion of species can serve these two masters equally well.
There's an assumption that whatever figures in the story of evolution will also figure
in classification, but it's not obvious that things are going to clean up as nicely as
that.
Evolutionary biologists want to understand how certain things happened, how a certain
process works, how organisms came to be the way they are.
For those purposes, it's okay if the notion of species ends up being pretty messy.
If rather different mechanisms can bring organisms together into groups that matter
for this story, the groups that undergo speciation, extinction, and things like that.
But a messy, multifaceted species category is going to be a lot less useful for classifying
purposes than it might be for purposes of explaining the history of organisms.
Biologists who are in the classifying business are interested in conveying information.
They need relatively enduring structures so that the classification tells you what to
look for if you want to identify a bird species, or what it's going to look like if you dissect
a certain kind of creature, and that's a different task than trying to accurately relate the
twists and turns of a particular story, namely the story of evolution.
So while there's presumably some kind of connection between the units that undergo
various evolutionary events, like speciation, and those that can be identified and classified
by examining the organisms themselves rather than their historical properties, we've already
managed to commit some philosophy with the idea of a species.
We've taken a category that we would have thought was pretty simple and natural.
We've made it look unfamiliar and puzzling and almost too headed, because it's got
to serve these classifying and these historical interests.
And as if the job of being a species concept is not complicated enough, species loom quite
large in our applications of biological thinking, for instance in our environmental protection
laws.
So if the category of species turns out to be problematic, that raises at least some
initial questions about the use we can make of this concept.
Why, if at all, are species rather than individual organisms, populations, genes, or what have
you?
Why are species the things at which preservation efforts should be directed?
I don't mean to suggest that there's no good answer to that question, I mean to suggest
that the question is perhaps more interesting to ask than we might have thought.
And there are additional reasons why reflection makes the species' category seem increasingly
puzzling.
For one thing, evolutionary change is, in an important sense, gradual.
New kinds of creatures arise via really quite small mutations in existing creatures.
Huge mutations of a sort that would clearly and decisively distinguish offspring from
a parent are highly unlikely to result in viable offspring.
Huge mutations just don't lead to creatures that can survive and reproduce.
So where are we going to find the distinctions of kind within a process that looks fundamentally
continuous?
Why is it that we find different kinds of creatures rather than a continuous, as it
were, spectrum of creatures within, say, the primates?
Just as there is impressive continuity across species, there is impressive variety within
species.
Conspecifics, that is, members of the same species, need not resemble each other in any
clearer or decisive ways.
There are butterfly species, the members of which mimic different other butterfly species.
So each of two butterflies from the mimicking species might resemble butterflies of other
species more closely than it resembles members of its own species.
And though philosophers like to use chemical elements and biological species as our clear
classic examples of natural kinds, it's far from clear that species work very much like
the chemical elements do.
There's nothing in a species that seems to answer to an atomic number that makes the
element the element it is.
There's no genetic, there's no phenotypic, there's no behavioral trait essential to
making something a member of the species of which it's a member.
Why not?
Well, there are all of these forces that tend to lead to biological change, things like
mutation and genetic drift, and they're going to tend to make it the case that there's always
a reasonable possibility, if not yet an actuality, that some member of a species could lose in
a particular trait, through, say, a minor mutation, and it wouldn't thereby forfeit its
membership in the species.
Nor are there in general traits that are unique to a given species.
This is different from the case of chemical elements.
Not only is it the case that all samples of pure gold share an atomic number, it's also
the case that no other substance shares gold's atomic number.
We've just seen that members of a species needn't share any particular trait, and it's
also true that even if they do, there's not much that prevents some members of another
species from also sharing that trait.
So one thing species don't seem to be is one of the things they're classically taken
to be, namely, natural kinds out there, united by a common and a distinctive essence.
Because that would require that the species have a property that is unique to it and essential
to it, and that seems to sit badly with the biological facts.
There are less demanding conceptions of biological kinds that species could be taken to face
fit.
These are kinds united not by an essence, but by stable clusters of certain properties
that work together in ways that would get too complicated for us to go into.
This is a reasonably popular view with those who want to put the notion of a species primarily
to classifying use, rather than to the purposes of understanding evolution, which is not the
main use to which the species concept gets put, as we'll see.
Even for classifying purposes, it's not clear that a view like this, though it's much more
permissive than the essential property view, this view still might not be able to do justice
to the range of traits and trait clusters that can occur within a species.
All this raises the issue of the ontological status of species.
If a species is not a natural kind in that full-blooded sense, a group of organisms
united by an essence, what is a species and what makes individual organisms part of a
species?
One answer to this question, more common among those who want to put the notion of a species
to evolutionary rather than taxonomic use, is really quite surprising.
The idea is that species are more like individuals than they are like classes of objects.
Why is that?
They require that a kind of spatiotemporal or causal connectedness constitute something
as a species.
If an identical copy of a Bengal tiger arose on a distant planet, somehow miraculously,
and were brought here, it arguably would not be a part of the terrestrial species.
If the evolutionary processes are central to what makes something a species, it's plausible
to hold that something has to be part of a lineage in order to belong to a species.
And a lineage is something like a thing rather than a class of things.
A lineage is something that is causally connected.
So in this view, it's literally true that species have a beginning and an end in time.
It's all but literally true, it's not literally true, that species are born and die.
They don't quite have to be organisms, but they are individual things on this view.
Species have a spatial location, a range, though that need not be spatiotemporally continuous.
And perhaps most importantly, species are constituted by properties at the population
level, not at the level of the individual organism.
Let me explain.
This is a crucial point, because this gives species a kind of reality, a kind of cohesiveness.
A species is a unit of evolutionary change, because it's the population, not individual
organisms, that bears many of the properties that matter to evolution.
The population can literally have a property like having recently lost much of its genetic
diversity, or having a trait that was once rare become prominent within the population.
If these are genuine and explanatorily important biological properties, they are born by populations,
not by individual organisms.
And these population level properties can change quite rapidly, and that's the explanation
for our sense that the boundaries between species are relatively stark, even though they
arise via very slow continuous processes of things like mutation.
This is how we can reconcile that gradualist picture, that picture of continuity at the
level of parent offspring biological relationships, while also making sense of the appearance
anyway that organisms seem to come in kinds rather than in a continuous spectrum.
There's no living missing link between humans and other primates.
So for instance, when a population encounters a serious new disease, there won't be much
change within individual organisms from before the disease arrived to after.
But the population will very quickly change.
It will become smaller, and it will equally quickly become characterized by having a much
higher percentage of its members resistant to that disease.
So the population changes starkly.
And so far as species are more like individuals than they are like classes of things, an individual
organism is more literally a part of a species than a member of it, in the way that my finger
is a part of me.
So the idea is that a lineage is more or less an individual thing, and so it has components,
not instances or members.
And so no similarity of form, no similarity of DNA or behavior can do the trick of making
something a part of a lineage.
That's got to be a matter of a kind of causal connection, a place in a story.
This brings us directly to the question of how we should best define species.
A surprising number of definitions of species have been proposed and are taken seriously
by biologists.
Though they were once common and are less common these days, phonetic species concepts
are a good place to start.
They group organisms in terms of similarity.
They can be genetic similarity, behavioral similarity, or morphological, that is bodily
similarity.
Similarity as we've seen over and over in this course is a tricky notion.
There are too many ways, for instance, that emeralds can be similar in color to the emeralds
we've already observed.
They can share the color grew, or the color green, or the color red.
And this is the problem that faces phonetic species concepts.
How is similarity to be measured, and on what facts is it to be grounded?
To what extent are we entitled to think of ourselves as tracking distinctions that are
out there rather than what we happen to care about when species membership is to be determined
by a similarity measure?
Intra-specific similarity, similarity within a species, as we've noted, is a good bit
less impressive than one might think, especially if you don't help yourself to the assumption
that members of a species must be deeply similar.
If you just look at queen and drone bees, they're members of the same species, but they
don't look or act all that alike.
And in many species, males and females aren't all that similar.
Furthermore, if the notion of a species gets determined by similarity, then species can't
get used to explain similarity.
But it seems that we'd sometimes at least like to explain similarity in terms of membership
in the same species.
So the once popular phonetic species concept is in a bit of trouble.
Much more popular these days is the biological species concept, according to which a species
is a group of organisms that can interbreed and produce fertile offspring.
Species on this view are characterized by the free flow of genes within a population.
This is probably the dominant species concept, but it has some problems.
As it stands, it's difficult to apply over time.
Let A, B and C be members of successive generations, and suppose that B is about equally similar
to A and to C. So B could breed with either A or C, but A and C would not recognize each
other as possible breeding partners.
So if A is the standard, then C is a member of a new species, since there's no possibility
of gene exchange, but if B is the standard, there's just one species.
Starts to look arbitrary how we divide a lineage up over time.
For reasons like this, proponents of the biological species concept apply it only at a time, not
over time.
But that means that in order to distinguish a species from just a lineage, however large,
they need an independent notion of a speciation event, in order to determine whether a creature
is of the same species as a given ancestor.
And this is provided by a notion of reproductive isolation.
It's a story about how species are born and how they preserve their distinctiveness when
a gene pool gets sufficiently isolated that genetic innovations can be preserved.
But this notion of reproductive isolation is a little bit tricky.
Reproductive isolation comes in degrees and not all kinds of isolation, for instance being
kept in a zoo should count.
Zoo animals are reproductively isolated, but that doesn't make them their own species.
Furthermore, they're ring species, which are characterized by each population being able
to breed with nearby populations, but unable to breed with more distant ones.
So that's got that transitivity problem that I was presenting as a problem for this
species notion over time that can happen at a time with a ring species.
To make a more purely philosophical point, modal notions like necessity and possibility
generally strike philosophers as problematic, and so we'd like to hear more about the sense
in which different populations are members of different species if they cannot interbreed.
A word like cannot always jumps into a philosopher's ear.
Empiricists, for instance, will want to know how claiming that two organisms cannot interbreed
is distinguished evidentially from just saying that they do not interbreed.
The most glaring problem with the biological species concept, at least as it stands, is
that it can't apply to creatures that reproduce asexually, which is arguably the most common
kind of reproduction among species on Earth, because it's defined in terms of mating and
that doesn't happen with asexual organisms.
Furthermore, gene flow is much easier among plants and among single-celled organisms than
it is among multicellular animals.
So the biological species concept is tailored to multicellular animals and might not apply
more generally.
Some biologists, for instance, suggest that there may be oak trees that have easier access
to the genes of nearby non-oak trees than they do to those of relatively distant oak
trees, which would make them members of the same species with the non-oak trees on certain
gene flow conceptions.
So the unity of a species, if these criticisms of the biological species concept are right,
has to consist in more than a protected gene pool.
Like the biological species concept, phylogenetic species concepts define species in terms of
a shared history, relevant to evolution classification system.
The biological concept involves a theory about the process whereby species are created and
sustained, namely reproductive isolation.
Phylogenetic species concepts are agnostic about this issue.
They simply appeal to patterns of common ancestry.
So they make room for the idea that other mechanisms than reproductive isolation can
lead to speciation events.
So they are silent where the biological species concept takes a stand.
But for that reason, they provide just a grouping criterion.
They group organisms together in ways that matter to evolution, but they don't provide
ranking criteria.
It doesn't tell us which groups, which lineages are genera, that is the plural of a genus,
which are species, which are subspecies, which are families, etc.
And it doesn't give us a principled way of applying these taxonomic categories.
Without some story about what constitutes a speciation event, this is likely to reduce
to the biological species concept.
We'll get back to the notion of classification and what it aims at after examining one more
species concept.
The ecological species concept identifies a species as a group of organisms sharing a
particular ecological niche.
And this has caught on a little bit these days because it looks like an attractive way to
handle asexually reproducing species.
The idea is that asexual organisms don't compete with one another for mating opportunities
– they don't mate – but they do for roles within an ecosystem.
So if something like this can be made to work, we have an analog of reproductive isolation
for asexually reproducing creatures, and it could play a kind of supplementary role with
respect to some of the other species concepts for sexually reproducing creatures.
Ecology, though, is kind of a new kid on the biological block, and this approach gives
a lot of hostages to fortune.
It raises questions like, how well do we understand the notion of an ecological niche?
Does that seem like a stable, enduring, explanatory biological concept?
And there's also the more direct problem of sometimes it seems that members of different
species sometimes compete for the same ecological niche, and so if we just have a pure ecological
species concept, we'd make those organisms members of the same species.
So the fundamental question here is how important it is to unify these different conceptions
of species.
Monists think that there is a single correct or at least a single best species concept.
Their hope or their assumption is that it's important to appeal to a single conception
that plays a distinctive role in understanding evolutionary processes on the one hand and
in classifying organisms on the other.
We need one notion to play that dual role in order to do important biological work.
So giving up on that ambition would be to abandon something central to biological thought.
The costs you pay if you adopt monism is that you run the risk of excluding genuinely explanatory
species concepts.
Sometimes interbreeding seems to be what's important.
Great advances in treating malaria were made when biologists discovered that there were
two apparently indistinguishable species of mosquito in the same geographical area, but
the two species were reproductively isolated from one another, and that helped them understand
why malaria was common in some mosquito infested regions and uncommon in others.
The mosquitoes that looked alike were members of a different species.
The way to tell that was by applying the interbreeding criterion.
But with diseases like AIDS, the valuable work is done by identifying morphology, by
looking at the critter involved, by examining intrinsic rather than relational properties
like with whom something breeds.
Do we want to commit ourselves to saying that there's a right way to identify organisms,
or do we want to say it depends on what you're trying to do, and for instance, if you're
trying to prevent disease, there might be different important kinds of classifications.
Now monists might try to capture everything legitimate about the other species concepts.
Notice this would involve a kind of ambitious reduction, like those we discussed back in
lecture 23.
To what might they reduce, something like the notion of a lineage.
It's hard to see how this is going to do justice to the range of organisms, for instance,
to both to sexually and to asexually reproducing ones, and also the variety of uses to which
the notion of a species is put.
If you try to reduce all of these to a single notion centering on a lineage, will we really
be able to distinguish species from subspecies on the one hand, and from higher taxa like
genera on the other?
So pluralists avoid this problem by saying that, let a thousand flowers bloom, there's
no problem having multiple conceptions of species that answer to different biological
interests.
The biomedical examples we just talked about is supposed to help motivate this kind of
approach.
Pluralism comes in a number of degrees.
Some versions are pretty limited.
They require that a species be some kind of spatio-temporally continuous lineage, but
hold that there are a number of equally appropriate ways of carving up the lineage depending on
what you're trying to do.
Other pluralistic approaches are more permissive than that.
They allow almost any grouping that does explanatory work in biology to count as a species.
That's starting to get pretty permissive.
It might allow other higher taxa, for instance, to count as species.
You're relying here also on a notion of doing explanatory work that's bound to be somewhat
controversial because not everybody's going to think the same things in biology need to
be explained.
But there are even more permissive criteria of species allowing non-biological notions
of species, so the kinds of the creation scientists might count as species for some largely religious
purposes.
And the purposes a cook might have for distinguishing onions and garlic from one another, and more
importantly from lilies, are just as legitimate on a very pluralistic approach as the biological
purposes that lead us to lump onions and garlic and lilies into a biological family.
The more pluralistic one's conception, the more it seems that one owes an account of
what makes different species concepts different species concepts.
The more different work is being done by them, the more the question presents itself, why
call all of these species concepts?
Furthermore, if one rejects monism, but also does not think that one can explain what makes
a bunch of different lineages or groups commonly species, then it looks like the best strategy
to adopt is to be a skeptic about the notion of a species as an increasing number of philosophers
of biology are.
They don't deny the existence of groups of organisms, of course.
What they deny is that there's anything in the world that is reasonably close to the
main uses to which the notion of species has been put, and which can distinguish species
from other biological classifications.
So there's all the biological stuff, but the notion of a species does not carve it
up in a way that we should care about.
Similar issues arise much more starkly with respect to the higher biological taxa.
Pluralists will stress the legitimacy of different purposes we might have in mind when
classifying organisms, while monists will point out that conceptual problems are going
to get in the way of many of these classification schemes.
Let's see how this works out.
A phonetic classification system is going to be similar to the phonetic species concept,
but applied here mainly for classification purposes.
It tries to convey information about similarity among organisms in a maximally efficient way.
So the idea would be that species are maximally similar organisms, genera are maximally similar
species, families are maximally similar genera, etc.
A related but distinct classificatory approach would be to classify organisms in terms of
evolutionary disparity.
This is simultaneously a historical and a morphological or bodily classification system.
So on this approach, a lizard species sufficiently different from the next closest species might
get put in its own genus, because we're trying to measure the extent to which it's disparate
from other lizards.
Finally, we might classify organisms in a way designed to reveal how evolutionary history
has gone.
We would classify organisms in terms of their ancestry.
This is called the clodistic approach to classification, and it's the most common approach.
Pluralists will be tempted to allow all three kinds of classification.
Depends on what you want to do, what you want to convey to people using your classifying
system.
The monists might worry about whether these deserve to count as legitimate classifying
systems.
So the phonetic system is going to run into problems about the unclarity of the similarity
relation.
Isn't there something peculiar about allowing that oysters and pigs could get classified
together as non-kosher animals?
That's not the kind of classification biologists should care about.
So the worry is that there's no principled way to measure similarity, and furthermore
that creatures that look similar to us may not be so similar.
And real similarity here would be measured in terms of the best species concept.
Similarly, one might worry about how well evolutionary divergence can get characterized.
Back in the day, somebody who classifying organisms placed human beings on the level
with all other mammalian species because we're just that special.
We want more objectivity imposed on our classifying schemes than this sort of notion of how disparate
one set of organisms is from another imposes.
The clodistic approach, common though it is, might focus too much on dissent and might
not make enough room for groups that are not united by a common ancestry, but play a genuine
role in explaining how evolution has gone.
So the non-marine mammals do not form a real group by clodistic standards.
They don't share a common ancestral species, but evolutionary history might group them
together for good reasons.
Some events that matter to evolution might have happened to all and only non-marine mammals.
So as we noted, clodistic classification groups together organisms that share an ancestral
species.
So the notion of a reptile is not a real clodistic group because there is no species that is
ancestral to all reptiles that is not also ancestral to birds.
But this notion of what it takes to have a real group does not vindicate any of the higher
level taxa.
All groups that share a common ancestral species are legitimate according to clodistic classifiers,
and all groups that don't are not legitimate.
A genus might name a real group, but there's nothing in reality that makes it a genus rather
than a family kingdom whatever.
As all this talk about what it takes to have a real grouping suggests, we're touching on
the same issues we talked about when we raised the distinction between hard and soft realism
in lecture 26.
Giving this some sort of biological content helps us see what's at stake, what's involved
in trying to do real scientific work with the notion of classification.
The one point I'd like to make about this is it's not just a matter of imposing one's
intellectual personality on the world.
Monus are not fascists who want to insist that everybody do things their way.
They're people who are impressed by the problems with various classifying schemes and think
we need to hold out for something better.
While pluralists are people who are impressed with the legitimate explanatory use to which
different classifying schemes can be put, each of them is onto something important and
internal to science.
It's not a matter so much of temperament as argument.
And next time we will turn to the philosophy of psychology.
