Lecture 4 Einstein, Measurement and Meaning
Having seen that it's no mean feat to settle on the essential features of science, we
return to our previously scheduled narrative. We saw in lecture 2 how an aspect of Einstein's
general theory of relativity served as a kind of momentous and inspiring example of
successful science for people like Popper. This time we jump a bit farther back in time
to Einstein's special theory of relativity. The crucial paper was published in 1905 when
Einstein was only 26. This was an enormous breakthrough in physics, but we're going
to be focusing on the philosophical implications, which are really no less enormous.
General relativity is indeed a wonderful theory, but special here means special case
of, not specially wonderful. The special theory concerns motion at constant velocity, motion
of objects not subject to any accelerating forces causing their speed or direction to
change. I will sometimes call this inertial motion. The general theory of relativity applies
to all motion, accelerated as well as constant motion, and so it's presumably the more special
in the sense of wonderful of the two theories, since it covers all of the cases. We can stick
for our purposes to the simpler case of special relativity.
One noteworthy thing about the history of this issue is that some of the ideas most
commonly associated with Einstein did not in fact originate with him. His genius, as
we're going to see, consisted not so much in inventing the components of the special
theory, but of reconciling them, which was quite the challenging task.
Now we're reasonably familiar with the idea that unaccelerated or inertial motion can
be detected and described only with respect to some reference frame. Galileo, early in
the 17th century, argued that objects will move the same way, whether the experiment
is performed on land or aboard a ship sailing at a constant velocity over smooth seas. Now,
you know that this must have been a thought experiment since you can't get a ship to actually
sail at constant velocity over smooth seas, but Galileo's point remains, you can feel
it if the ship changes speed or direction, you can tell that you're moving, but if the
windows are closed, there's no experiment you can perform that will detect whether you
are at rest or moving with a constant velocity.
This leads to what's usually called the principle of Galilean relativity. Since the laws of
mechanics can't tell one inertial state from another, it does no harm to call any state
of force-free or inertial motion a stationary state. So in that sense, the principle of
relativity does not originate with Einstein, he generalizes the Galilean principle of relativity.
Let's come at this another way. If you and I float past each other in the depths of empty
space, there's no way for us to tell which of us is really moving. We can say everything
we want to about how we're moving with respect to each other. One is tempted to say that
the question which of us is really moving doesn't have any meaning or doesn't have any empirical
meaning because there's no way to tell. Hold that thought. It's a bit more complicated
than that because there was reason to think that other parts of physics than the mechanics
of ordinary moving bodies, middle-sized dry goods as it were, might provide some meaning
to the idea of which kinds of motion count as real motion and which kinds count as mere
relative motion. In particular, the theory of electromagnetism, including light, provided
some reason for thinking that we could make sense of the idea of something like absolute
motion. How's that? According to the theory of the 19th century Scottish physicist James
Clark Maxwell, light is a kind of electromagnetic wave. And we will assume, along with Maxwell
and the best physics of the day, that this wave is transmitted through a medium. Waves
need some medium to pass through. This was called the ether. So light passes through
the ether like sound is transmitted in air or in water. So let's use sound for a moment.
Imagine a wave of sound transmitted through some water. If you're at rest with respect
to the water, you'll measure a speed for the sound that's the same in all directions.
And this is pretty much what we mean when we talk about the speed of sound in water.
The speed of a wave depends only on the properties of the medium through which it propagates
or moves. But if you start moving in the water, even if you're moving in a constant velocity,
the speed of the wave, relative to you or as measured by you, will be different in different
directions. Why? Because you'll be gaining on the wave in some directions of motion and
moving away from it in others. So it's just as if someone throws you a baseball, you'll
measure the speed of the baseball relative to you as greater if you're running towards
the baseball and less if you're running away from it. Now one trick here is to focus on
what you would see or measure, not what you know is really happening. You can't abstract
away from what you'd actually experience and talk about the speed of the baseball relative
to the playing field or something like that. That will only confuse you. So we're talking
about what you would experience or measure. So so far we've applied Galilean relativity
to wave motion. And now we're carrying this over to light. Light moves with a constant
speed through the ether, just like the speed of sound in water. Now if the Earth, along
with the rest of the solar system in the galaxy, is as it were swimming at a constant velocity
through the ether, we should be able to detect the rate of motion through the ether by looking
at differences in the observed speed of light, just as with the case of the swimmer and the
sound. We should be catching up to the light when we were moving in some direction, we
here being the Earth. And so the light should appear to be moving more slowly than it would
in the ether itself when we're catching up to it, and it should appear to be moving more
quickly than it would in the ether itself when we're running away from it. Now it's
not automatic that motion with respect to the ether is the same as motion with respect
to space itself. But it does seem like that's a pretty special reference frame, since the
ether pervades all of space. The ether is everywhere, light transmits itself through
the ether everywhere. So there's no violation of the principle of Galilean relativity here.
You can still treat all inertial or unaccelerated motion as relative. But light does seem to
have its own special or preferred reference frame. And the reference frame in which light
has a constant velocity, you might well call that space itself, or a reference frame in
from which you could measure absolute motion. As you might know, the experimenters could
not find this special reference frame. Much to their surprise, they always measured the
same velocity of light, no matter from what position in the Earth's orbit they were measuring
it. And that speed of light is the speed you'd expect if you were at rest with respect to
the ether. Light, experimentally anyway, seemed to be disobeying this Galilean relativity,
this principle that all unaccelerated motion is relative. And this is very strange, we're
a little over accustomed to it by now. It's as if you measure the same approaching speed
for a baseball, whether you're running toward it or running away from it. It's very peculiar.
So Einstein didn't discover the constancy of the speed of light. That's an apparent
experimental result from the late 19th century, and it was a feature of Maxwell's theory
from the mid 19th century that nobody had quite known what to do with. Einstein's contribution
is not, as it were, inventing or formulating these principles. It's bringing them together.
And this is a challenge because the relativity of inertial motion and the stubborn unrelativity
of the speed of light sure seem like they contradict each other. Let me elaborate here.
So we've granted the principle of Galilean relativity, which says it's meaningless to
talk of my moving at 55 miles an hour. I have to be moving with respect to something,
the police officer with his radar gun or something like that. But it does make sense, supposedly,
to talk of the speed of light in a vacuum now. We're going to drop the ether stuff because
we don't need it. Speed of light is 670 million miles an hour in a vacuum. That's not relative
to anything. And if I travel at light speed chasing after a light beam that's receding
away from me, it won't slow down or stop in its relative motion to me. It will still
be moving away from me at 670 million miles an hour. So it sure looks like the unrelativity
of the speed of light and the relativity of Galilean comparative motion contradict each
other. And if they do, one of them must be false. Pretty much everybody was sure that
the false claim was the one that the speed of light doesn't change no matter how quickly
you're moving with respect to it. But the experimental data wouldn't go away.
So scientists were forced to take some relatively desperate measures. One hypothesis was that
the earth dragged the surrounding parts of the ether around with it, so that the part
of the ether around the earth was always at rest with respect to the earth. That's why
you couldn't measure the speed of light's variations. Another hypothesis, a more popular
one at the time, but a pretty desperate sounding one, held that the measuring devices used
to evaluate the speed of light shrunk and clocks slowed down as the earth moved through
the ether. Now this sounds crazy. It's not quite as crazy as it sounds because the idea
was that the ether is what electromagnetic forces, light and other forces, propagate
through, and if it's electromagnetic forces that hold objects together, then maybe motion
through the ether would change the objects. But this is still a pretty desperate hunch
because it posits that the speed of light is changing, but we have no possible way of
detecting it. We will always be stuck measuring the same speed of light, even though the speed
of light, in accordance with Galilean relativity, must be changing. Einstein's genius consists
of accepting all of the experimental data. And what this requires is explaining away
the apparent contradiction between the principle of Galilean relativity and the unreletivity
of the speed of light. And Einstein overcame this apparent tension by critically examining
some of our most central concepts. What he discovered is that these principles contradict
each other only if certain assumptions that nobody had formulated or questioned about
space and time are in place. So the first thing Einstein does is generalize the old
principle of relativity. It's not just the Galilean principle where all mechanical experiments
are indifferent to motion at constant velocity. All experiments, electromagnetic, what have
you, are indifferent to motion at constant velocity. So the speed of light, like Newton's
laws of motion, doesn't care about motion at constant velocity. So this brings the
old principle of relativity and the absolute speed of light together, but it has some mighty
strange consequences. Observers moving with respect to each other will, even if all of
their instruments are incredibly sensitive and functioning properly. They will disagree
about such matters as whether one event happened before another event, how long an event took.
So in a certain sense, Einstein takes on the principle that measuring stick, shrink, clock
slow down, but the explanation is not that the speed of light is changing and we have
to figure out a way to make the experimental data fit with the fact that the speed of light
is changing. No, the speed of light is constant. Space and time are much weirder than we thought
they were. The clearest illustration of this that I know of is due to a physicist named
Brian Green, so I'm going to borrow with some modifications an example of his.
Two countries have been at war, and their presidents are about to sign a peace treaty.
President Enginfacer and President Caboosefacer, the names have significance that will emerge
shortly, but it's important because this is a very fraught political conflict that
neither president signed the treaty before the other one does. The treaty needs to be
signed in neutral territory, so the two presidents get on a train, moving of course at a constant
velocity, and right when the center of the car passes over the border between the two
countries, a light bulb goes off. President Enginfacer, of course, sits facing the front
of the train. President Caboosefacer sits facing the rear of the train. Each president
is equidistant from the light bulb, each president has very good vision and very good reflexes,
and each president signs the treaty immediately upon seeing the flash of light. Both presidents
are very pleased with this solution, very pleased with the execution of it. But interested
and very sharp-eyed observers from both countries are on the platform as the train crosses the
border, and they are horrified. They insist that President Enginfacer signed the treaty
first. Now, both presidents and all of their minions deny this charge. They were paying
very careful attention because this was a big deal. And the people on the train insist
that the signings were simultaneous. But the observers on the platform, who, like the observers
on the train, are allowed to think of themselves as stationary, point out that from where they
stood, President Enginfacer is moving toward the light, while President Caboosefacer is
moving away from it. Let's make sure we realize why this is true. From the standpoint of the
platform, the train is carrying Enginfacer toward the light bulb, and Caboosefacer away
from it. Since it's all moving in the direction of the train's motion, the light is being
carried from the standpoint of the platform towards Enginfacer and away from Caboosefacer.
It's important here to focus on what you see, not what you know about how things would
look on the train. You have to focus on your observations from the platform. So the observers
on the platform agree that the light moved at the same speed toward each president. But
they insist, you have to have very sharp eyes, of course, to make this out, that the light
had farther to go to reach Caboosefacer than it did to reach Enginfacer. And this is why
they saw Enginfacer sign the document first. So one set of observers says the signings
were simultaneous, another says President Enginfacer signed first. Well, who's right?
Everybody is. That's Einstein's innovation. It literally depends on where you stand, which
president you will have observed signing the document first or whether you will have observed
them signing simultaneously. Now, since both observations are correct, there's got to be
something wrong with the question, namely, when did the signing happen? It happened differently
in different reference frames. So Einstein shows that such questions are meaningless
in the same way that the motion in deep space with respect to each other is meaningless
unless and until a reference frame is specified. If you and I are in uniform or inertial motion
with respect to each other, your clock will seem to me to be running slow. Mine will seem
to you to be running slow. Of course, we have to be very, very astute in our observations
or moving very, very quickly with respect to each other if we're going to make any
of this out. But let's grant that. The sense that we both can't be right, it can't be
the case that your clock is running slow and that my clock is running slow. That comes
from the pre-relativistic assumption that Einstein is trying to help us get over. That
assumption is that there's just a plain fact about when something happened or how long it
took. So we've talked about time so far. Similar considerations apply to the measurement of
space. Meter sticks in your frame of reference are going to look shorter to me than they will
to you. Likewise, assuming we're moving with respect to each other, my measuring stick
is going to look shorter to you than it does to me. Each of them can't be shorter than
the other if we're talking about the same reference frame. But of course, each wouldn't
be shorter than the other if they were in the same reference frame. So here let me use
another example. This one's kind of a classic from all of the relativity books. We place
a pole next to a barn. Same reference frame, not moving with respect to each other. And
we measure them very carefully and assure ourselves that they're the same length. But
then somebody really fast, somebody who can run, I don't know, seven tenths the speed
of light, runs through the barn at a constant velocity carrying the pole. You and I stay
at the barn and watch. Now it's going to get weird. From our standpoint, the pole has shrunk.
And so we should be able to close both barn doors with the pole inside. But from the equally
legitimate perspective of the runner, because the velocity is constant, the barn is in motion
as are we, the observers in the barn. And so the barn has shrunk. And so it should be impossible
to close both barn doors with the pole inside. So we're going to run the experiment. Is the
pole going to end up being shut in the barn or not? Yes, both. You and I will see both
doors closed with the runner and the pole inside. While the runner, we're going to give the
runner eyes in the back of his head here. We'll see the farther door still open. And
the pole poke through the far door before he sees the near door close. The trick, we don't
have time to go through it in detail. And you don't need, if you're willing to take
my word for it, you don't need to understand this in great detail. But the trick is to
calculate how long it will take information traveling at the speed of light. And that's
the fastest information can go. How long will it take that information to reach each observer
from each relevant position in the barn? The relevant positions are the two doors and the
two ends of the pole. What Einstein shows us is if we actually calculate that and get
over our assumptions about how it's, how we know it's supposed to go, the appearance
of paradox disappears. We will see that if you just look at when light reaches each observer,
you'll see that there's no contradiction here at all. Now, obviously nobody has performed
the experiment of having somebody run at seven-tenths the speed of light through the barn. Doesn't
mean that special relativity has not been very impressively experimentally tested. There
are little particles called muons, which live, not biologically of course, they fail to disintegrate,
for about ten times longer if you accelerate them to near the speed of light. Time for
the muons, as measured by us, slows to a crawl. Now, fortunately for me, because I'm about
at my limits with this physics, the physics is of secondary importance to the philosophy
for us. The point is that other physicists assumed that they knew what they meant by
a concept like simultaneous or having a certain length. Special relativity shocks us and shocked
them only because we think we have space and time figured out much more thoroughly than
we in fact do. Much of Einstein's achievement involves linking the concepts, simultaneity,
length, very tightly to experience and measurement, and denying that we can legitimately use these
concepts when they're disconnected from experience and measurement. This idea exerted tremendous
influence on physicists and philosophers. And it's this idea that occupies philosophers
for the first couple decades, not exclusively, but largely, how to link our scientific concepts
properly to experience and measurement. So we're going to turn to more explicitly
philosophical considerations and ask in what way a concept must be cashed out in experiential
terms, in measurement terms, if it's to count as scientifically legitimate. And the first
major move in this area comes not from a professional philosopher, but from, like Einstein, a philosophically
inclined physicist, a Nobel Prize winning physicist named PW Bridgeman, wanted us to
learn the lesson of special relativity. And he thinks the lesson is a conceptual lesson.
So it's kind of a call to arms, never again says Bridgeman. Our concepts are going to
be allowed to prevent us from seeing what nature tries to show us. That was the point
of special relativity. Nobody could see that the experimental data was right because they
had a theory between themselves and the data, and Einstein thought his way through the theory.
The way to prevent this from happening again is to be sure when we use a concept that something
in nature answers to that concept. Now how do we do that? Bridgeman offers a view called
operationalism, which says that we must define each scientific concept entirely in terms
of the operations we would use to detect or measure instances of the concept. So what
we mean by length for Bridgeman is exhausted by the measurements we take of length. We
don't mean some philosophical definition like length means taking up space. That leads
to bad metaphysical theories of space. What we mean by length is, you want to know what
the length of something is, grab your trusty meter stick, and place one end of the meter
stick at one end of the object. And if the object is shorter than the meter stick, look
for a certain number. That number is the length. If the object is longer, then you've got to
start over and start from where the last meter stick left off, you all know how to measure
things. That's the length measuring operation. And Bridgeman thinks if we confine ourselves
to the operational meaning of terms, we won't get into the kind of trouble that we needed
a genius like Einstein to cure us of. Had we insisted on an operational definition of
simultaneity, we'd have realized that we don't have a good way of measuring it for
events that are at a distance from one another. Now, if cell phone signals could move infinitely
fast, then you and I could just call each other and talk while something's going on.
And it wouldn't matter how fast we're moving with respect to each other or how far away
we are from each other. We'd be able to agree on which events were simultaneous. But since
no signal can move faster than light, there won't be any way of measuring simultaneity,
at least what we thought we meant by simultaneity. And here's Bridgeman's point, if we don't
know how to measure it, we don't know what we mean by it. We can measure simultaneity
using light signals. I won't go into the way you'd set up an experimental apparatus to
do that. But if we do that, we'll realize the moral of the barn example and the train
example, which is that observers moving very quickly with respect to each other can't agree
on when two events are simultaneous or whether two events are simultaneous, if we define
simultaneity operationally. So we'd never have been shocked by this. So let's try applying
operationalism more generally. Strictly speaking, each operational procedure should be identified
with a distinct concept. So you've got the concept or operation of temperature as measured
by an alcohol thermometer and the different operational concept, temperature as measured
by a mercury thermometer. Officially, since we're using different measuring devices, we
change the subject whenever we change operational procedures. Why? Because on Bridgeman's view,
the procedure is the meaning. Now, this isn't a fatal objection. It's going to be a problem
for Bridgeman. So far, Bridgeman can just say he wants us to understand that we're taking
a risk whenever we identify temperature as measured with an alcohol thermometer and temperature
as measured with a mercury thermometer. It gets a little worse than this because it's
not clear how we should individuate operations. Very strictly speaking, using blue litmus
paper while wearing a white lab coat should count as a different procedure from using
blue litmus paper while wearing overalls. There's something different involved in the
measuring. It's not clear exactly how Bridgeman's going to approach this. I assume he would
say that ideally we would distinguish these procedures. We don't usually just bother or
get around to doing so. How comfortable Bridgeman is entitled to be with the assumption that
it doesn't matter what color the clothing of the laboratory worker is when you're measuring
the acidity of a liquid, that's a problem we're going to return to in a moment. But
right now we're still fleshing the view out. Another thing to notice about Bridgeman's
view is it requires a basic vocabulary in which operational definitions can be given.
What do I mean by this? Operations have to end at something that doesn't require further
operationalizing. So you can talk about placing a thermometer in liquid. That's part of the
temperature measuring operation. Another part of the temperature measuring operation
is removing the thermometer from the liquid. Another part of that operation is holding
a thermometer in front of your face and looking at the scale. But we can't operationalize
everything. It had better end in some kind of look and see and write down the number
that doesn't itself require further explanation of what that means. So Bridgeman is helping
himself to the assumption, as virtually all scientists do, I'm not putting this forward
as an objection, that some phenomena are directly and unproblematically observable. And so those
don't need to be operationalized. There's some base level at which you can just say
look and see and write it down. And you stop there. So I'm granting Bridgeman that assumption,
at least for now, but we should know that this is pretty different from the conception
of observation that we saw at work in Karl Popper's philosophy. Bridgeman is assuming
as Popper would not assume that there's a special language or level of observation
that is available for the purpose of explaining theory and that that observational language
itself does not stand in the need of explanation. That when you get to the look and see stage
everything's okay. And that can be used to explain other things without itself standing
in the same need of explanation. So I'm just noting that difference. We'll be coming back
to that a couple times through this course. Operationalism for a while in the 20th century
was enormously influential in many scientific disciplines. It continues to be influential
in some, especially psychology, where diagnoses are sometimes explicitly operational. To say
that a patient is depressed, to psychologists of a certain school anyway, just means that
the patient scores below a threshold on a certain test. They don't want to let you
mean anything else by that at all. The motivation for this is pretty straightforward. Psychology
is a tricky business. It's complex. We want the terms to be regimented, so everybody
uses a term like depressed in the same way. And so they appeal to an operation, a test,
a measuring device, to clarify, to show the links between experience and the proper use
of the term. The question is whether the links are too tight. Most philosophers think that
operationalism is a too stringent way of trying to tie down our concepts in experiential terms.
And the problem you're going to run into if you're an operationalist is that if we restrict
our conceptual resources this way, we're either going to cheat, we're going to smuggle in some
kind of meaning that isn't operationally legitimate and assume we know what we're talking about in
the way that Einstein warned us about, or we'll deprive ourselves of meaning we need in order to
do science. We'll see some problems with this whole approach a little later. Right now I'm just
focusing on problems with the specific operationalist version of the approach. So let's try to
operationalize weight using a pan balance. Alright, so place something on this side,
place something on that side. If they have the same weight, the pans will balance. Whichever
one falls lower weighs more. This assumes that there are no additional forces acting on the
pans. If somebody's got his finger on one of the pans and pulling down, that's going to throw off
the measurement. But how can you operationally specify there are no additional forces operating?
You can build in a check and see if anyone has his finger on the pan balance operation. You can
build in the check and see if there's a magnetic field operating on the pan balance operation.
If you can explain these in operational terms, you can build them in. But there's going to be a
gazillion such possibilities. It's hard to shake the idea that what we mean by weight isn't whatever
the outcome of the pan balance is. We've got some idea of what we mean by weight that the pan
balance is supposed to be tracking. Because otherwise we wouldn't be able to rule out all of
these other factors from influencing what the pan balance reads. A similar problem is going to arise
if you identify the outcome of two different operations, like using litmus paper wearing a
lab coat or using litmus paper wearing overalls. Our confidence that the two different kinds of
thermometers measure the same stuff tracks this idea. It's also tracked by the idea that there
are changes in temperature that are too small to measure. The idea that temperature is as it were
out there being tracked by these operations, not being constituted by these operations. So one last
illustration, if you tried to use a thermometer on the surface of the Sun, it would explode and you
would die. We can try to figure out how to build a device that would accurately measure temperature
on the Sun. But there we're using the notion of an accurate temperature measuring device. We're
helping ourselves to a notion of temperature and we've given up on reducing the notion of
temperature to what we can actually measure. But that was supposed to be the point of
operationalism. The point of the Einsteinian Revolution was supposed to be you can't help
yourself to content that runs beyond measurement. So Bridgeman, under the influence of Einstein,
is onto an attractive and important idea. As we'll see next time, this general idea has a long
philosophical history and we're going to see how philosophers had for centuries been responding to
these issues that physicists had just now made newly urgent.
