These lectures are part of the Great Courses series. They are produced by the teaching company.
The Great Courses cover a broad array of university level disciplines. The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in just weeks.
Browse our catalogue or website and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just 30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lecturers are university professors carefully selected by the teaching company and its customers for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
These lectures are titled, Philosophy of Science, Part 1.
The lecturer is Professor Jeffrey L. Kasser.
Dr. Kasser is an assistant professor of philosophy at North Carolina State University.
He received his BA from Rice University and his MA and PhD from the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor.
Dr. Kasser was the first recipient of the John Dewey Award for Excellence in Undergraduate Education given by the Department of Philosophy at the University of Michigan.
While completing his dissertation, Dr. Kasser taught at Wesleyan University.
He then moved on to Colby College where he helped direct the Integrated Studies program and received the Charles Bassett Teaching Award in 2003.
Professor Kasser's dissertation concerned Charles S. Pierce's conception of inquiry.
The classical pragmatism of Pierce and of William James serves as the focus of much of his research.
He won the 1998 essay prize of the Charles S. Pierce Society for his essay, Pierce's Supposed Psychologism.
He has also published essays on such topics as the Ethics of Belief and the Nature and Importance of Truth.
Dr. Kasser prepared the course guide that comes with these lectures.
The course guide includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a glossary, biographical notes, timeline, and a bibliography.
To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to follow along with the outlines or review them before or after each lecture.
Lecture 1 Science and Philosophy
Hi, I'm Jeff Kasser from North Carolina State University in Raleigh, North Carolina.
One classic way of beginning a lecture, especially perhaps a philosophy lecture, is by defining our key terms.
This is how our patron saint in the discipline Socrates is often understood.
He would tell his interlocutors, we can't talk about virtue until we know what virtue itself is.
Now, our key terms are science and philosophy. I'm hoping you'll let me let of slide for now.
But there's an apparent problem here, and this problem might explain why his contemporaries were tempted to kill Socrates.
How do we come to know enough about virtue to feel entitled to talk about it?
In our case, how do we come to know enough about science or about philosophy in order to feel entitled to perpetrate philosophy upon these ideas?
Now, putting issues about the interpretation of Socrates aside, it's nice to have a rigorous understanding of our project right at the start.
On the other hand, requiring a rigorous understanding right at the start makes it awfully hard to get going.
So in our case, it's perhaps unsurprising that getting clear about the nature of science is itself one of the major philosophical issues within philosophy of science.
And as we'll see, it's not an easy task. We'll spend our next two lectures pursuing without quite resolving this issue.
And it's perhaps even less surprising that it's hard to get clear about the nature of philosophy.
Questions about the proper business of philosophy are themselves perennial, perhaps the perennial, philosophical questions.
Even within the philosophy of science, we will see quite incompatible views about the nature and about the role of philosophy.
So not only would we have to know quite a lot about the philosophy of science in order to define the discipline,
we'd also have to come to some difficult decisions about what the discipline should be.
On the other hand, we can't get going without some sense of what science and philosophy might believably be.
Fortunately then, definitions aren't quite what we need.
Rigorous definitions are the outcome of good philosophizing, not a precondition of it.
What we need is a reasonably clear and reasonably simple statement of a question and some good reasons for getting interested in that question.
And that's not so hard. Science is special, and we'd like to understand what's special about it.
We can clarify this issue quite a lot without reaching for something as grand as a definition.
We need to start from some idea of what counts as a science, but we only need some clear cases of science in order to get started.
And we have some unproblematic cases before us. Parts of physics surely count as science.
Maybe the theoretical parts, far removed from experimental confirmation, shouldn't count. We can worry about that later.
Maybe economics counts as a science. Maybe it doesn't.
We do need something of a rationale, however, because we're not interested, or at least equally interested, in every sense in which science is special.
If, as the stereotype would have it, scientists share an especially unfortunate fashion sense, that's not the kind of distinction about science that we're interested in.
The notion of science as an astonishingly successful enterprise gets closer to the root of our puzzle.
But not every way in which science succeeds is of direct concern to us here.
We humanity's types are notoriously jealous of how good scientists are at getting grants, but that's not quite the sense of success at issue when we're philosophizing about science.
Even the amazing technological successes of science don't quite get at the root of the puzzle.
Computers and airplanes and such have surely transformed the world, and they surely suffice to show science's importance, but they don't yet show the special kind of importance that science has.
In order to appreciate the special kind of importance that science has, we need to introduce a philosophical term.
The intriguing importance of science is epistemic.
Epistemology is a fancy Greek word, meaning the theory of knowledge and justification.
Philosophers are professionally incapable of doing without this word, I'm afraid.
Now, there's no need to worry here about just what counts as knowledge.
Because we're doing preliminaries, we just want to get started and we start by noting we have a special epistemic confidence in science.
This special confidence manifests itself in a number of ways.
It helps explain why scientists get those grants of which we're jealous, why we're confident that airplanes won't crash,
and why we pay special attention to doctors about what to eat, to ballistics experts about criminal trials, to climatologists about global warming.
Now, we think that other enterprises, from mathematics to art, deserve serious intellectual respect.
But no human enterprise has told us so much, about so much of the universe, as science has.
And so it's natural to find ourselves wondering what, if anything, unites the disciplines we call scientific, and explains this distinctive epistemic success.
Now, I'm not asking you to buy that science is successful in this way, most people I think do, but not everybody we will discuss buys this.
I just need you to think the question is tempting, that it's worthy of serious consideration.
And for those of you who do buy this premise, the puzzle deepens when we reflect that our confidence in science is itself subject to rather severe limitations.
There are questions we think science can probably never answer.
It can tell us quite a lot about embryonic stem cell research, but not whether such research is morally permissible.
There are a lot of questions science can't answer, at least for now, and not just what was happening a millisecond after the Big Bang kind of questions.
Also, the does a glass of wine a day help prevent heart disease kind of questions.
We get answers to these, but they prove not all that enduring.
Each study is contradicted by another study two years later, telling you to behave differently.
And how much confidence do you really want to place in those commercials that promise to use a scientific method to help single people find their soulmate?
Even when we clearly do have a good scientific answer, it often turns out to be wrong.
One noteworthy fact is that many widely accepted successful theories in science, in clear cases of science, are now known to be false.
The wave theory of light, for instance, was accepted by nearly every competent physicist in the late 19th century, but it turned out to be wrong.
So the special epistemic status of science, this is the root of our puzzle, looks more intriguing the longer we look at it.
But is philosophy the best place to try to discover what's epistemically special about science?
After all, lots of disciplines can make contributions to our understanding of what's distinctive about science.
History can tell us how science differentiated itself from other disciplines and can tell us quite a lot about how scientific controversies began and ended.
More generally, the history of science tells us what's been done that has worked so well.
Sociology can tell us a great deal about what science is doing that seems to work so well.
It tells us how science manages to generate agreement, how it manages to focus and control disagreement, for instance.
The psychology of science is somewhat less developed, but give it time.
Maybe psychologists can someday tell us important things about the upbringings or even the brains of successful scientists.
Let's contrast these disciplines with philosophy.
Philosophy does not have its own domain of facts.
We're not concerned with the past, we're not concerned with social relations, we're not concerned with brains.
So we first need to say a bit about what we philosophers do, and then we'll turn to the question of how philosophy can help us understand what's epistemically distinctive about science.
Now the best characterization I know of philosophy comes from a former teacher of mine named David Hills.
Philosophy, he says, is the art of asking questions that come naturally to children, using methods that come naturally to lawyers.
So in philosophy we ask big, unembarrassed questions and give small, and by small I mean carefully distinguished, laid out in detail answers to these big questions.
To a first approximation anyway, the excitement of the discipline comes from the juiciness, the provocativeness of the questions,
but progress in the discipline comes from turning the big questions into smaller, more manageable ones.
Etymologically, philosophy just means love of wisdom.
Clarifying big questions has always been a central part of the discipline, but more than that used to be included.
All the scientific disciplines were once considered part of philosophy.
But when enough of the childlike questions, like why do things fall toward the earth,
seem to have answers that no longer invite lawyerly distinction, mongering, and controversy, the new science is born and leaves philosophy.
This happened to physics in the 17th century, to biology in the 19th, and to psychology at the beginning of the 20th century.
Now this leaves philosophy not only with its own fields, in which the childlike questions and lawyerly disputations never quite go out of style.
Ethics is, for instance, an example.
But also with important intersections with scientific disciplines.
A question like what is space seems simultaneously a philosophical and a physical, in the sense of within the discipline of physics question.
Note, by the way, that the bold questions and the careful distinction mongering work pretty well together.
If you don't want to sound like a small child or a big pothead when you ask what space is, it helps to explain that you have in mind a contrast,
like between the view that space is nothing over and above the spatial relations objects bear to one another,
like being part of a family is just bearing certain relations, like the cousin relation, to certain other people.
There's no family stuff beyond those relations.
Similarly with space, it's just a set of relations.
On the other hand, space might be something more thing-like, something more like a container, in which things hold these relations.
Now philosophy involves a pretty useful set of skills.
I happen to be married to a philosopher, and when we get into a fight, we're getting into a fight about a big, exciting question.
We tell each other, here's what you said, here are seven things you might mean by it, and here's why each of them is wrong.
We turn the big question into a bunch of small questions.
By the time we make up, we're pretty clear about exactly what we agree about.
And that's a useful skill to have in real life, as well as in the academy.
And the question with which we began, namely, what's special about science, is itself one of those bold, child-like questions.
It invites distinction mongering, and so it has never found a home within a science.
I'd like to give you some other examples of questions about science and about particular sciences that alike exhibit this tendency towards being big questions that need to be worried into small questions.
So some of these are questions that remain entirely within philosophy.
Some are questions that have left the ancestral home to go off into a new young science and come home to do laundry every once in a while.
So they are questions within philosophy and within physics or biology.
And we'll spend some time wrestling with each of these claims at various points in our course.
An obvious one is, how are scientific claims justified?
Under what conditions are we entitled to generalize from a sample, these bits of copper have conducted electricity,
to a whole population, enormously bigger than we've sampled, and say all copper conducts electricity?
Under what conditions are we entitled to infer from the fact that certain people smoked and got cancer, that smoking causes cancer?
How do we get from the evidence to these grand, exciting conclusions?
A similarly big question about science is, does it explain or does it merely describe?
People have taken both of those views, we need to figure out what the difference between those is before we can proceed to answer a question like that.
Another big question about science, what is a law of nature?
You hear about physical laws all the time.
How does a physical law differ from a true statement in science that has the same sort of form, but doesn't at all seem like a law?
All copper conducts electricity seems like a potential anyway, law of nature.
All the trees in my neighbor's yard or pecan trees doesn't have that same feeling.
But let's say they're both true, they have the same, in an intuitive sense, logical form.
What's the difference?
An example of a question that has a foot in science and a foot in philosophy would be, does our notion of biological species reflect real differences in nature,
or is it just a convenient way to classify organisms?
Now what's the difference?
We have to worry these big questions into smaller or more manageable ones and then we can get somewhere with them.
Now perhaps facts from other disciplines can help us answer these questions, whether they can is itself a major philosophical controversy.
But they can't do so before we bravely ask these simple questions and start worrying them into clear and manageable forms.
In this way philosophy can perhaps anyway claim to approach more directly than other disciplines do, the question of the special status of science.
Now I'd like to clarify this picture of the relationship between philosophy and science by contrasting it with two more influential, more common, in some ways more detailed, conceptions.
It was for a long time widely believed that philosophy should provide an intellectual foundation for the sciences.
I can note just a couple of the many and complex reasons for this.
It was thought that real knowledge would have to be grounded on something more certain and more solid than observation and experience, which are of the fleeting and changeable.
Similarly many people thought that phenomena could only or at least best be understood as manifestations of a kind of divine will or order.
So for instance, in order to understand why rocks fell to earth, you had to understand that that's where they belonged. This is part of Aristotle's physics.
So insofar as human reason was capable of understanding the world, big questions about purpose and function come first, and that gave philosophy a kind of priority.
Darwin made some serious mischief for this view. We'll touch on that issue starting in lecture three and intermittently throughout the course.
But it's an important and influential view historically.
In addition, geometry once served as the model for all sciences, for all knowledge really.
And it was thought that sense experience could never yield the kind of security and systematic character that typified geometrical knowledge.
At least it couldn't do so without a lot of help from philosophy.
Real knowledge, real science should start from truths of reason, necessary truths clearly perceived, like that parallel lines never intersect, not from observations and experience of the changeable.
So observations on such a view can yield knowledge, if at all, only by finding a place in a philosophical system that itself has a grounding in something deeper than experience.
But this view now seems decidedly old-fashioned, because philosophy's children have accomplished so much that they've really changed the rules of the game.
They have far surpassed the intellectual prestige of their parent, much perhaps to the chagrin of myself and my colleagues.
Physics is now a paradigm of knowledge, philosophy is not. Whatever exactly philosophy might be, she is no longer the queen of the sciences.
We can then ask a question at the other end of the spectrum, what might philosophy have to offer science, if not a foundation?
Does science have any use for philosophy at all?
All factual questions, one might think, are ultimately questions for some science or another.
Any questions that aren't scientifically answerable are in some sense flawed.
Now this could still leave some room for philosophy, and even for philosophy of science, if one thinks, as many people do, that facts and values are deeply distinct from one another.
In my experience, most of my scientist friends think that philosophy of science concerns the ethics of animal experimentation, issues about how to share credit for group research.
Such questions is that.
Now philosophers of science, in fact, generally leave such questions in the capable hands of ethicists.
We will talk about values in this course, but the values we'll talk about are mainly epistemic values, the simplicity or elegance of a theory, the objectivity or openness to new evidence of a researcher.
Those are in some sense value questions, but they're not questions about moral value.
I'd like to suggest that this challenge, that suggests that philosophy has nothing to offer science, helps itself to a starker distinction between doing science and doing philosophy than we perhaps want to begin from.
In the 18th century, the followers of the British physicist Isaac Newton and those of the French philosopher and mathematician René Descartes got into quite a tussle about gravity.
Newton could do some great stuff with his notion of gravity.
He could give you quantitatively precise predictions.
He could tell you how to drop bombs on people you don't like.
Not bombs in the modern sense, but cannonballs.
But he couldn't tell you what gravity was.
Gravitational force is transmitted instantaneously across vast reaches of space.
It pulls, but with no rope.
And this seemed to the Cartesians utterly unscientific.
It seemed to them like voodoo, just postulating some mysterious force with no way to explain how the force operates.
The Newtonian said, it's not our job.
We're going to tell you how objects move.
We're not going to tell you what makes them move.
We're just giving a name to that.
Now, is this a controversy in physics or in philosophy?
That's not a question that seems to me to have a clear answer,
so we don't want to assume that we can mark off the distinction between factual questions which are scientific
and philosophical questions which are somehow something else.
After all, the assertion that all factual questions are scientific
itself looks like a philosophical assertion,
in which case it looks like it undermines its own status as a serious or factual question.
I mean, after all, which branch of science determines which questions get to be scientific ones?
This example shows that it's devilishly hard to avoid doing philosophy,
and that's an excellent reason for trying to do philosophy well.
I won't go so far as to say that philosophy is quite unavoidable.
David Hume, an important 18th century philosopher from whom we'll be hearing more,
said that after philosophy overheated his brain, he would go play backgammon.
You can go play backgammon and avoid doing philosophy.
What you can't do is reflect while being sure to avoid philosophy.
When we reflect on our undertakings, when we reflect on the status of science,
we'll see that science can't be free of philosophy any more than baseball can be free of physics.
So in one sense I'm suggesting, it's possible to do science without doing philosophy.
One doesn't need to do any heavy lifting in epistemology to be a good biologist,
and biology's intellectual legitimacy surely does not depend on a philosophical justification.
They don't come to us to ask whether what they're doing is legitimate or important.
Similarly, a good pitcher needn't have studied any physics,
and if the pitcher is good at striking people out,
his teammates and managers won't much care whether the physicist
can give a good explanation of why the knuckleball works.
But in another sense, it's not possible to do science without doing philosophy.
The boundary between science and philosophy itself only gets drawn by doing philosophy.
Science can't escape the relevance of philosophy any more than baseball can escape the relevance of physics.
Sometimes, reflection on a particular scientific project, like how to classify animals,
presses pretty directly towards reflection on what one's discipline is trying to do and why.
Analogously, sometimes, trying to improve your knuckleball presses on reflection towards the physics of baseball.
So that's how questions that are simultaneously scientific questions and philosophical questions arise.
Sometimes, we want to reflect not in baseball, but on it.
We might want to understand, for instance, how people, mere mortals, can throw so hard and hit a ball so far.
That's a perfectly worthwhile project. It's not as good a project as our project is.
Why? Because science is enormously more remarkable than baseball is, and I say this as an avowed baseball fan.
And philosophy of science is enormously richer than the physics of baseball is.
Enormous, intriguing disagreements about what makes science special remain for us to render precise and wrestle with.
A lot of good philosophy of science was done prior to the 20th century.
I, in fact, do a lot of my research on the philosophy of science of the 19th century.
But most philosophy of science these days gets done in terms of a vocabulary and a set of problems
framed by a group of thinkers called the logical positivists, also known as the logical empiricists.
Both positivism and empiricism are terms that emphasize the distinctive role of observation and sensory experience in their views.
Now, though logical positivism is now mostly dead, it figured centrally in the rise of philosophy of science as a subdiscipline, as a part of philosophy.
And the live views in the field are best approached by seeing how they arose out of logical positivism.
Prior to the positivists, individual philosophers did philosophy of science, but there wasn't a field called philosophy of science.
And so their plan for the discipline remains with us, and their vocabulary for posing questions remains with us.
So, while we will certainly acquaint ourselves with some earlier views,
our course will center around the rise and fall of the positivist program.
This is a program that originated in the German-speaking world around 1920,
and which dominated philosophy of science in the English-speaking world well into the 1960s.
Sadly, however, I can't promise you a course with quite that clear a structure.
Philosophy of science is a big and complicated field, and like any part of philosophy,
we can't understand a view without frequently pausing to raise critical objections to it.
So we're going to need roughly to make two passes through this material,
so that we can integrate some critical worries as we present the material.
The first pass actually begins not quite with the positivists, but with Karl Popper, a contemporary of theirs, Vienna, circa 1920, and a distant intellectual cousin.
He offers the most influential and really surprising answer to the most basic of our questions,
what makes science science.
And his answer is very much not that scientific hypotheses are supported by lots of observational evidence.
We'll start to approach his answer next time.
We then approach positivism via the work of Albert Einstein, scientific hero both to Popper and to the positivists.
Einstein showed that we have to be able to explain the very meaning of our scientific terms by recourse to observation.
Some obvious seeming statements about space and about time had Einstein showed no experimental meaning at all,
and physicists and philosophers were astonished to see the damage that had been done by a certain conceptual approach to physics,
and they wanted to show how these things could be done differently.
So the positivists expended great energy trying to develop this notion of what it takes for something to be scientifically meaningful.
Questions that go beyond experience in some ways seem as such unscientific.
Whether human beings have souls might be a perfectly lovely question, but it's not a scientific question.
I'm relying on an intuitive sense of science here.
While on the other hand, questions that go beyond experience in other ways, are there good reasons to believe in quarks, do seem quintessentially scientific.
And so the question with which the positivists wrestled is, can science say everything it needs to say without saying more than it can say?
The positivists' approach to this problem simultaneously answered questions about the nature of philosophy, what philosophy might believably be.
For them, it is a conceptual discipline akin to mathematics and logic, and deeply different in methodology from the sciences.
Those are empirical observational disciplines. Philosophy has no facts, has no observations.
It aids the sciences by clarifying their concepts for them.
It's a pretty modest conception of philosophy when you think about it.
We then turned from issues about observation and meaning to similar issues about observation and evidence.
We saw one of these earlier. How, if at all, can there be a scientific method that allows us to go from small observed samples to grand conclusions about unobserved cases and even unobservable objects like quarks?
Can anything other than observational data count as evidence for the truth, or truth of a hypothesis or a theory?
Hypothesis and theory I'm going to use as more or less interchangeable terms.
A hypothesis is a sort of smaller, simpler version of a theory, but that's the only difference I'll have in mind.
So we might ask, for instance, does the simplicity, elegance, or explanatory power of a theory count as evidence for its truth, or is that just a reason to like it that doesn't show it true?
Note, by the way, that calling something a hypothesis or a theory is not to say that it's particularly wobbly or epistemically thin.
People go around saying of evolution or various other views that it's just a theory. That's not how the term theory is used in science.
We grant that we could be wrong about anything that we claim. You could be wrong in thinking that you're listening to me right now. You could be having a very peculiar dream.
So in that sense, the hypothesis that you're listening to me is a hypothesis. It could be wrong.
But that's not to say that it can be dismissed for being just a hypothesis.
We then turn from the positivist to the work of Thomas Kuhn and his emphasis on the history of science rather than on its supposed logic.
Kuhn suggests that science couldn't and shouldn't be governed by logic and method in the way that the positivist thought it was.
Kuhn thinks he can explain why science is uniquely successful, a uniquely successful way of investigating the world, without crediting science with being nearly as rational, as cumulative, or as progressive as people had thought.
As you might imagine, critics held that deprived of a special scientific method, science could only be madness.
On the other hand, there were people who thought that Kuhn did not do a sufficient job of deflating science's pretensions to be a superior way of knowing the world.
Since these thinkers largely deny the presumption from which we started, namely that science is epistemically special, a discussion of their views provides a fitting way to end our first narrative.
We then return to positivism and begin with the issue of explanation. Loosely speaking anyway, in order to explain something you have to go behind or beyond it.
How, if at all, science can explain things while respecting its need to constrain itself within the resources provided by experience is a huge issue that will occupy us in the second half of the course.
This discussion leads us through an examination of some notions that are critical to the task of explanation, that of a law of nature, which we raised earlier, and that of one thing causing another.
You don't see objects cause each other, so how does science make use of that notion?
Finally, we ask about an especially ambitious and important kind of explanation. In what sense, if any, does the discovery of DNA allow genetics to reduce to molecular biology?
And does biology reduce to physics? In what sense are they about the same stuff?
This tension we've seen between the ambitions of science to explain, to discover laws, to unite fields, competes with its insistence on confining itself within the bounds of experience.
This tension gets resolved very differently by a group called scientific realists than it had by the positivists.
Realists find ways to relax many of the constraints on which the positivist had insisted that science confine itself within the bounds of the experiential.
The realist can then say, as the positivist cannot, that science theorizes about quarks in exactly the same way it does about unobservables, about tables.
So unobservable objects are not second-class citizens any longer, for this philosophical view.
But of course there's a price to be paid, the distinctive virtues, that science, as the positivist conceived of it, attained courtesy of this tight connection to experience, have now been forfeited.
As a result, a different conception of the relationship between science and philosophy accompanies scientific realism.
Where the positivist sharply distinguished philosophy from the empirical disciplines, the realists think of philosophy and science as on a continuum.
We ask the bigger questions, they address the smaller ones, but we're in the same business.
On this view, science can be used to help answer philosophical questions about science.
And at this point we can bring our two stories together.
We can ask whether the scientific study of science appears to vindicate, or to undermine, science's pretensions to objectivity and truth.
The course then closes with a two-part coda.
We examine the probabilistic revolution that has made such a difference to recent philosophy of science, and we ask whether that allows us to reframe issues of objectivity and justification.
And then we end by looking in some detail at examples from the philosophy of physics, biology, and psychology, to apply what we've learned from general philosophy of science,
and to examine some of the philosophical issues that arise within particular sciences.
And then we'll end with a conceptual geography showing how our smaller puzzles have arisen out of our big, open-ended questions.
Now we begin next time by seeing whether we can come up with a clear, rigorous statement of what's distinctive about science.
Thank you.
