you
So my talk will be actually divided in three parts.
The first part will be a new geometric paradigm, which is in fact a geometric paradigm which is underlying all of non-competitive geometry.
And when I say new, it's a little bit of exaggeration because it goes back to the beginning of the 1980s when I introduced it.
And however, it's new with respect to Riemann's paradigm.
And the main feature that it has is that it is basically quantum.
Namely, it sits inside the quantum formalism.
So what is it? In one word, it's just an algebra of operators which is acting in the inner space.
And in that inner space, you not just have the algebra which is actually represented as operators in the inner space,
but you also have an unbounded self-adjoint operator.
And it is this operator which actually will play the role of the metric.
So this is the self-adjoint operator, which is not bounded in there, unbounded.
So the first part will be dealing with this new geometry paradigm.
And I will explain what are its roots.
It has three absolutely fundamental roots.
One, the first one will be what is a manifold?
This looks like a very simple question, but mathematically speaking, it has a very fancy answer.
And we shall see it.
The second is that through their single index, if you want, there was an understanding of what is k-homology
and this plays a fundamental role in this stuff.
And the third one will be the measurement of distances.
And the fact that even in physics, there was a drastic change of the measurement of distances
which was done in the 1960s, which was replacing the meter bar
by the wavelength of the hyperfine transition of the cesium 1 over 35,
which is something of the order of a microwave of the order of 3.5 centimeters
which completely changes the measurement of distances.
So this will fit exactly with this.
So the second part will be, if you want, the bottom up sort of sequence of events which happened.
And this was in collaboration with Mayhew, my collaborator, Alishan Sidin.
But then a collaboration with Matele Marcoli and with Walter Ronson-Locombe.
So I mean, that part, what we did was we used the new geometric paradigm
to actually understand the structure of the space or spacetime.
By the way, I will always be working Euclidean.
Don't bother me on that.
So that the structure, the fine structure of spacetime is actually more complicated
than just the continuum, the ordinary continuum.
There is a fine structure, and this fine structure will uncover that.
And this fine structure actually is detected by a product structure.
So it's a product of the ordinary continuum, the ordinary manifold structure,
by a finite space, f, so f will be a finite space.
But because the paradigm fits with non-commutative stuff,
this finite space will be described by a triple where the algebra actually is not commutative.
And the algebra that we found after a lot of interaction, as I will explain,
is following its algebra af, which is 2 by 2 matrices over quaternions,
plus 4 by 4 complex matrices.
This is the one we found.
And, by the way, the operator d there will be given by the Euclidean couplings.
In fact, in most fancy, I mean, when things evolve and so on,
but sort of very close to the right answer,
then what we found out is that by taking spectral invariance,
so which we call spectral action, of this geometry,
then we get the standard model coupled to gravity.
So we get the full action function of the standard model coupled to gravity.
But we also get the very tiny, very important details of the standard model,
which is the X-mechanism, the d minus c of Feynman and Delman,
and the CISO mechanism.
Well, the CISO mechanism actually comes from the fact that we have,
for the neutrinos, we have master, which are not only Eukawa master,
but Majorana master also.
So the third part, the third part would be,
you see, when we were doing this bottom-up approach,
there didn't seem to be any reason that the story would stop somewhere.
And there seemed to be the fact that we are getting more and more details
from the Lagrangian of the standard model coupled to gravity.
But there didn't seem to be any reason why this should stop at some point.
You know, there could be an infinite number of variations on that.
And finally, just in 2014, we found what, I believe, to be a crucial clue,
and we found this with Slava Mopadov and Alisham Sadiq.
And, I mean, this clue, I hope, I mean, I really want to reach that point,
because in that clue, what will happen, what will happen is something that can be simple,
which we didn't think of before, which is that, as I will explain immediately,
you know, this framework quantizes the finite attraction,
which is called Keomer.
And then, when we understood that we could quantize the dual class, in case theory,
then what happened was a perfect explanation for this algebra.
Abstract explanation from pure geometry.
You see, this algebra is very strange, because if you look at the dimension of the other ears,
this is dimension 16 and this is dimension 32.
So it looks like a very bizarre mixture.
However, as I will explain, there is a beautiful, simple, completely from geometry
explanation of this algebra here.
And so, when it gives you, it gives you a slight variant of the standard model.
It gives you a party-salam model, where you have a SU2 left and a SU2 right.
Okay, but I mean, this is better, because it's actually asymptotically free.
It's like the smallest extension of the standard model, which I don't know.
So I want to explain that, and I didn't want to write slides,
because I'm sure I can learn a lot of things from the audience.
And also, once you have written slides, you cannot change your route.
So here, what I have done, if you want, I have sort of shown you what is the basic plan for the lecture.
Okay, and now, okay, I mean, if you have some questions and so on,
or if you think that I'm getting a little bit too mathematical, don't hesitate to stop me.
Okay, and especially in the first part.
Especially in the first part, because what happens, if you want, in the first part,
is that the routes of this notion of spectral triple are, in fact, quite deep, mathematically speaking.
And, I mean, they really go back, can you tell to your neighbor to stop looking at his computer?
Or you can go out of the room, I mean, you know, I don't mind.
If you want to do something else, please go out.
Okay.
Now, okay, so let me start.
Okay, so you see, the main question that one can ask in order to understand the first point is what is the manifold?
Now, implicitly, this question didn't arise in the first day of the conference,
because, for instance, you were trying to get manifolds from nets and so on,
you know, Carlo was trying to get manifolds in another way and so on and so forth.
So, somehow, you know, it's very important to understand, conceptually, what is manifold.
Of course, you can do a manifold by a recipe.
You can glue charts and so on.
And that's a recipe. That's not a good understanding.
Okay, so what is manifold?
Imagine I give you a space X and I ask you, can I say that X is manifold?
Well, the first thing you can say is that if it were manifold, it would have a certain class in homology,
with questions in there, such that when you take the cut product with this class,
you get an isomorphism, which is called precariduality.
Okay, so in fact, there's a sort of weakest notion.
Why Z? It can't be anything.
What?
Why Z?
No, Z is very important, because Z is like the universal ring.
Do you mean that we start with the C?
No, no, but Z is contained in any ring, so forget it. Forget it.
Okay, now, so, no, no, if you take C, you forget torsions, which is very bad.
Then you take the sphere spectrum.
You could also take the sphere spectrum and work.
Yeah, yeah, okay, but that's exactly what I'm going to say.
So once you have this, then there is a result of speedback.
Okay, so this is a good point.
Okay, so there is a result of speedback.
I don't want to enter into the points where you take the fundamental group and you take flat bundles
and so on, ignore that, take this manifold to be simply connected.
It's a space X to be simply connected.
To avoid all these details.
Now, by speedback, what you know is actually you can embed X in some Rn
and get a normal bundle, stable, stable, normal bundle.
But it's a strange bundle.
It's really a strange bundle.
It's something which is called the spherical vibration.
Okay, and these spherical vibrations, they are classified by some space which is called Bg
and that space has a stable amount of groups of spheres.
The half idea that you should have in mind is that you are still very, very far from a manifold.
Why?
Because the normal bundle of a manifold is really an orthogonal bundle.
It's a vector bundle.
Okay, and the problem is really expressed by mathematicians.
I don't want to enter into the details.
Forget about the details.
The problem is expressed by mathematicians by an exact sequence.
Well, what you do is you take the corresponding classified space for each sort of refinement of this Bg.
So here you have topological manifolds and this means that your space was giving you a map from X to Bg
and if you could lift it here, you could actually turn it into topological manifold.
If you could lift it there, you could turn it into a PL manifold
and if finally you could lift it there, you could turn it into a smooth manifold.
Okay?
So that's the picture.
Forget about the details, please.
Okay?
Now, the first big, big step in big discovery is the discovery in the 60s which is due to the denistry one
and which is at the root of this.
Okay?
So denistry one, in the stasis, so I'm not sure if it's in the stasis, but I mean it was working with big balder.
I'm not sure that the result I'm going to say is in the stasis, but what it proved is that except of the prime two there are some subtleties.
But a PL bundle, a PL bundle is the same thing as a spherical vibration together with a KO orientation.
Okay?
So denistry one found that what we mean is what is a KO orientation.
Okay?
Now we are re-entering into the right stuff.
Because if you think about denistries as that, what does it mean?
It means that having poignant duality in the ordinary homological sense, with coefficients like that, is not the right thing.
What you mean is to have poignant duality in another theory which is different from ordinary homology and which is called KO homology.
Okay.
Okay.
Now what is the link between KO homology and spectral triples?
Let me explain that in a few words.
Okay?
So what is the link?
Well, the link came from a discovery of Athea and Singer when they were working on the index.
So Athea and Singer, okay?
Okay.
They, you see, they proved something which has been suggested by Gelfand, which was a formula for the index,
that actually would cover what Tom had done, what Ilsebrook had done with Ilsebrook, the Manrock formula and so on,
and would be purely operator theoretic.
And as a consequence of their work, what they discovered, in fact, is how to represent KO homology.
See, KO theory was developed by Athea and Rothenrich.
So KO theory is something which is not so difficult to understand.
KO theory, what is it?
I mean, you take a space, again, x, and you classify vector bundles.
Okay?
You classify vector bundles.
That's not so hard.
But what about the dual theory?
It was known from abstract nonsense that if you have a corvology theory, like KO theory, it has to have a dual theory.
Okay?
That's always true.
But, okay, I mean, you know, it's nice to know it exists.
But then you want to realize the cycles there.
And what Athea and Singer showed, actually, Athea on the vector, which is very important,
which is called abstract and hypocritical.
Okay?
This is Athea.
This is Athea.
And, I mean, what did he do?
What?
You see, he showed that an abstract KO homology, it's no KO, I mean, it's KO homology, cycle,
is actually given by a representation of the algebra of continuous functions on the river space,
and then not the same D as I have, but an operator which is bounded,
and which satisfies the probability that it commutes with C of X modulo compact parameters.
Let me not enter the details.
This is not important.
What is really important is that, you know, at the beginning of the 80s, I was aware of this.
I was aware also of the fact that the Athea notion of KO homology cycle, all the K theory,
were still working when the algebra A is no longer commutative.
In fact, you know, a K theory is much easier to understand if you don't require the algebra to be commutative.
What is the reason?
The reason is that when you talk about a vector bundle, a vector bundle is nothing else,
but an idempotent in the n-bio matrices over the continuous functions.
Okay?
And so, I mean, in general, if the space is connected, you don't have any idempotent in the continuous functions,
but you do have idempotent in the n-bio matrices, and the n-bio matrices, they don't commute.
Okay?
So, I mean, the right language to talk about K theory is already non-commutative.
But the beauty was that, you see, the algebra in all these notions still need to be commutative.
And then I understood, at the beginning of the 80s, that actually, by making the operator of Athea,
and bounded, then one could reach the metric aspect.
And what is the metric aspect?
The metric aspect can be understood by just writing one formula.
Okay, so what is this formula?
You see, first of all, you have to understand that the type of geometry I'm talking about
contains Riemannian geometry.
How does it contain Riemannian geometry?
Riemannian geometry?
If I have a Riemannian manifold, m is the gv nu that we knew.
Okay?
And so, okay, let me assume it's spin.
Okay?
What do I do?
I associate to it a spectral triple, which is what?
I take functions, functions of m.
It's got a complex value of functions of m.
Okay?
That's my A.
I take the inverse space of L2 spinors.
Okay?
Okay?
And I take, for the operator of D, I take the dirac operator.
Okay?
So now you can tell me, okay, fine, you have done that.
You have replaced it by such an algebraic, so quantum mechanical triple.
But how do you compute distances?
Well, there is a formula for computing distances.
And this formula is actually kind of, it's dual to the ordinary formula.
How is it done?
So the formula is the following.
It's that if I have two points, and I want to compute the geodesic distance.
So this is the ordinary Riemannian geometric distance between two points A and B.
How do I compute this?
Normally, you compute this by taking the infimum of an arc.
Okay?
Normally, you take the infimum of the integral on the arc of ds.
Okay?
And ds is square root of gv nu dx mu, whatever.
Okay?
Now, you have to take the infimum of the arcs.
Okay?
So I...
So you are going from A to B?
Yeah, from A to B.
On the past, gamma.
So gamma is going from A to B.
Okay?
Now, so you take the infimum of a series.
Well, this requires a space to be connected by arcs.
Okay?
Now, I'm going to write a formula which gives you the same result, but doesn't require
the space to be connected by arcs.
And what is this formula?
This formula is very, very simple.
I get the distance from A to B by taking not the infimum.
This is a kind of Kantorovich dual of the standard formula.
What is it?
It's the supremum of the difference of the function of A minus the function of B.
Okay?
Whereas the only condition of the function is that its commutator with D is less than
one in norm.
Now, how does this work?
You see?
First of all, look that the dimensions are high.
D has the dimension of a mass of an energy.
And so this condition will have the dimension of a length, because it's the inverse.
Okay?
Now, this condition exactly means that the subnorm of the gradient of the function is
actually less than one.
So it's telling you exactly that the function is a Lipschitz function of constant one.
And you can reverse the argument.
It's very simple.
Okay?
But now, this formula makes sense on Kantor's sense.
It makes sense on totally discontinuous basis.
It doesn't require that the space you are dealing with is connected by arcs, which is
of course a big requirement.
Okay?
So we have this formula.
We have this formula.
And as soon as you have this, you can say, okay, fine, you recovered Riemannian standard.
Why does it give you even in the Riemannian case?
Well, in the Riemannian case, it gives you invariance, which you didn't know before.
I claim, I mean, the first invariant that it gives you, everybody knew it, it's a spectra
of the Dirac operation.
These are gravitational observables.
They are global.
They are local.
Okay?
And they are gravitational observables because they are invariant under the film
offices.
But it's well known that they don't suffice to give you balance of space.
Okay?
Now, it turns out, it's a theorem that if you take the functions which are just measurable
functions, measurable functions acting in the upper space, then you can recover the full
Riemannian geometry from this triple.
Now, the measurable functions, they form a fundamental algebra, which is cognitive.
And all fundamental algebra acting in the same, which are of this type, acting in the
same, they are all isomorphic.
The only thing that matters is the multiplicity, namely the dimension of the speed order.
So, they are all the same, yes.
Any question?
Yes.
Is this what a physicist would say defined distance through a two-point correlation?
Yeah, exactly.
Let's just say that will go ahead.
Yeah.
Okay.
But let me rebound on this, what you say, because it's very important.
Okay?
Let me rebound on this and say the link with the physics because it's crucial.
Okay?
And then I'll come back.
I shouldn't forget to come back, but the link with the physics is the following.
The inverse of d is, in fact, what I call ds, the line element.
Riemann was able to define ds square, but I can define ds.
And there is an extraction of square root, which makes a choice of the spin structure.
Okay?
So, exactly what Dirac wanted.
Sure, which is exactly what Dirac wanted.
Okay?
But now let's do a little bit of physics.
What is this ds?
It should be very tiny.
Okay?
What is it?
Let me write it down.
We all know it.
It is a fermion propagator.
So, when you write down the final graph, you have fermions between points and you have
these little things.
Very small.
Okay?
Yeah.
But what do we gain?
We gain something fantastic, which is that we know from quantum physics that it doesn't
stay like that.
It gets stressed by the quantum corrections.
And this means that this geometry can tell you how to follow up with the quantum corrections.
Namely, how the geometry, which is defined by this stuff, actually undergoes some change
just by the interaction with the quantum fields.
And that interaction will be a formal power series in powers of each power, which we don't
know yet what it means globally.
But it will be of the form that you replace your d by d times a function of d square over
lambda square over lambda square over some scale.
And when you do that, many things could happen.
The dimension of the space could depend on the scale.
Because how do you measure the dimension of the space, the metric dimension of the space
from the growth of the eigenvalues by the Hermann-Weier theorem?
Okay?
So, the dimension of the space could depend on the scale.
All right?
So, we are now at extreme flexibility with this.
Okay?
We have much more flexibility than we had before.
But let me come back to what I was saying.
So, what I was saying is that actually now the von Neumann algebra, this place, okay,
no longer creates trouble because it no longer depends on A.
It's a theorem of von Neumann, which is amazing, which is that all commutative von Neumann
algebra without atoms are isomorphic.
Okay?
It's a very, very nice result.
So, it acts in the universe space.
Even its representation in the universe space is unique.
So, the only thing that matters is how, what is the angle between this operator which you
know from its spectrum and this algebra.
Okay?
And this angle is, there is a way to measure it, which is well known to physicists because
they do that when they compare the mass eigenstates for the upper fermions, the upper quarks,
with the mass eigenstates for the lower quarks, but moved up by the willow spin group.
And they do that, they call that the CKM matrix.
So, if you want, what I am saying is that there is an additional invariant which you
can illustrate in human geometry and which is complete.
If you know now the spectral invariant plus this invariant, you would know the geometry.
Whereas there are many examples where you have the same spectral invariant, but not that.
Okay, so what is the strategy that we use in general?
Now, the strategy is very simple.
The advantage is that we have a new paradigm, this paradigm has this flexibility and more
over it can handle non-competitive spaces.
So now you can ask, okay, so what about the period two if you want and why were we enticed
to look at the non-competitive stuff?
Well, the reason is so far.
The abstract reason is also like simple to an arc might be I shouldn't raise this.
So, if possible, I will write here.
It doesn't matter.
Okay, so what is the reason why there is some advantage, there will be a much stronger reason
in part three, but why is there some advantage in taking the algebra A to be non-competitive?
Okay, that's another question.
What is this reason?
Okay, this reason is the following.
It is that if you stare at the lagrangian of gravity coupled with matter, okay, and you
don't have any prejudice.
I don't have any reason.
I might have prejudices.
So, imagine you don't have any prejudice and you look at the lagrangian of gravity coupled
with matter.
Then you will find out the following.
You will find out that if you look at the invariance group of this lagrangian, okay,
then it's not true that this invariance group is a different office group.
It's a little bit bigger.
Okay, and what is it?
So, I mean, the invariance group is actually bigger than the different offices of your
manifold, M, because it contains the gauge transformations of second kind.
So, what it is really is maps from M to the gauge group, whatever, call it H that you
have chosen, a semi-direct product by different offices.
You see, the different offices act on the gauge transformations which depend on the point
by shuffling them, okay?
So, it is a semi-direct product.
Now, okay, of course, if we are very hopeful, we say, might be there should exist some manifold
transformation and such that its different offices of M should be equal to this group,
okay?
This is a calizacline idea.
Calizacline idea.
Okay?
However, there are mathematical sayings which tell you this doesn't work.
And why doesn't it work?
It doesn't work because this group is not a simple group.
It has the normals of group which is huge, the group of gauge transformations of second
kind.
And our mathematical sayings are completely general.
Tell you that whatever manifold you take, the correct component of identity in the different
offices is simple.
What is the second type?
What is the second type?
Second point dependent, okay?
Turn, turn, turn, turn, turn.
All right.
So, this is what you have.
And so, it seems that the calizacline idea is a little bit too stark by this.
But the beauty is that now, just take n by n matrices over the smooth functions, okay?
Or the functions of whatever kind you want on your manifold, okay?
And now, try to compute what if n was one would be the different office and group.
Namely, it's the automorphism group of that.
So, this is my algebra.
I would call it a.
And what replaces the different offices is the group of automorphisms.
Because it's an exercise.
When I mean automorphism, I mean star automorphisms, of course, okay?
But it's an exercise to show that if you take a manifold and if you take smooth functions
and if you take star automorphisms, you get different offices.
I mean, that's, you know, if you think right, you get it in one second, okay?
Now, so what is this group of automorphisms?
You see, this group of automorphisms cannot be too small.
Because matrices don't compute.
So, there are automorphisms which you can create easily.
Which are of the form an element here goes to Uf U star.
U is a unit element in this algebra, okay?
And these are called, in mathematics, these are called inner automorphisms.
Now, if you compute them, you find exactly this group where IH is actually SUM.
And the, and I mean, okay, you can formulate it by an exact sequence.
But I sort of, you know, so the exact sequence is the following.
You have inner automorphisms of the algebra.
You have the group of automorphisms of the algebra.
And when you divide the group of automorphisms by the inner automorphisms,
you find the group out of the algebra of auto-automorphisms.
And it turns out that in that case, out is exactly D for them, okay?
And this group is exactly the group of gauge transformations of Stephen Kahn.
Moreover, the mathematical language fits with the physics language.
In other words, inner automorphisms are what physicists call the internal symmetries.
Okay?
So, this is the reason why, many years ago, in 1996, we started with Shamsikin
to actually program, put them up, of trying to take each time a lesson
from what the complications of the standard model are
in order to understand the fine structure.
Okay? So, I mean, one of the tools which is very, very important
is that exactly as you have inner automorphisms of the algebra, okay?
In exactly the same way, you have inner fluctuations of the metric.
Namely, your operator D gets transformed by some perturbation.
Okay? But they correspond exactly to the inner ones.
Gets transformed into a new D.
And this new D, actually, what is it?
It's the old Dirac operator, but which is now loaded by vector potentials.
Okay? As they are normally present.
Okay? And what is the beauty in that?
Okay? What is the beauty in that?
The beauty in that is that it exactly answers the query of Riemann.
Riemann was an incredibly careful writer.
When he wrote his essay on the geometry, on the foundations of geometry,
he was incredibly careful to say that probably his ideas might not apply in the very small.
Why? What was his reason to believe that his ideas would not apply in the very small?
He said it explicitly because the notion of a solid body or the ray of light
doesn't make sense in the very small.
So, he was incredibly smart because his idea, I don't know,
I have never been able to understand his intuition.
I've got, you know, the metric and so on.
But however, he wrote down explicitly that the geometry of space,
or spacetime, whatever, should be encapsulated,
should be given by the forces which hold the space together.
Now, it turns out this is exactly what we get here.
Because the new Dirac operator, the new operator D,
the new line element, if you want, when it's encoded,
when it has these inner fluctuations,
it contains exactly all the forces coming from the gauge potentials.
And if we compute it in this very simple example of the environment,
then we get exactly the gauge potentials that we give you, the Yang-Mills theory.
How do we get the Lagrangian?
You get the Lagrangian by spectral invariance.
So, how do you get the Lagrangian?
So, how do you get the Lagrangian?
So, the Lagrangian, the condition of the Lagrangian is that
it should be literally invariant.
So, here, if you want the invariance group, it's enormous.
The invariance group is the unitary group of Hilbert space.
It's an enormous group.
And the only invariance that you can concoct,
which is unitary and invariant, is spectral.
Moreover, you want this invariant to be additive
when you take disjoint union of geometries.
Then you don't have a choice.
Then you have to take an expression which is a trace of a function of the operator.
So, then you have to take the expression which is a trace of a function of the operator
and you put it in a scale because, as you know,
the operator or whatever the dimension of a mass,
we have to put it in a scale.
And so, what you do now is you do the heat expansion,
the heat expansion of this expression.
And you have a very nice surprise.
You have first a very bad surprise, but which I understand how to deal with it.
The first bad surprise that you get is you get a huge cosmological term.
So, the first thing that you get is something like I am working in dimension 4.
So, it's like lambda 4 times the volume.
And that's a bad surprise because it's an enormous term.
But then you get a lambda squared term.
And this lambda squared term gives you the Einstein-Hubert action.
And in the presence of x, which I will explain why you get x,
it gives you exactly the sort of negative huge, negative term that you need for the x.
So, this is for the second term after the volume term.
And then you have a third term.
And this third term, if you take this example of the environment,
it delivers the Young-Mills action.
The signs of the coefficients of those terms.
Yes, they are correct.
They come out automatically.
And I can tell you an episode, let's relax a little bit.
So, let me tell you one episode which I had with this sign.
Because the sign of the Einstein-Hubert action is of course very important.
And I remember once I was in my country house
and I began late at night to have some doubts about the correctness of the sign.
Then I fell in one of these sleeps where you are extremely disturbed.
And I had a dream.
And the dream was, I had my teacher of preparatory school
who was asking me to dismantle my car.
I had a Mercedes at that time.
So, he told me, dismantle your car in small pieces.
So, I was doing it in small pieces.
And after he told me, now reconstruct your car.
So, I reconstructed my car.
And then he told me, now try to run it.
Well, I ran it.
And then he told me, yes, it runs, but not in the right direction.
Okay, and then I came back home, I checked and everything was okay.
So, I mean, it's very important, of course, to have this sign.
It's very important to have the sign right in front of the Young-Mills action.
This is very, very important.
All these signs, there were eight signs that had no reason to be right.
But they are correct.
So, they're not dependent on the function F?
How much do you say about the function F?
Okay, let me say the function F.
The function I dream of is a cut-off function.
Okay?
This is the function I dream of.
But, okay.
So, I mean, the idea I have for the function F
is a function which, if you want, is like one.
Okay, and then it sort of slowly decays to zero.
That's what I want, ideally speaking.
Okay?
Now, what matters for this function are the first moments.
Because what happens is that when you expand this,
after a while, you will have negative powers of lambda which are highly suppressed.
The way we think about this model is an effective action.
We don't think of it as a fundamental theory.
We think of it as an effective action.
Okay?
So, this is the idea.
Okay, this is the idea.
Now, okay, this idea, we worked it out.
As I said, you know, we did a lot of work.
And there were several episodes which were important, actually.
Very important.
There was one episode in 1998 because when we had worked out
for the starting model with Alishan Cedil,
we had assumed that the finite space that we put in,
this finite space F,
we had assumed that its dimension in chaos theory.
I didn't tell you much about the nuance between K and chaos,
even though it's very fundamental, okay?
So, but the point is the following.
The point is that in chaos theory, you have not one chaos theory.
You have eight chaos theories.
They depend on the dimension of your space, but you have eight.
And I think the physicists know about it, without saying,
because they know about Clifford Archibald.
So, there are actually eight chaos theories.
So, there is, if you want, chaos dimension zero, chaos dimension seven,
and so on and so forth, okay?
And they are only prescribed by the commutation relations
which exist between the small decorations that you get
in this spectral triple to pass from chaos to chaos.
And the decoration is the charge conjugation operator
and the chirality operator, which I call gamma.
Now, these operators, J and gamma,
they fulfill according to dimension modulo eight
some commutation relation with D and between themselves.
For instance, you have that J squared is plus or minus one.
You have that J gamma is plus or minus one times gamma J,
and you have that J D is plus or minus one times D J.
That gives you three signs, which are plus or minus one,
so it gives you eight theories, okay?
And it took us...
So, what we did first with the Champs-Édines,
we had some over there,
couple to gravity in ninety-eight,
sorry, ninety-six,
but then in ninety-eight came a bad thing for us,
which is the cameo-cande experiment.
We showed that there are neutrino mixing, okay?
So, then we abandoned for several years,
and I always remember telling to Bryce David
that he could throw all of our stuff to the trash, okay?
Okay, and that lasted a few years.
It lasted until 2006.
In 2006, I was working with Matilde Marcoli,
and she provoked me by asking me to write down all the details
of why we were getting the standard model with the V minus A,
with the each mechanism, and so on.
And I did, and while doing it,
I noticed that we had been very, very foolish
because we had assumed that the k-o-dimension of the finite space
was zero, and we had not tried the other k-o-dimensions,
and then I tried the other k-o-dimension,
and when I took the k-o-dimension of F to be equal to six,
okay, this should remind something to the string service, okay?
Then everything was working beautiful.
And the main reason why everything was working beautiful
was that six plus four is equal to two modulo eight,
and then you can write down the family connection and the profile,
which is much, much better than before.
And the other reason, so this is not the only reason,
but then I computed, I computed,
and I found that there were not only dirac masterms for the neutrinos,
but there was mixing, there were dirac masterms,
but there were also mayona masterms.
I didn't know the syssovic isla.
I can swear it.
I did the computation and I found the syssovic isla.
So then when I realized, you know, that people were putting it by hand,
there must be something there, okay?
But then there was another very bad event, two thousand days.
Would you get higher on your scales?
Yeah, okay, I'll come to that later.
But here the only scale that you have is the unification scale, or Planck scale.
This is the only one, okay?
So are we going to get smaller?
Well, oh, you run it down.
You run it down, okay?
I'll try running like we were discussing yesterday, okay?
You take it as an effective model at that scale, okay?
I mean, you know, it's not ideal.
There are plenty of criticism one can do, but okay, this is the only thing we do, okay?
So then in 2008 came very bad news,
which is that, you know, exactly because we were running down the standard model
and we had the scattering parameter of the X,
which was of order one and positive at unification, we ran into trouble.
Because it's well known that if you have the scattering parameter of the lambda 5, 4,
of the X, which is positive at unification, the X must have to be large.
I mean, it has to be at least something like 160 G or something like that.
When in 2008, this mass was ruled out again, you know,
and I mean, there is something which is written which can testify about that.
I wrote it, I wrote in my blog, in the blog of Locomotive Geometry,
I wrote about this phrase of the crest, you know,
that you look at the others when they are sinking with their boat,
and you enjoy it reading the newspaper or something like that.
Okay, so, so, so then, you know,
what happened? So what happened is that then there were four years
which were again very low, very, very bad years, until 2012.
And in 2012, what happened was kind of an amazing fact.
I mean, I got an email from Ali Shansedin,
and in his email, he was saying the following.
He was saying, look, there are three groups of physicists
who have found a way to make the standard model stable
until unification scale.
Okay, so there were three independent teams.
And what they do, they are joined to the standard model,
a new scalar field, which is not the X, okay, another scalar field.
Let me call it five.
And this scalar field has a quartic self-potential and so on,
and it has to couple with the X, with a certain sign, you know,
it has to satisfy certain properties.
And then, when you rerun the renormalization group,
you find that, you know, things are okay.
Okay. And then Ali was continuing his mails.
And then he said, you know, in our 2010 papers,
we had this scalar field, but we had ignored it in the computation
because we were lazy, but we had this scalar field.
And what is this scalar field doing?
This scalar field is giving a mass to the Majorana mass terms.
Okay.
So, in fact, we had this scalar field,
and then when we redid the calculation, everything was compatible.
So this big trouble, this huge trouble,
so we went away completely.
It went down from 1 over 60.
Yeah, I mean, there is an adjustable parameter from the lookable masses,
but I mean, you get the right value if you wish.
We had a long time ago, you know, got the right value of the...
of the... you got a coupling from the top.
That was okay.
That was okay from the start.
But this is not very impressive for physicists
because it's an attractor, more or less.
Okay. So that was the second period.
That was from the second period.
So now let me pass for the third period,
which is that, as I said before, you know,
there seems to be no ending to this process and no clue
why, you know, should nature require some non-commutativity
for the algebra A.
I mean, you know, this is very strange.
This is very strange because to most people,
non-commutativity is a nuisance.
You see, because all of algebraic geometry,
for instance, is done with commutativity.
Let me try to convince you again
that this is a misguidance, okay?
So again, we shall relax a little bit.
And in order to make you understand,
I have to write something on the board.
Don't think that I am crazy, okay?
Okay, so I will write this.
Okay, so this is my first step.
Okay, let's look at these two guys, okay?
And let's make them commutative.
Okay, so what this one will become?
How many a's do I have?
Two a's.
A squared.
How many b's?
No b's.
How many c's?
No c's.
How many d's?
One d, huh?
How many e's?
Two e's.
Say this.
How many f's?
No f's.
How many g's?
One g, huh?
How many h's?
No h's.
How many i's?
Square.
How many k's?
No k's.
L's?
Oh, two L's.
How many m's?
No m's.
How many n's?
Six.
Okay, how many o's?
I have two o's, huh?
Yes, two o's.
Okay, how many p's?
How many q's?
No q's.
One q's?
One.
Sorry?
I was jumping two a's.
Oh, we were jumping two a's.
Okay, one a's.
At this point, huh?
One a's, huh?
Two a's.
Two t's.
I have two t's, huh?
Two t's.
And then I have no u, huh?
I have a v.
Yes, how many v's?
One?
One v.
That's all, huh?
Now you do the same thing with this guy.
Okay.
And you get the same.
You see, I really want to do that slow,
because then you get the idea.
And what is the idea behind that?
The idea is a great idea.
The idea is that when you pass to the abelianization,
when you pass to the abelian world,
you lose, you lose enormous information.
Because these two guys are the same
in the abelian world.
They are the same.
That's a second has a lapostrophe.
Okay, this is a little debate
that puts everything down.
Okay.
So this is a very important point.
And it is exactly
if you want what is bang, what I'm going to tell now.
Because what you find out,
you should do the following little exercise.
You see, imagine that
I want to describe functions of the two spheres.
So imagine I want to describe S2.
And I want to describe it by functions.
I claim that it's much simpler, much easier
to describe and
to describe continuous functions
on S2 with values in M2 of C.
And of course this is the same thing as M2
of C of S2.
Or it's the same thing as a transfer product of M2 of C
by C of S2.
Okay.
It's easier to describe this
than to describe continuous functions on S2.
Why?
Because this guy will contain M2 of C for sure.
Okay.
And what I claim is that in order to get
continuous functions on S2 with values in M2 of C,
it's enough to add
a punctuation symbol.
What do I mean by a punctuation symbol?
I mean a letter Y which satisfies
Y equals Y star
and Y square equals Y.
So you cannot repeat it more than once.
Okay.
You write words in M2 of C and Y.
Okay.
And you write down the condition that the trace is zero.
You get this theorem
that this gives you exactly the functions
of on the two spheres
with values in M2 of C.
That's a little exercise.
It's a non-commutative algebra.
It's like the free product of 2x2 matrices
by this symbol Y.
So what is the algebra here?
Can you repeat the algebra?
Yeah. Okay.
So what is the algebra?
The algebra is you write words where
you start with a matrix, say,
then you put Y, then you put M2,
you put Y.
Okay. And you take sums of these guys.
Okay.
This is the algebra.
And terms are either in M2 of C or this Y.
Okay.
That's it.
The trace of Y, I mean that
then you can write it as a 2x2 matrix
and, you know, the trace makes sense.
No detail is important. There is no point.
Okay. And then what we have noticed
a long time ago with Gianni Landy
is that
once you know that,
you can actually get all matrix
but with a fixed volume form
on the two sphere
by a simple equation.
And the simple equation is simply the following.
It's Y.
So you take, again, the trace
is equal to the chirality.
It turns out that this equation
has many solutions
and these solutions correspond exactly
to, on the two sphere, the same two sphere
to all matrix
which have the fixed volume form.
On the two sphere.
Okay.
So with Ali and Slava Mucanoff
we start from there.
Okay. And what did we find?
What did we find?
What did we find before that?
Okay.
So what did we find?
That last statement you made
about the chirality operator,
I guess you didn't follow it.
You're saying that the D that you're imagining
is associated with a specific chirality
Well, it's associated with a specific spin structure.
So you have everything.
You have the chirality and you have the charge conjugation operator.
And you can read out the chirality by that?
Yeah. Well, the chirality
is put in your algebraic formalism.
Okay.
You put the chirality operator.
I mean, it's an operator in L2 spinors.
So you put it in. Okay.
But what I'm just trying to understand
or clarify is the trace
formula you just wrote, you're saying
you can read out the chirality?
Exactly. I mean, this is quite tricky.
I mean, if you want what happens
is when I wrote this y
dy square
okay, when you write it
because why now, as I will explain,
why this y
now can be written in terms of gamma matrices
because it's a 2 by 2 matrix.
Okay. But these gamma matrices
have nothing to do with the gamma matrices of D.
And when you
write the trace of this operator,
this thing, what you find out
is that only the totally anti-symmetric
combinations
enter, give you a non-trivial,
a non-zero result.
And these non-trivial combinations actually
they give you essentially the Jacobian.
You see, this map y
will actually be a map to the two sphere.
So, if you want
because y square is equal to 1
if I write y
in terms of components
of gamma matrices
it would be something like y a
gamma a
and the fact that y square is 1
will give me that the sum, this is how
we prove that it is a 2 sphere.
Sum of y a square is equal to 1.
Okay. And in that case, there are 3 gammas
which are the power matrices.
Okay, so now what happens is that
when you compute this trace, sorry?
Because the trace is 0.
Okay, exactly. Because the trace of y is 0
as I said, so you don't have a
constant component. But then when you
compute this thing, you will have
to have a non-trivial trace for a product
of 3 gamma matrices.
But this is a totally anti-symmetric tensor.
And because the dy
is given by the gradient
or if you want partial derivatives
this will give the Jacobian of the map
to the two sphere.
Okay, and so what you will know from this
is that actually
the volume form will be determined.
Okay. So, but now
we are going to see a much more delicate case.
Okay. So, but this is the idea.
This is the idea. This is really the idea.
Okay.
By the way, when you compute this
combinator, you will have, of course,
the gamma mu matrices again.
And they combine with the other matrices.
There are gamma matrices. Okay.
So, what we did with
Alien Slava,
okay, what we did with Alien Slava
was first to extend this result
of the two sphere to higher dimensions.
This suppose is no problem.
This suppose is no problem.
And to check
that the same type of result was true.
And, of course, this is correct. This is not
so difficult.
And it's something which
somehow, you know, involves
just playing
with the gamma matrices. Okay.
And
but
let me take an even simpler case
so that you understand what we are trying to do.
And why we called it the
higher Eisenberg equation.
Higher
Eisenberg
Eisenberg
equations, commutations,
commutations.
Okay. So, what I claim
is that there are higher Eisenberg
commutation equations that actually
embody all four spin geometries.
And that when you
evaluate the spectral invariance,
they give you the standard model
of coupled gravity in this case.
This is the thing.
Let me explain in detail.
Okay. So, at first
we were working with k theory,
not with k.
So, we were working with k and this was simpler.
And with
k what we wrote, we wrote the similar equation there.
So, in dimension 4
this equation is the same. It's y
dy to the 4
is equal to the
minus.
Okay. And what happens is that
so, at first
you can think of
d to be the Dirac operator,
think of d as being the Dirac operator of the
manifold, and think of y
as being y a gamma a.
Okay.
Where the y a is, if you want, are functions.
Okay.
They are functions of the manifold.
Okay.
You can think of them this way if you wish.
Okay. All right.
So, if you do that and you compute this guy,
what you will find out is that this equation
is equivalent
to the fact that
if I look at y as a map from my manifold
m to the fourth sphere,
because y square is one,
the fact that y square is one
will tell you that I have a fourth sphere.
So, if I look at y as a map
from m to the fourth sphere,
it will tell me just one thing.
It will tell me that when I pull back
the standard volume form
of the fourth sphere, which I call
rho, I get
the square root of g
before x. I mean, I get the volume form
of the remaining metric.
Okay.
So, this equation turns out to be equivalent
to that.
Okay. It turns out to be equivalent to that.
So, when we found that,
we were a little bit disappointed.
Why? Because if this equation is true,
it's telling you that the Jacobian of the map
doesn't vanish anywhere.
The map is a covering of the sphere.
But the covering of the sphere,
it has to be, there is only the sphere
because the sphere is simply connected.
Okay.
So, at that point, we were
a little bit disappointed
because what we were finding
as solutions of this equation
was just a disjoint collection of spheres
each of the Planck sides.
Okay.
So, there was a time when we were collaborating
with Ali and
and the Slava
where we were talking about little bubbles.
You know.
So, the picture, the mental picture you should get
at that point is that there were a lot
of little bubbles floating in the air.
Okay. Each of Planck sides.
And each was a sphere.
I mean, it's true that each of them had an arbitrary metric,
but, you know, an arbitrary fixed volume.
So, but I mean, this was bad.
Okay.
And then, we got the right idea.
And the right idea came from the nuance
that there is between
k-theory and ko-theory.
And that nuance is very, very important.
Okay.
And where does that nuance come in
and how does it manifest itself algebraically?
Okay.
It manifests itself algebraically
by the fact that when you
move from k-theory to ko,
okay, the new ingredient
that you have is a charge conjugation operator.
So, j, which is the charge conjugation.
Okay. And this charge conjugation operator
has a very important property
with respect to the algebra a,
which is that the algebra a
commutes
commutes
with its transform by j,
namely j, a, j-less.
Okay.
I mean, the fact that when you have
an algebra in inverse space,
you can, in most cases, find a j
which satisfies this property.
This is Tomitas in the cerebral operator.
It's a very deep theorem.
Okay.
So, in physics, it's a charge conjugation operator
and, mathematically speaking,
it's a key ingredient of the ko-theory.
Okay.
So then, with Ali and Slava,
we began to say
why don't we use the j?
Okay. And we formulate a condition
which is like this, but which
involves a j. Okay. And we did that.
We did that.
We did that. And we got this
higher-islander equation.
And what does it look like? It's not complicated.
So, what does it do
at the conceptual level?
One has to always be careful
to stay at the conceptual level.
So, at the conceptual level...
conceptual level...
Okay. What is going on?
What is going on is that
the d, okay,
is quantizing.
It's representing...
I don't like the word quantizing. It's representing...
representing
the fundamental class.
Fundamental class
in ko-theory.
Okay.
That's fine.
But then, the right idea
is to also represent
the fundamental class in the dual-theory,
which is ko-theory.
ko-theory.
Okay.
And what is important?
So, what about the fundamental class
in ko-theory?
Okay.
What is really important is that
once you have this,
then you know that
the pairing, the index pairing
between d and the fundamental class
in ko-theory,
let me call it z, okay?
Between d and z,
it will be an integer.
Okay. And it will be crucial
that this integer is non-zero.
It will be a positive integer, okay?
So, you want to find the fundamental class
in ko-theory.
And there is a very simple way to do it
in the ko-theory,
which is to replace the condition that we had,
which was that y squared
is equal to 1,
and so on, by the condition that y4
is equal to 1.
Okay. That y4
is equal to 1.
Okay. And the
commutation with j, so, suitable commutation
with j, I don't want to write that down.
Okay. And then,
it turns out that you can combine,
you see, there is a correspondence
which is 1 to 1 between
the operators,
operators
which fulfill,
I don't know, t squared is equal to 1,
self-adjoint, of course,
and projections.
Okay.
If you have projections, I call it e,
you can manufacture a symmetry
in operator of square one
by just taking t equals
2e minus 1.
And you can go backwards.
So, you can go this way.
But the right way
is to take the projection
which is corresponding to the y
and to multiply it by something
which commutes with it,
which is the projection which is coming
from j, y, z.
Okay. So, in that way,
we obtain a certain operator z
of square one again,
and we wrote down this condition,
z squared to the 4
is equal to gamma.
And then, we studied this condition,
we studied this condition, okay,
as being the natural one, being the bearing and so on.
And what did we get?
What did we get?
We got a big difference
with the previous
thing
which is that it's no longer true,
it is no longer true
that
you only get spheres.
So, for a manifold m,
so m will appear,
m with a metric,
will appear
if I don't leave,
if I don't leave,
there exist two maps
which I call
phi and psi.
To the part of y which has a square one
and the part of y which has a square minus one.
Phi and psi to the fourth sphere,
so mapping n
to the fourth sphere.
Okay, and what is the condition now?
Condition is the following,
it's that when you take the pullback
of the volume form of the fourth sphere,
plus the pullback of the volume form
by psi
of the fourth sphere, you get
the line element.
Okay, and now you can see
this doesn't imply
that the Jacobian
of each of them doesn't vanish.
You want the sum of them
not to vanish.
So, this has an immediate implication.
The first immediate implication
that it has
is that then the volume
then the volume, because it's
integral, it's a degree,
then the volume is quantized.
Then the volume is quantized.
Okay, and the value
of the numbers that you get
by this quantization is actually the degree
the degree of phi
plus the degree of psi.
Okay, and
it is the index, the anti-asinger index
that's easy to see,
but we got a fantastic
surprise at this point.
We got really a fantastic surprise.
I mean, this was
motivated purely by geometry.
There's no standard model anywhere.
Okay, you agree with me.
There's no standard model anywhere.
I'm telling you that.
What was the fantastic surprise?
The fantastic surprise was that
in order to concoct
y, you needed gamma matrices.
In order to concoct
this y with y4 is one,
you also need
gamma matrices.
In order to concoct this y with y4 is one.
What type of gamma matrices you need?
You need y4 is one.
So it will have a part which has
the k-4 algebra
with five pluses
plus, plus,
plus, plus, plus.
Why five?
Five because I want to be
on the four sphere.
So I want five gamma matrices,
because the sum is here.
So five pluses, and because I have y squared
minus one also here, I have k-4 algebra
with five minuses.
Okay?
And these are the
algebra which are needed in order to write down the equation.
Okay?
What you need is a little bit more precise.
You need irreducible representations
of these two algebras.
Now you take a table.
If I had a slide, I would show you a table,
but then you would forget it.
So you take a table of three-fold
algebras and what do you find?
You find this one.
This is m4 of c.
This is m4 of c.
And, oh,
perhaps there's one.
Excuse me if I make a mistake.
I'm a little bit tired.
And this one is m2 of h.
It could be...
Ah, no, it's a reverse. Sorry.
Now I am working there.
Okay, so this one is m2 of h.
Present m2 of h.
Present m2 of h.
Present m2 of h.
And this one is m4 of c.
They have the same dimension.
But if I take an irreducible representation
of this one, I get m2 of h.
And that is the explanation
why we have the algebra
m2 of h present m4 of c.
m4 of c is a simple algebra.
I mean, the center of m4 of c
doesn't contain the very important.
It's not the case for m2 of h present m2 of h.
The center contains the very important.
So,
then we are really amazed.
We are really amazed because
as I explained for the two spheres,
the natural algebra
is not the algebra of functions.
It's the algebra where...
You see, let me explain that point
because it's very crucial.
When Hamilton discovered quaternions,
what is the beauty of quaternions?
The beauty of quaternions is that
when you want to write down a point in fourth space,
you write down a single quaternion.
When we want to write a point in the plane,
we write a single complex number.
When we want to write the momentum
of a particle,
we write a single slash of the momentum.
The idea,
the new idea is that we do the same
for the coordinates.
We write the slash of the coordinates
and we take the most economical
and the most conceptual way
of writing the slash of the coordinates
and then bang, it works.
But then we had a big mathematical problem
for which I got a lot of help
from geometry
and the mathematical problem was
which are
the manifolds
for which there are two maps
to the fourth sphere
such that
something like that can be true
namely such that
the pullback of the volume form of the sphere
doesn't vanish anywhere.
If it doesn't vanish anywhere,
it can be made into the volume form
of the Riemannian manifold.
This is not difficult at all.
It's the whole theorem of the Jürgen-Mozart
that you can do that.
Jürgen-Mozart proved long time ago
that volume forms of the same volume
on the compact manifold are different morphics.
The difficulty
is to do the following.
We define an invariant at first.
We introduce an invariant of the manifold
and this invariant
makes sense in any dimension.
It's better as usual
to make it in any dimension in order to sank.
And what was this invariant?
We call it
Q of the manifold.
Q of the manifold of a little dimension
what is it?
It's the set of all degrees
of phi
plus degrees of psi
such that
if you want the pullback
of the volume form of the sphere
of the correct dimension
it doesn't vanish.
It doesn't vanish.
This will give us
the explanation for dimension 4.
The reason is the following.
You want to Jürgen-Mozart
in any dimension
and you want to construct
two maps to the sphere
that actually
have
the fact that
the sum
of the two pullback
volume form doesn't vanish.
Yeah,
you see
such a problem in dimension 2
is trivial
because if I take Riemann's surface
with many holes
what can I do?
I know that my Riemann's surface
because of the complexity of it
is the Riemann's surface cover of the sphere
and this cover of the sphere
actually ramifies
on a few points.
There are a number of discrete points
that ramifies.
Now what can I do?
I call this map phi
it preserves the orientation
it has a Jacobian which vanishes
at a few points
and what do I do?
I move it around a little bit
and I get a map psi
now my map psi
will have a Jacobian
which is vanishing at nearby points
but not at the same point
and now when I pull back the volume form
no problem
no problem
the very important thing here
is the role of complexity
without complexity you wouldn't have
ramified cover
where the singular set
is of co-dimension 2
you see normally if I take
a random map to the sphere
the place where the map is degenerate
is of co-dimension 1
because this is where the Jacobian vanishes
that's one equation
but the beauty of complex geometry
is that actually you take
a complex map
the place where the
it's not only the Jacobian which vanishes
both components of the derivative
so then you get two equations
that's because in the complex numbers
you have a a square
b square which happens
it's very deep fact actually
it doesn't work for quaternions
you could say why don't I get
something of co-dimension 4
because it doesn't compute
so this is complex geometry
now you go to dimension 3
so now you take a 394
and you try to find two maps
from the 394 to the sphere
which satisfies the property
you try to do that
what do you do? you do the same thing
you find one map using the idea of
complex geometry which is tricky
and that map will actually ramify
on a lot
so there will be
a co-dimension 2
a variety of subset
on which it ramifies
and then you can do the same thing
because you have a one-dimensional thing
in a three-dimensional stuff
it has no self-intersection
you can move it around
so that it doesn't intersect
by bare cell or whatever
you can do that in dimension 3
what about dimension 4
and I will use the result of
Puenaru to go
so how do you deal with this in dimension 4?
dimension 4 is
first of all why is dimension 4 critical?
I claim it's a critical dimension
why?
because when you write the map
to the fourth sphere now
or the n-sphere in general
you can write from
n to the n-sphere
the ramification will be
in dimension n-2
because of complex geometry
now
the problem is that the psi
will also ramify
in dimension n-2
and if it was true
that n-2
plus n-2
was strictly smaller than n
you would be in business
is that correct?
yeah
but that's the same thing
as n being smaller than 4
unless n is mistaken
so in fact n equals 4 is bad
because in n equals 4
you will have two surfaces
and two surfaces
in the four-manifold
intersect in general
in fact
when I began to talk with the geometers
there was a counterexample
in general and the counterexample was p2 of c
if you take p2 of c
it's not difficult to show that it doesn't work
for p2 of c
you cannot find two maps from p2 of c to the fourth sphere
which have this property
then you could be desperate
but then with
my collaborators
we proved that any spin-manifold
works
and I will explain how
and in fact
it's almost a necessary and sufficient condition
the people who helped me
there are many actually
but in particular Donaldson
did help me at some kosher point
so what do you
how do you proceed
so the theorem
the theorem is that
a spin-manifold works
by the way p2 of c is not a spin-manifold
it has
the square of the second
stifled Whitney class
so how do you go
I want to explain a little bit of this
because I'm using the result of
a volunteer point of view
how do you proceed
so you take your form-manifold
okay
you take your form-manifold
okay
and you ramify it over the sphere
because this is a sphere
and you have a
several varieties of sigma
which is where the Jacobian vanishes
which is of co-dimension 2
so this is like a surface
like a surface
and the first idea doesn't work
the idea to move it around doesn't work
but there is a very clever idea
I don't know so
one should always say such things
and what is the idea
the idea is that you make a little gluing
now so you take a neighborhood
of this guy
okay
take a neighborhood of this guy
and
imagine
that
you can construct
an immersion from this neighborhood
let me call this neighborhood n
imagine that I can
find
an immersion
immersion
from n to r4
okay
imagine I can do that
then
you see because it's a map to r4
I can extend it to the whole manifold
I don't care
and I can extend it in such a way
that the Jacobian of this map would be very small
very small as small as I want
but if it is positive
because it's an immersion
around the sub-manifold
then the sum of the two will be positive
we never vanish
okay
but then you need a theorem that allows you
to say that this n actually
immerses in r4
that's a smelting theorem
of Valentin Poignardot
Valentin Poignardot proved as a refinement
of smelting theory
that if you have a manifold which is open
and parallelizable
then it's okay
it's an amazing result
it's amazing that a manifold
which is open and parallelizable
does immerse in the corresponding rn
the same n
and how do you go now
well you have to prove that this neighborhood
is parallelizable
that's where the spin structure enters
how does it enter
it enters because the spin group
for a four manifold
okay
the fact that you can lift
the tangent bundle to s2 cross s2
tells you that there is no
two-dimensional classes there
so there is no obstruction
and so you can parallelize
this because it's two-dimensional
it's a motor peak to the sigma
okay
okay so you are done
so now
to conclude this stuff
you know to conclude this stuff
we
well somehow
we are in an interesting situation
because it turns out that
from a purely geometry problem
from a purely geometry problem
which is a problem of encoding
four geometries
in a right way
in a spectral way somehow
as a D
and a Y
fulfilling this Eisenberg notation relations
we found
the right geometries
and so what happens is that actually
you find that
that's why we call them quantum geometry
because
what happens is that then you can
prove that this q of m
this set of degrees
okay so the theorem that we have
is that if a manifold m
m is spin
spin for manifold
spin for manifold
then the theorem
and q of m
contains all numbers
which are bigger or equal to five
so it contains all integers m
belonging to z such that m
is bigger or equal to five
now this was very important
this was very important because
you see in physics
the volume is automatically plank
plank size whatever you do
you will get a volume of plank size
and we want to get macroscopic manifolds
and how do you get macroscopic manifolds
you get macroscopic manifolds because
of this theorem
and how do you get that
you get all integers you not only
get that you get
some maps but you get that
these maps can be of some of degrees
which are arbitrary how do you get that
you get that by triangulation
you get that by triangulation in other words
the first map that you construct
not the gluing map
but the first map that you construct
you construct it by triangulating the four manifold
you triangulate it
then you do a little trick
which is due to
refinement of the Alexander theorem
which is that
you take the
barycentric subdivision of this triangulation
and when you do that
when you take the barycentric subdivision
of this triangulation what you will get
you will get a chess board
so you will get something where
alternatively the cells are either
black or white
and what you do is you map
the black part to the
upper part of the sphere
and you map the white part
to the lower part of the sphere
in that way you get a very high degree
map
and you get huge volume
and our contention if you want our
mental picture is that our little
bubbles which were before
you know, buzzers like champagne little bubbles
are now coalesced together
to form a huge
contour
which now can have macroscopic size
so this is a picture
which is imagined
and there is even room for
e-folding
and the room for e-folding is the following
the room for e-folding is that the sphere itself
has self maps of arbitrary degree
and when you compose with such maps
you will get e-folding
namely the volume will not be adding something
it will be multiplied by something
the volume
now to conclude I would say the following
you see there was this very buzzer in the term
in the agrarian which was the
cosmological term
but now this cosmological term
is no longer buzzer because now the volume
is coalesced so the volume
is now an integer suitable units
and that means the following
that means that when you do small variation
this term doesn't enter
doesn't come in
doesn't come in in the variation of principle
ok so that's where we stand
as I said
there is no quantum gravity there
there is no quantum gravity
but there is a formalism for geometry
where geometry appears
as an irreducible representation
of relations
why irreducible? it's irreducible because not only
you have the coordinates but you also have the derivative
and that's
that thing is irreducible
so they appear as irreducible representations
and
my feeling is that what we have
is a particular picture
of what should be a good start
for trying to do quantum gravity
on that side ok and we call that
quantum geometry because of the
Earth's reason
ok so I think I will stop there
this is
this is a native language
but first of all
when you do a gary-centric division
you get a B-parted thing
you get a color transition
exactly you get a color transition
and there is another question
of course to a cancer model
yes it should be related to that
which is at some point
the category that you picture correctly
for quantum geometry with cancers
is the peer category
and it is the same here
but in dimension 4
dimension 4 there is no distinction
ok now
let me involve a little bit on what you say
because that's very important
because of the work of Denis Sullivan and Donaldson
you see
people should know that
another reason why dimension 4
is very special
there is a notion of what is called a sobo-left manifold
which is due to Venice
and the notion of sobo-left manifold
is that you have charts
and when you change charts
the condition
which appears
is that the first derivatives
the first derivatives
of the chain of charts
are
in the LP space
for P equals the dimension
ok now
this fits exactly with our equation
with Ali because we consider
d-computator y which is the first derivative
to the power of the dimension
so it fits on the nose with what we have
now what happens
that you should know with the following
is that when you are in dimension
greater than 4, strictly greater
5 and on
it's a theorem that if you take a topological manifold
you can make it into sobo-left manifold
essentially up to
something
that's a theorem of Denis Sullivan
if you are in dimension 2 and 3
it's also true
dimension 2 and 3 is also true
but it's actually false
why is that false?
it's false because of the Donaldson theory
so
the Donaldson theory tells you
that in dimension 4 you have
plenty of topological manifolds
which cannot be made into
smooth manifolds
and the action functional and so on
that we have with Ali
sort of targets on the fact that
we should have only smooth manifolds
why? because they are sobo-left manifolds
they have to be sobo-left manifolds
but physics seems
to detect
the topological ones are too rough
you have to know a little bit of the stuff
what Donaldson found which is absolutely amazing
using the SU2 gauge theory
is that you cannot have any signature
for smooth manifolds
the signature
intersection form for smooth manifolds
is very special
and that results
many many many topological manifolds
and it's not only what you say
it's more fundamental
it's more fundamental
but PL of course
in general you are perfectly right
but in dimension 4 they don't differ
they don't differ
and here I was using very fine results
of
I was going to say Percacci
but I forgot his name
he's a very good Italian generator
who actually proved
that you can make any
ramifire of a force sphere
with at most
5
sorry
with at most multiplicity 5
for ramification
degree 5 yes
is it right that at the just beginning
you said that this ko homology
was related to the
PL factor
yeah of course let me repeat
because these are fundamental things
you see what Sullivan proved
in his thesis
I don't know if it is in his thesis or afterwards
anyway but what he proved
is that if you have a spherical
vibration and you want to promote it
into a PL
random
PL structure
then it's exactly a ko orientation
that you need but it's not
top it's not smooth
it's PL
yeah of course
this ram is very very important
key to my old story
you see if the theorem was done there
there would be no reason why you should move
from ordinary homology to ko homology
I mean you know and then there was this
discovery of Atia then okay I picked out
on the metric side
I could find that you know the metric was
the right thing and so on so I mean you know
and if you look back at Riemann
it's amazing the intuition that he had
because he was saying exactly the right words
but he didn't look all the mechanics
he couldn't fancy
this new paradigm of course
but you know
the atomic structure was already
yeah the atomic structure was in there
but not in your space and not
unfortunately you know not the quantum
formalism but this thing
is congenial to the quantum
formalism I'm not saying it's quantum
gravity not at all I'm saying you know it's
congenial to the quantum formalism
it could be that these are
you know like the particle picture the
single particle picture
formalism quantum gravity
could be I want to say
one thing for experimentalist
it would be great if one could actually
use the quantum
corrections of the
fermion propagator
in the electron microscope
to detect the corrections to the distance
which I am predicting
you see what I was saying
is that when you measure distances
well for instance with the electron microscope
okay you actually are using
the fermion propagator in one way or another
for electrons okay
now but this gets
stressed by the quantum corrections
so I mean there would be
you know a kind of experimental
test to be done these corrections are very
small we are working on it
QED corrections or?
yeah QED corrections or QCD corrections
if you can but I mean you know QED
corrections should already be seen
I mean there is a formal series
in power of H bar you know
they should be seen
yeah sure of course
I mean it gives you a kind of effective geometry
you see what I am saying is that
because I don't have the gym news
because I have this D and this D gets quantum corrections
I do get an effective geometry
and we could have big surprises
of how this
corrected propagator runs
it could be that the dimension as I was saying
depends on the scale
and that as you were suggesting
dimension is too at the end of the day
no why not I have no idea
which dimension?
spectral dimension
spectral dimension
I mean the whole theory is based on
spectral dimension
spectral dimension is the
singularities of the zeta function
of the operator
just a few questions about
connecting this to the physics
for you it's already very connected
but for me it's not good enough
let's say starting with the last thing
you mentioned so the rack operator
on a curved manifold
has the metric
structure built into it
and you also have the angles
sure
but are you thinking that you quantize this
no there is no quantization here
I am not claiming anything
I am not claiming I am quantizing anything
you see this is
in the next step
are we supposed to do that next?
yeah of course you guys not me
when we do
would we also be doing say a path integral
over this method? yeah
you are right there is a step which one can say
now doing it is another story
the step that one can say
is
but there is something interesting to say about it
which is that I was talking about 4-manifold Euclidean
now let me take 2-3-manifolds
so this is a 3-manifold
and this is another 3-manifold
now what I can write down
not doing it yet
is a path integral over all Euclidean
4-manifolds
which bound like this
now there is a beautiful fact
which we proved with Alisham said a few years ago
which is that as you know
in the Einstein action
when you take manifold with bound there is
there is an additional term
which is the Hawking Gibbons term
this Hawking Gibbons term is very specific
it has a factor of 2
it has the extraceic curvature
in it and so on and so forth
and it is mandatory
I mean you cannot do without it
spectral action gives it
when you compute a spectral action you get this term
on the nose
so the idea would be
indeed
to compute the Euclidean functionality
right
over these things
co-bounding these 2-manifolds
ok
and in order to do that
you have to extend the result that we have
with Slava Bukanov and Shamsedin
on the realization of
speed-manifolds
you have to extend it to manifold with boundary
we are thinking about it
but you know how it is
time passes
Karol
John Barthes is actually trying
to do something like that
he takes the deracupilator
on the sphere but not on the sphere as phase sphere
so he cuts the algebra to
J
and then
everything is 5-dimensional
yes
he can integrate
and he tries to do it numerically
I know
but let me rebound on what you say
because if that function
were really a cutoff function
what would it tell us really
what would it be telling us this action
it would be telling us that
our macroscopic view
of the spacetime and so on and so forth
is only an approximation
to something which is actually
finite in one way
not a finite set of points, this is Bushin
we know it contradicts inflation
actually, if you take
finite set of points it's no good for inflation
no, what it would mean
is that the inverse space of spin-off
is finite-dimensional
and then what happens is that
the values coordinates appear as operators
and their spectrum is so dense
that it looks continuum
but it's not the continuum
and at the end of the day
what we have is a matrix model
so at the end of the day what we would have
which would be
you see the D is the self-adjoint matrix
in this inverse space
so at the end of the day what we would have
is a matrix model
and I am extremely
sympathetic to this
you are, you are like this
it's very basic
but you cannot find the finite-dimensional
orientation of these Eisenberg-Eier relations
because they are like
the ordinary Eisenberg relations
so you would have to find how to modify them
to make them finite-dimensional
and that's not easy
that's certainly not easy
what about somebody asked earlier
I think Kostas asked
is how many scales are in this
yeah, you are right, okay, so there is a second
there is a second scale
which is the scale of this
unfortunate scalar field that we had forgotten
that scalar field
should have a scale which is corresponding
to 10, 11 or something like that
I mean for the CISO mechanism
so there are two scales
and using these two scales
Walter once had a call
was able to show that you could have
perfect unification of the cappings
we have done a lot of work
but
where does that scale come from
that second scale
you wrote a spectral action
that has one scale
but that scale is another part
of the gravitation
so it's not coming from the inner fluctuation
it's another scale
related to that
when you go from D to D sub A
do you include an arbitrary gauge coupling
there are some continuous free parameters
oh sure, sure, sure
and they come from the inner automorphisms
the point is that
the fact that you have inner automorphisms
transcribes and metrics
by the fact that you have these inner fluctuations
for a long time these inner fluctuations
were rather mysterious
we were imitating what people do
by taking commutators and other
but very recently we said
we understood that they come from a semi-group
which is completely natural
and which extends the unitary group
of the algebra
so there is a semi-group very natural
why do we find that
I can tell you the abstract reason
is following that
you see what you expect
which is a little bit unfortunate
what you expect is that if you do an inner fluctuation
take the new thing as a starting point
and again do an inner fluctuation
it should be an inner fluctuation of the start
that's true
and that defines a semi-group for you
it's a semi-group and not a group
because you can fall in a well
you can start
with an operator
which has a lot of interactions
and fall into something
which I don't longer have
you mentioned the
possible connection to strength theory
because of the shift
this is only a sign of it
could be
you see that strength theory is too stuck
with the ordinary Riemannian paradigm
and that
they have to extend a little bit
their sort of framework
they already used
in a paper which is probably
it's not my most quoted paper
my most quoted paper is
a paper which I wrote in 2000
the non-competitive geometry
it has 6500 quotations
but I wrote another paper
with physicist, with Michael Douglas
and Albert Schwartz
and that paper has a lot of quotations
and indeed I mean
we know we're mixing
non-competitive geometry with
strength theory in that paper
I have a question
so you write this
a Feynman propagator as ds
distance
so usually I know that
Feynman propagator has a green function
that connects those two ends
so it usually comes
as inverse of a delta function
but that's exactly not a delta function
but that's what it is
ds is the inverse of course
ds is the inverse
but how can they be
infinitesimal than
ds?
let me explain
no no no it's not a very question
come on
these nine questions are the key questions
no no no
let me explain why you are not naivato
you are not naivato
you are not naivato
so you say why can it be infinitesimal?
oh my god
ok so I will write a dictionary
I will write a dictionary
I will put in this dictionary
the classical
and I will put the quantum
now in classical
words we talk about a real variable
a real variable
in the quantum dictionary
you talk about self-hygiene parameter
you follow me so far
ok
now in the ordinary
language
when you talk about real variable
you find that you have a set X
and a map to the real
but you find very easily
that you cannot have discrete
for existing with a continuum
and the reason is that
if you have a really discrete variable
they said X would be countable
that doesn't fit with a continuous variable
whereas in your space
you can have an operator which has discrete spectrum
coexisting with an operator which has continuous spectrum
the only point is that they don't compute
they can't compute
ok
now amazingly
amazingly
here
you can talk about
you can try to talk
try
to talk
about infinitesimals
ok you can try
you are welcome to try
but here you have them
infinitesimal they form an idea
which is called the idea of compact parameters
ok
so the compact operators
in liberal space they form an idea
exactly as infinitesimal should do
ok and the only point
is that they don't commute and they don't commute
with your continuous variables ok
ok and here
ok you can talk
about the integral
the value of function
and when you talk
talk about the integral
you have to buy the whole package
you have to buy this whole thing
ok
you cannot buy
independently the one side and the other
ok not in the quantum world
in the quantum world the integral
of an operator
integral of t
what is it? it's the coefficient
of the logarithm of the agency
of the trace
of the trace of the operator
and this is a very
deep thing
which was discovered by Dix-Mier
in the 1960s
which plays a crucial role in the theory
it's called the Dix-Mier trace
now
when you take our ds
which is the inverse
ok forget about the camera
ok if you take that one
it's infinitesimal in that sense it's compact
ok so that's the answer to your question
ok
and the whole formulation goes through
I mean it's amazing how far it goes
this dictionary it goes very very very
very far
and for instance there is a theorem
that the volume is quantized
but the volume in that sense
in the sense of the logarithmic divergence
of the trace
it's quantized as an integer
as being an integer
ok
so why don't you insist that
we should have many many folds
I mean one could just as well start with a non commutative
triple instead
so you said you worried about four dimensions
and you proved that any spin
many folds five or so would
especially one or has these two maps
but why did you worry about that
why not do all the ace
that has these properties
you see because
it's related to the previous question
when you do the functional integral
after or something
you want to have all spin for many folds
available
you want to have all topologies available
so I would have been quite worried
perhaps you want to have a theory which is unitary
yeah
exactly
if you miss some elements in the functional integral
ok you might miss the whole story
so I mean but this is at the level
of one particle level
this story is a one particle story
it's not a quantum gravity story
I have a question about the additional scalar field
yeah
is it just a plain old scalar
yeah it's just a plain old scalar
so once you realize that you should take that into account
you go back and check whether or not
the spectral action gives
the Ricci scalar
as opposed to a function
of the scalar field times the Ricci scalar
that's a good question
because
as a coupling with a gravity
what you have normally
you have the
the Ricci scalar
times the square of the X
it's true
in what we have
we have the term that for instance Feynman was writing
in his book on gravity
which is the square of the X
times the Ricci scalar
you do get that
then you also probably get the other
sure
you get the other in fact
there is no reason
it's another scalar field
you get that
can I ask a question
you don't want to hear
I am here to hear the questions
I don't want to hear
well because you said at the beginning
don't bother you about being Euclidean
yeah
did I have to bother you about
no you are right
but my hope is the following
when you compute
Euclidean functional integral between
two three space
you get something interesting
you see this is the idea
and
my sort of intuitive belief about this
is that I have worked a lot in quantum field theory
and I know very well
that
it's cheating to talk about
non Euclidean functional integral
it's really cheating the people
and so I mean you know
yeah
compare two three spaces
why don't go
in Euclidean and compare them
then ok
of course it will take time and work
and so on to understand what it means cosmologically
but
that's my point
you see
the Hartle Hawking wave function
is Euclidean
it's not clear that it works
but let me tell you why it doesn't work
and why this corrects it
why doesn't it work the Hartle Hawking
wave function
it doesn't work because when you look at
the corresponding operator
which has six degrees of freedom
there is one which has a wrong sign
you know that
which is a vile factor
the vile factor gets
the wrong sign for the functional integral
gives you
an unbounded
term
now this
framework the volume form is fixed
so this term is frozen
the volume form
is quantized so this term is frozen
so you don't have this problem
for the functional integral
you don't have this blowing up term
that Hawking was trying to
to put a knife
which is a mess
doesn't work
but this vile term is exactly the term
which we control by the type of equations
and did you say that the cosmological constant
doesn't really answer
no because it's quantized
it's quantized
if a term is quantized you cannot
vary anything it's a number
can I ask you a question
did you say that
you are forced into having a
SU2 process
so I am forced into a pati salam
which is
do you think the gage group
of the salamode should be a lot
exactly and we have exactly the way to do it
and we have the reduction to the salamode
we know exactly how it works
no
but it should be related to the second scale
to the scale we were talking about
like it stands to the 11th
I think it's a big time
so I mean
it's far away
and also
you have this right hand
the real freedom
but this works beautifully
we have all these matrices
we have the Majorana mass matrix
we have everything
and there is a lot of freedom
the Dirac mass
and the Majorana mass
all of that
pops up from the calculation
you don't have to put it in
you calculate
I did calculate the calculation
and you have one right hand
and a pair
we don't have an answer for the
families
but there is a trail to follow
which is that I cheated you
because I always assumed the manifold
was simply connected
when the manifold is not simply connected
you have to take into account
not the Dirac operator on the base
but the Dirac operator with coefficients in a flat bundle
and the idea is that the generations
come from this flat bundle
and
this should be very natural
because when you compute
coefficients in a flat bundle
it really looks like generations
they look alike
so that's the idea
that's something which is
of course not done
you believe that
there are finally many families
or
we believe three of course
it's known experimentally
the odds that you have more than three
is very very small
yeah
yeah sure
the boy is breaking
the rule
you are finished
so
yes
you have some questions
go ahead
no no, you already talked enough
just a little bit
layman question
just at the beginning of your talk
you talk about fine structures
oh fine structure, let me explain
you know very well that when you take
the atomic spectra
they look simple from a distance
but when you look finer and finer
for instance you have this hyperfine splitting
of the
I think it's a 55th electron
of the
cesium
so
so what happens
is that when you get closer
and closer when you look at things with microscope
you find more structure
this is the idea
I mean you should read
no no but you should read Riemann
I mean don't listen to me
just go back to the text of Riemann
and you will see that he had the intuition
it's amazing
it's really amazing because he was saying
he had already understood the limitation
of his point
the limitation of his point was
that of course it should work beautifully
in the large but not in the small
and the reason was
that his intuition I don't know how to understand
his intuition I am totally unable to do that
but his intuition was that everything
was based on light rays and solid bodies
and solid bodies no longer
makes sense in the very small which is true
neither do light rays we know because of the photon
the photon is a particle it's not
so that's sort of the simplification
of the
domain and so now
you introduce when you formulate
you have the C
so
doesn't that complicate things
the C over
the capital the complex
the M
M sub C
the matrices
so I was just wondering
if we include this complex domain
doesn't that point that
the invariance principle so we are
going to have problems with our gauge
solution
you see
the belief in there
the belief in this story is the following
is that one day I understood
the following that
we are born in quantum mechanics
cannot deny that
you see quantum mechanics this is what you
are saying in your talk and quantum mechanics has been
verified
the spin system
it's really a sphere
you know it's
so I mean this has been verified
this has been checked so many times
that we cannot say nature
is classical and then we try
no nature is quantum
it's really quantum and
from this quantum stuff
we have to understand how
our vision
our sort of
very classical
natural selection
way of saying things can emerge
that's one way
it's very very difficult
of course you know I mean
there is no reason why
I think
the system
the sort of sociological system
in physics and also in mathematics
it's very wrong because
I love
people who have doubts
and I think it's crucial that we have doubts
and I think that it's crucial also
that we manifest these doubts
if we are just preaching
it's a catastrophe
it's a catastrophe
and I admire Gabriele for that
you know because
and I think you did right
this is the right thing to do
we spend our lives doubting
the chances that we are right
they are tiny
they are tiny
because what we have in front of us
is most rules
the mountain information
is most rules
and a lot of things we have to understand is most rules
so we have to doubt of course
no more questions
well thank you very much for the master class
thank you
