This is a topic that is probably my favorite topic of all the things we're working on.
It's probably the hardest thing we've ever worked on.
And it's going to be, as a talk, a little different from what I think you're probably
accustomed to in the sense that I'm not going to be able to give you an answer.
In fact, it's not even trivial to phrase the questions, but I'm going to be trying to
phrase the questions.
There are some issues that one can define pretty clearly.
But the underlying notion of where life came from or even what life is is just an extremely
interesting question.
And I want to start with one of the meta-issues, which is particularly interesting to me as
a chemist about this.
And it has to do with the way different subjects are thought about.
So if you consider the question of science in big, unsolved questions, you can ask where
do chemistry, physics, biology, and so on stand in the scheme of things.
And I think if you were to talk to most people about what physics does, they would have a
pretty clear answer that it's the origin of everything in dark matter and dark energy
and nuclear weapons and quantized spacetime and all the rest of it.
And don't misunderstand me.
I am absolutely for quantized spacetime.
I just don't have any idea what it means.
Then you go to biology, and biology does disease and differentiation and development
and what's an animal and things of that kind, and people understand that.
And then astronomy is stars, they blow up, they make fantastic pictures.
And you go to chemistry, and it's not completely clear what the answer is.
And there's a little bit of the feeling that you get when you go to what used to be called
the UK.
I don't know what we will call it in the future.
Where if you hear an announcement on the radio, it will say the sciences and chemistry.
And that carries something with you.
So what does chemistry do?
It is true that it makes better glue.
There are a series of problems, and this is one, where I think that the problems that
chemistry must address fall in this category of being very big ones.
And I would argue that the origin and nature of life is not a biological question.
It's really kinetics and molecules and how they come together to make something that
is completely unexpected.
It may as really an interesting subject.
Then there are others that come after that, such as sentience.
And some of the problems that come up in the origin of life come up in the origin of sentience,
but it's a little bit more complicated subject.
So we're going to talk about it only very briefly, only at the end.
Now let me show you a couple of slides that I showed some of you before, but I want to
make a point about this.
If you look from left to right in these slides, you understand that this is the natural order
of things.
If you do the same thing the other way around, it's the unnatural order.
And the question is, we all say it's perfectly obvious that you don't demix milk and coffee.
But it's worth the effort stopping for a moment and asking why it's obvious that you don't
demix milk and coffee.
It is not a trivial question.
I mean, yes, it has to do with the entropy of mixing, and it has to do with conversion
of potential energy into heat and things of that kind.
But do stop for just a second and ask about it, because it's very intimately connected
to the subject I'm going to talk about, which is the origin of life, which has a little
bit this character.
So I showed you this before, which is we know how to make a chicken into chicken soup.
The question is, can you make chicken soup into chicken?
And we don't know how to do that, but it's a little bit even worse than that, because
it's really this.
So suppose you have something of this kind, which is, I think, what many people would
argue is the plausible cradle for life.
And then you pour the chicken soup into it, and out of it comes something like that.
And it seems very hard to understand how that can happen.
How do you go from a system that's disordered, dilute, contains all kinds of other stuff,
mostly other stuff, how do you go from that spontaneously, not only to a more ordered
state, but also to a state that has the characteristic that, depending upon how you want to phrase
it, it's self-evolving or self-assembling.
We know how to do that once you get to life, but we don't know how to do it at the very
beginning.
That's one reason, at least one reason, why I find the subject so interesting.
So the basic issue, we know that molecules are not alive.
We know that the cell is molecules.
Chemical reactions are not alive.
Cells are assemblies of reactions, molecules, but cells are alive.
So what happens?
How does a cell, which is a collection of reacting molecules, become alive?
And there are various answers about that.
The one that I'm going to come back to is that I think that life is simply a name that
we give to a certain kind of reaction, set of reactions.
But that makes life, in a sense, a question of networks, and we don't understand how that
works.
I'm going to give you a couple of questions to think about during the course of what comes
from here.
So the first question is where and when and how did biological life start?
And we have a little bit of an idea about that, but it raises an interesting question
of could there be other kinds of life other than the life we know?
And the second question is, was the start deterministic or random?
And what I mean by that is in every planet that's a water planet and that has distribution
elements, is life inevitable?
Is it something that will always happen or is this just a quirk that happened once per
galaxy or once per universe or once per all of recorded time?
And I think at the moment we don't know that.
You can make guesses about each of these, but I don't think we know the answer.
So this has to do with statistics and probabilities, and that has to do with knowing what these
reactions are.
How does dissipation allow chaos to become order?
And we know that you can go from a disordered system to a more ordered system if the free
energy of the system goes in the right direction, and this is the second law.
But having said that, understanding how you couple dissipation of free energy to the creation
of order in detail is not at all a trivial question here.
So was it chaos or, you know, one of the questions you can ask is there's something
else that we're missing in this?
Where do alive and not alive separate?
And I'll come back to this subject again at the end, but we have two words for something
which is not clearly a binary distinction.
I mean, I don't know that there's a bright line in between life and not alive, alive
and not alive.
It may be a continuum, and if it's a continuum, what are the properties in between and what
are the properties beyond either end?
These are questions that are very, very important when one is thinking about other forms of
life.
So those are interesting, and there's a question of, which is relevant to this subject, which
is early life and current life.
Is current life a reflection of what happened at the beginning or was it really different
at the beginning?
Was evolution sufficiently large scale that the traces of what was the first evolving
system totally different?
And I don't think at the moment we know the answer to that question.
And so this is going to prove very relevant to one of the principal topics that I want
to talk about in terms of the sociology of this field.
And then is life more than a name for just a set of molecular processes?
And there are people who feel passionately on this subject both ways.
So is life just like a flame in a sense?
And then finally, if one, like me and others, have set off to study this, how do we know
when we've been successful?
What is the measure that you've gotten over some hump and you're beginning to see something
that says that we sort of know what's going on?
So where did life start?
And we don't actually know where, but let's assume it started on this Earth.
And when, we actually have a pretty good idea.
The formation of Earth itself, the formation of the planet, was about 4.5, 4.6 billion years
ago.
And that's fairly accurately stated.
The first, this is what's called the end of the period of heavy bombardment and ocean
evaporators as represented by this.
What does that mean?
And it means that the things that were falling in this period were big enough that you ask
the question, this object comes in and falls through the atmosphere, falls into an ocean,
what happens to the ocean, and the answer is it evaporates.
So the surface of the planet is then covered with superheated steam for 100,000 years or
something like that.
And that doesn't sound like a really great place for something as fragile as a cell to
come together.
The age of the oldest fossilized bacteria, this is still a question of some debate, but
in this period, so 4.2, 4.3 to maybe 3.5 giga years ago.
And some of the oldest traces are, in fact, in Western Australia.
But there are arguments as to what's real and what's a geological thing.
This question, how did different sets of molecules and reactions unite?
And a point which is actually quite an interesting point, which is that you can argue that life
emerged alarmingly early.
That is, if this were something which was really a random event, thinking about the
difficulty of what has to have happened, it seems that it must have happened pretty
rapidly.
Now, it's true there's a lot of ocean, and a billion years here or there is a lot.
But the fact that it happened as early as it did, I mean, the planet's surface was barely
enough to sustain things without boiling them off, has raised some people to raise the question
that maybe it came from somewhere else, so-called panspermia.
And if it did, it doesn't really change the situation, because you can then ask the question
of where it started there.
You just don't know the time scale.
Now in more detail, there's some things here that are plausible but a little surprising
to chemists.
The first is that the planet at that point was largely a water planet.
There are people who argue about whether it was completely underwater or mostly underwater.
It was probably mostly underwater with some land above water, probably 10% of the above
water land that we now have.
The continental plates were probably informed, their discussion, extensive volcanism because
if there were plates, it was thin relative to what we have now.
Lots of geothermal activity.
The sun was cool and very UV-rich, so there was a lot of stuff going on in the upper atmosphere
that produced big gradients in oxidation and things of that sort.
There was continuing impaction, which may have been important, because it's interesting
that when even a pretty small meteor runs into the atmosphere, you ask what happens
to the stuff that's in front of the meteor as the meteor comes in at faster than the
speed of sound, and the answer is it just piles up.
So a meteor simply punches a hole through the atmosphere that's 5 kilometers across, takes
all that stuff, ionizes it into a plasma, and then smashes it into whatever it happens
to run into.
And there's the potential for doing a lot of chemistry there, but we know a lot about
how that chemistry works.
We know something about the atmosphere.
There was maybe oxygen in the very upper regions, probably the upper regions in fact were fairly
oxidizing, at the surface, it was mostly CO2 and N2 in water, and there are arguments
about how much fixed nitrogen and methane and oxygen, there were probably a lot of methane
from geothermal sources, probably not a lot of oxygen, who knows about this.
And then the oceans were acidic, probably a pH 5, mildly reducing because they were
bright red, mostly iron.
And then there was a lot of what I call pond scum.
And pond scum means that the atmosphere had been swept off a number of times into outer
regions of the solar system, and subjected to this UV-rich sun's radiation, and what
you tend to get under those circumstances are molecules like HCN, which have the characteristic
that they have a very strong bond in a small number of pieces, because generally thermodynamically
you favor things entropically under those conditions that have broken up the molecule
into the maximum number of pieces.
So when you see people doing synthesis in this area, you'll find a lot of reliance on
HCN and H2S and acetylene and things of that sort, which seem a little implausible and
on Earth they probably are, but in this period in the formation of the planet they were probably
okay.
So I put this picture up again to prejudice you, because I think this is what we're ultimately
thinking about, whether this was on land or underwater, I don't know, but the virtue
of having it on land is that it also accumulated the stuff that was falling down, it was subject
to UV radiation, it just seems like a good sort of concentrator and reactor for a lot
of things.
And we can ask a little bit now about life itself as we know it, and a good question
is one that we can answer.
What is the simplest cellular form of life right now?
And this is probably it, it's an organism known as microplasmagenitalium, Ventner, Herbenner
has done a lot of work with this, and you can look at the genome of this, the genome
is 5.8 megabases, and there are in the order of 800 proteins expressed, and of those 800
proteins we know what in the order of somewhere between 550 and 600 of them are, and you can
make guesses about some of the others, but it just gives you a sense that this is a bag
of molecules that make up this number of proteins which do whatever life does.
So that's the introduction, now we're going to go on and talk about some of these other
subjects, and just to give you a little bit of orientation, one of the disagreements in
this community, there's a schism right down the center between those who believe in what's
called the RNA world, which says that, I don't fall in the RNA world, so I'm going to put
this in a slightly prejudiced way, the RNA world says it is so obvious that life must
have come from RNA, which was both a catalyst and a memory molecule, that let's just assume
that there was RNA and then go on from there, and then the other part, and this is me, says
I can't see how to get to RNA, so I don't care where there was a light, it was a catalyst
and a memory molecule, I don't see how to get there, and there's a quite a difference
between these two points of view.
We'll talk about this a bit, we'll talk about some of the results from our work in chemical
fossils and about dissipative networks, and I'm just going to talk briefly at the end
about information in the context of this subject.
So what does this cell do for a living?
It replicates itself and it makes the pieces for doing replication and controls that.
And the replication guys are the core of the RNA world and the metabolism guys worry about
where the pieces came from.
So the basic schema is that you start with, and we all agree with this basic structure,
somewhere there are simple chemicals like H2S and CO2 and HCN, and then a lot of geochemistry.
And the geochemistry is intensely interesting and not really very well understood by current
chemistry.
We don't know a lot about geochemistry, but it's much more complicated than you would
think.
So simple molecules make more complex molecules and that's fine.
Somewhere there are precursors to RNA, somehow the precursors to RNA become RNA, RNA becomes
DNA and we sort of know why that happened in terms of stability.
So that you can either start intellectually by saying we know about DNA, we know a lot
about RNA, we can ask about that, and let's just assume that this happens somehow because
this is also satisfying and plausible.
And the other point of view says we know about this, we know about this, but we don't understand
how to connect the two.
And those are sort of the two different approaches to the problem.
Now what about the RNA world?
Why is it so satisfying?
Well, RNA is a very interesting molecule.
Let's start with DNA.
RNA is, of course, the double helix, it's the memory molecule and we understand a lot
about DNA, it contains information in base pairs, but more to the point the cell puts
in a lot of effort to make DNA out of RNA because you get long-term stability that way,
long-term chemical stability.
But RNA has the characteristic that it looks a lot like DNA in terms of a sequence of bases
which in many circumstances will base pair, and also RNA is a catalyst.
So if it's both a catalyst and in principle, both in principle a catalyst and in principle
a memory molecule, it must have been the thing that started off this particular approach.
But part of the evidence sort of favoring this is the ribosome, which is, of course,
a key molecule in replication of proteins.
And it has the characteristic that you can think of it depending upon your point of view
as a matrix of proteins with RNA plastered in between or I think more plausibly as a
giant catalyst made out of RNA with proteins stabilizing the whole business.
And it's a mixture of these two, it's about half and half.
The problems with this point of view is that RNA, A, we can't figure out how to get there
in my view.
Further, RNA is a catalyst, but it's not a very good catalyst.
What it mostly does is catalyze reactions that involve phosphates, and it isn't a very good,
it looks like it should be a good memory molecule, but it isn't really.
So yes, these are good steps along the way, but it's not obvious that that's the final
thing.
So one of the questions that you can ask here is the plausible question of, OK, so RNA isn't
the right thing as we know it now and either for catalysis or for memory, but maybe we're
missing some steps.
Maybe there was something like RNA which would work better, but it disappeared through evolution.
I don't think anyone has a good suggestion of what that might be, but it certainly is
a possibility.
Now the other approach is to say metabolism.
And there's been some absolutely brilliant chemistry done by Albert Escher Moser and Leslie
Orgel and John Sutherland and Christian Dedeuve and many others who've thought about the kinds
of molecules that you can make in an organic laboratory, and they have done amazing stuff
and particularly I would point to Escher Moser and Sutherland.
Escher Moser had a very nice synthesis of vitamin B12 that involved nothing more than
HCM.
So he made vitamin B12, which is a very complex molecule, starting just from those pieces.
The trouble with that was that the synthesis, which was absolutely brilliant, also involved
20 years of very, very skilled synthetic technicians in Zurich in well-defined laboratory conditions.
And whether that really tells you something about what could have happened in a wildly
disordered planet, I don't know.
I happen to think not, but I could be wrong.
So this is an issue.
You can make very important things, and Sutherland has even found a way of going from simple
pieces directly to a base as a precursor for RNA, whether this applies or not is a question.
So the question to arcane conditions, that is conditions in the peri-biotic world, is
that there's no obvious route to RNA using this kind of thing or the proteins.
The laboratory conditions under which this all happened, smokers and volcanoes and lightnings
and toxic compounds, don't bear much resemblance to what's going on up here.
And then there are a series of things having to do, particularly with concentration.
Because if you're going to have two molecules react with one another at a finite rate,
they have to have some proximity to one another.
And if they're dilute present, but dilute in an ocean, what is the probability that
you will get reactions that lead to the kind of thing that you want with a cell?
Probably not high.
There are hints that I think are interesting, and one is relevant to what I'm going to
tell you later, that there might be other ways of doing it.
So for example, you can make peptides, you can make proteins, little proteins, without
having a ribosome.
And the method that's probably most important now is something which is actually pretty
complicated in its own right, but it involves a piece of machinery in which the sequence
of the protein is determined by the sequence of subunits, protein subunits, which instead
of using RNA and activated amino acids, use thioesters.
And this is one reason why Christian Dedeuve talked about the thioester world.
This particular thing makes molecules of this sort and a bunch of other bacterially derived
antibiotics that are oligopeptides, but probably more important, exactly the same kind of chemistry
makes fatty acids, which are the lipids that make up the cell membrane.
So it's a very successful reaction pathway.
Now just a couple of points here, and this is as a reminder something you already know.
When we talk about equilibrium systems in chemistry, we sort of understand what we're
doing.
We have pretty well established rules for doing equilibrium.
We do understand the sources of free energy that could be used in the origin of life.
So sunlight and radioactive decay, heat in the center of the earth coming out in thermal
gradients, concentration gradients, things of that sort.
It turns out that although there are many gradients in, for example, temperature between
a kilometer down in the earth and the surface, we don't have very good methods of harnessing
that kind of energy, free energy to do chemistry with.
And there is a point, and this is for those of you who are students primarily to remember.
When we talk about free energy, we write delta G0 equals delta H0 minus T delta S0, and
we phrase this in kilocalories per mole as if it were a fundamental property.
And actually it's the wrong way of writing the equation.
You should really write it as delta G0 over T equals delta H0 over T minus double F minus
delta S0, which is a statement of second law thermodynamics.
So everything is basically the second law, and there's no separate thing which is free
energy is just entropy that runs everything.
The problem with this is that of course this is all in equilibrium conditions, and exactly
how to think about something that might be a thermodynamics for a dissipative system we
do not know, even though some very smart people have thought about the problem.
So in a sense, this issue begins to boil down to the nature of dynamic and dissipative networks,
and we don't have a very good understanding of these either theoretically or empirically.
And there are some important issues in auto-amplification and auto-catalysis that I'll come to, and there's
a whole field of what we call systems chemistry and biochemistry, which is a subject of active
discussion, but it is not correct to say that the field has solved its internal problems.
So then let me turn to some experimental results.
And we've taken the following kind of approach.
One is that we have been interested in looking at what I call arcane compatible chemistry,
that is chemistry that we have chosen in the hope that it might actually be directly relevant
to the conditions of the peribiotic earth as opposed to the conditions of a modern synthetic
laboratory.
It's a different kind of chemistry.
And I'll give you a couple of examples just to give you a notion in ATP and the origin
of the potassium sodium gradient that characterizes all of life right now, and then things like
chisprinoids and metallocofactors.
I'm going to sketch and only sketch the area in which we spent the most work.
I've talked about this briefly here before, but it's the issue of a thioester-based network
and what one can get out of that in terms of self-organizing behavior.
And then finally a bit on information.
So molecular fossils, the argument here is purely hypothetical, and it may be wrong,
but the argument is the following, that if you're thinking about the origin of life,
what you might want to do to trace back to whatever was going on then is to look at features
that are common to all life now.
Maybe it evolved later, but if it was a good idea at the very beginning, maybe it stuck.
What are some examples?
Well, all life has the characteristic that it has its high on potassium on the inside
and it lives in an environment in which sodium is rich on the outside.
So in fact, the storage of free energy in terms of the potassium-sodium ratio is one
of the great commonalities across life.
We look at this now and we say, well, that's obvious.
If you've got potassium and sodium, you can make a storage battery by simply concentrating
the dilute thing.
The problem with that is that, of course, before there was life, there was no sentience
and there was certainly no thermodynamic analysis.
So something else has to have happened then.
Polyphosphates, that means ATP.
One can make a pretty clear case for that kind of come from thioesters.
I'm going to talk about that.
They're common throughout life, ATP and the common cofactors are common throughout life.
Where did these things come from?
And then these major metabolic cycles like the Krebs cycle and glycolysis and the light
sensitive molecules that are used almost everywhere to harvest sunlight, so porphyrins
and retinal and flavins and things of that kind.
So let's start with ATP because that one is easy.
This is, of course, the activating chemistry, the equivalent of the chloride, the carbonyl
chloride in all of synthetic chemistry that's used to activate oxygen.
And all it has to do is to take phosphate in the presence of urea on a hot rock and
you heat it at 100 degrees.
And what you see by capillary electrophoresis is this series of peaks, these sort of jagged
peaks there, each of which is another step longer polymer of polyphosphate.
So that it's not hard to take phosphate and condense it into polymers and, in fact, they're
organisms even now that use polyphosphate as a principle energy storage source.
And so it's natural to say that triphosphate attached to some recognition handle could
have been the origin of ATP.
That seems okay.
The sodium potassium gradient.
This is more complicated.
The question here is, is there a way in which you could plausibly have gotten to media that
were high in potassium and low in sodium even though the environment is very rich in sodium
and poor in potassium?
And to do this, you go to geochemistry.
And without going through the details, very common rocks are basalts and felsbars and
zeolites of various sorts and clays.
These are all basically aluminosilicates of various kinds.
And if you take one of these mixtures, you know, you take a mixture of potassium sulfate
and sodium sulfate, and you put in a solution with something that becomes, well, you start
with a molecular sieve and a mixture of sodium and potassium or aluminum mixture of sodium
and potassium, allow these to convert into their stable form.
The crystals that are formed here, the mineral that's formed here, is 100% potassium, essentially,
and with aluminum, it's 100% potassium, so that you can find geochemical processes which
naturally crystallize things in terms of very high potassium forms.
So the idea would be that you start with a sodium and potassium mixture of some kind.
You do a crystallization on the surface of a volcano, and then you wash away the sodium
that's left, and what you're left with is a potassium-rich brine.
And that would be the place where, in this argument, you would have started something.
And then, although we haven't done isopronoids, I think you can make a good story there, and
the story suggests this idea of missing things.
The way isopronoids are made in current isopronoids, for those of you who are not organic chemists,
are things that are derived from isoprene formally, which is this C5 molecule.
And the way it's made now is a pretty complicated process by which you start with acetyl-CoA,
which is a thioester.
You make this rather complicated molecule by some processes that we understand and end
up with this, and it's all under tight control.
But it turns out that the most stable and most abundant olefin in C4 that you can make
is isobutylene, a very stable molecule.
And formaldehyde very plausibly could have been formed by reaction of methane produced
geochemically, with oxygen produced by photolysis of water in the upper atmosphere.
There was almost certainly formaldehyde there, and a touch of acid makes this or precursors
of this, and then we know that acid from that begins to form the bonds that form this.
So here I think what happened was a natural process that went this way that's evolved
over time into this.
And that touches on the RNA issue in saying that there's no life that does this now, it's
been lost, but the products have been preserved, and it seems plausible that one could have
started with RNA precursors, something else that then evolved into RNA in the same general
way.
So one can work through a number of the important catalysts that are present in everywhere.
Urease is the enzyme that hydrolyzes urea.
Carbonic anhydrase is a key enzyme that catalyzes the equilibration of carbon dioxide and CO2,
carbon dioxide and carbonate.
The ferrodoxins are really important in various ways in redox chemistry, nitrogenase, whatever.
These all have active sites that look just like minerals.
So the idea that they may have formed by just taking colloids in smokers and wrapping,
stabilizing proteins or something around them makes pretty good sense.
So I think one can find plausible ways of making a very large number of cofactors, cofactor
containing enzymes from pieces that are either naturally occurring colloidal minerals or simple
molecules that could have been formed by the kind of processes that we're familiar with.
Now can you put all this together?
And here I'm giving you a kind of community view that probably the most plausible environment
to think of for these earliest life forms was this, or maybe it was a deep smoker, or
maybe it was a dying sea.
These have the characteristic that they concentrate because you have dilute solutions of things
coming in, they evaporate water in the heat, and so you get concentration, you get UV
irradiation, you get colloidal catalytic minerals being produced, you can imagine ways in which
you get a high potassium brine.
There are a lot of pieces that come together into a story that is not a convincing story
for anything, but it's a start.
There is however a little glitch, or at least in my view there's a glitch.
And you see it in, for example, metabolic processes that are common to all life, basically,
such as the Krebs cycle.
The Krebs cycle, if you look at it, it has a couple of thioesters, that's good, we're
comfortable with thioesters, although we don't know exactly how to make them.
There are things that are iron sulfur clusters, those are colloids from hot springs, there
are the sulfur compounds, we're certainly not acetyl-CoA, but they can have come from
hot springs.
This can have come from evaporation, there are other steps, here's another colloid.
The pieces all look together okay, but the problem is this one, that each one, you can
make an explanation for where it kind of come from, but we don't have any idea of how it
was all integrated into a piece.
High potassium brine, isobutylene plus acid, deep smoker, a deep smoker, probably hydrocarbon
junk and deep smokers, how does this all get together, no idea, not a clue right now.
So we're moving, having not declared success in point A, moving on to the problem that
I think is really the problem.
This is the era of the modern of the RNA world, the field of the RNA world, we're interested
in this problem, which is networks and are there alternatives to RNA in terms of memory?
I mean can you have a memory in a cell that isn't based on RNA or DNA?
And we've taken an approach to this, which is, we'll see.
It's to say that the cell is a dissipative system, it takes fuel, which is glucose and
other nutrients and oxygen and it burns them in a reactor, it makes CO2 and other forms
of waste and what it does with that is to generate the components that make the cell.
And we're going to model that in terms of something which seems ridiculously far away,
which is a flame and a flame takes a reactant which is a methane rather than glucose and
it takes oxygen and it burns them and it makes heat and light and CO2 and water.
So how do you put all that together, how do we learn something from this that is in any
sense relevant to this and we're going to do it by using chemical engineering to model
the cell with what those of you who are chemical re-engineers will recognize as a continuous
stirred tank reactor except that a cell doesn't require stirring because it's so small that
diffusive mixing is as fast as you need it to be.
Now we're going to do one other thing here, which is to try to deal with a problem of
complex behavior and if you remember a cell has the characteristic that it grows and then
it replicates and it grows and it replicates so there's a periodic behavior to it.
Where else do you see periodic behavior of that sort and one of the places that I've
always been curious about is that those of you who have seen and even worked with gas
stoves that have these ring burners will notice that when you turn down the flame as the flame
goes down you'll often get a rotating circular behavior, very interesting.
Where does that come from and what's happening there is that as the flame goes down locally
it will use up all the methane but it will illuminate the flame next to it and it goes
around in a circle and by the time flame comes back to here this will have gotten enough
methane in it that it can go off again, that's the sort of general process.
You're working just on the edge of instability.
So what we're going to do is to work with a flame in which in essence a flame in which
we have a chemical reaction not a methane reaction but it's one in which we are going
to try to get this kind of cyclic behavior.
And the system that we're going to work with is thioesters and I'm going to tell you the
result for those of you who are organic chemists that are interesting and important.
The reason for working with this system is that thioesters have a remarkable characteristic
which is this carbon-sulfur bond can exchange with other carbon-sulfur bonds essentially
quantitatively rather than hydrolyzing which makes it an ideal system for working with
an ideal reactant for working with system.
So this is another argument for the thioester kind of world and ignoring the details the
relative rates of hydrolysis of the system we studied in detail the relative rates of
exchange reactions one thio for another versus hydrolysis is in the order of 100,000 to one
which is enough to do anything we need to do.
So it's a very, very good reaction and I think a number of us have the intuition that the
only reactions that have the robustness to contribute to the development of complexity
are reactions that go in essentially quantitative yield.
So here's the reaction don't bother to look at it because it's too complicated to understand
I just want to put it up there to make the case the following case that if I look at
this as a long-term organic chemist I can't make any sense out of it it's too many things
going on and I can write the differential equations and in fact solve them but or simulate
them but that doesn't help me very much either.
So it's a problem that comes up fairly often in the chemistry of complex systems that you
can get things to work empirically but by doing so you don't necessarily learn everything
you all learn so understanding and doing are not the same things and what we've begun
to appreciate is that there are other languages for thinking about these kinds of complex systems
that make them much easier to work with and the one that we're pursuing at this point
is control theory which is a language and approach to the simulation and control of
complex systems such as for example a petroleum refinery and we've broken this problem up
into pieces that actually can be understood and the entire system I'm going to show you
all of this stuff consists of three steps there's a step that's an auto-amplifying step
in which once a set of reactions reaches a certain critical value a reaction goes off
exponentially and for many complex behaviors you need auto-amplification to set this off
we need a trigger and the trigger is going to be composed of a process that makes the
triggering molecule competing with another process that destroys the triggering molecule
and there's a third step which is washing out of the reactor which enables you to control
the concentrations of many of the pieces all at the same time those are the components
and when you embody this in an actual device it's pretty straightforward a little complicated
to do but syringes that feed the reactants into a mixer the mixer goes into a stirrer
you measure products that come out and there's a lot of technical detail in this but the
basic structure is very easy to understand and when you do that this is the behavior
you see that is if you look for example at the products you will see as you increase
the rate at which you feed the reactants into the reactor a steady state you change
that rate you get to another steady state you change that you get to another steady
state you change you get to another one goes down and then you reverse that process here
to here to here and you don't go back this way you go a different way so the system shows
what's called by stability that is proceeding in one direction you get this series of behaviors
and proceeding in the reverse of this behavior you get a totally different set of procedure
of reactions so by stability you see oscillations so the reactions show spontaneous oscillations
like the division of cells and maybe completely unrelated but it's that kind of stability
and you see something that I'll come back to which is that as you change the control
parameter here which is the space velocity which is basically the rate at which you
feed reactants into the reactor you see this complex behavior over a range but when you
make it faster or slower that behavior disappears so it's a behavior that's defined over a limited
set of circumstances and as many processes with life if you freeze me solid I don't work
if you heat me to 100 degrees I don't work so I don't think it's worth the effort here
to go through the details other than just to show a couple of essential features in
the auto amplification reaction what one does is to start with a reaction that has a thiol
group you do chemistry which was designed and at the end of a single cycle of reaction
you get two thiols it is amazingly difficult in chemistry to design such processes there
are very few of them the explosion is one crystallization arguably is one maybe electoral
is deposition but for reasons that I don't understand you just don't see very many auto
amplifying or autocatalytic reactions I think it's probably an area where there's great
room for discovery the trigger is simply to take one of these things and to hydrolyze
it it's the thiol that starts the reaction and we can control how much of that's here
by having a reaction that destroys that and you can see this is in red the concentration
of this inhibitor as it's consumed the auto amplifying reaction does nothing so long as
it's there as soon as it goes away the reaction goes off autocatalytically so that's the triggering
process and then inhibition is a related kind of thing it's even more complicated to understand
but this behavior here this is the first time that anyone has taken a system which is biologically
relevant in the sense of containing kinds of chemistry that could have occurred and demonstrated
a complex by stable oscillating behavior of the sort that you see here and it's quite
interesting and their business got a number of people very excited now one thing that
fits into this that is a you know a broadly interesting subject to me is the issue of
robustness what you find in these systems is that they do this oscillation but they do
it only a very narrow range interestingly though you take related molecules which do not oscillate
you put them in and they're entrained by the oscillating reaction so the whole system
oscillates and so what you can do is to make a system that oscillates but over a much broader
range of conditions by including a mixture of things which do what they do it raises
a question which has to do with Darwin and we have a picture of Darwinian evolution which
says that what life does is to optimize its behavior to make the fastest cheetah or the
best beak for a goldfincher or whatever it might be an alternative view is to say that
all of that is a view of life which is life as it is now in a highly optimized form and
at the beginning what in fact we may have needed was the most robust reaction is possible
which is actually quite different set of processes and so these these kinds of things provide
a very good way of studying that kind of thing now let me finish by just talking briefly
about this question of memory because one of the characteristics of life is that it
has a memory that's DNA and the characteristic of DNA is it's carefully tuned so that in
each cycle of replication there's a certain amount of error those errors generate the
mutations which allow the system to evolve so mutations and error big deal so when we
think about memory and you know think about evolution we have to think about these kinds
of questions and I raised these for you to consider as we go on here how do we know whether
something is alive or dead I mean what's the criterion we're going to use it's alive it can
mutate and evolve if it's dead presumably it can't but is there a distinction that we can
make between live and dead or not alive and we're talking about something of this sort well
I'll come back to this in just a moment but is a frozen embryo alive it does no chemistry
it doesn't evolve it doesn't do anything but you warm it up and it becomes palpably alive
is there a point sharp point where something happens what about a virus or what about a city
is the city alive it certainly can evolve it has a memory it can divide it can do all the other
things that a principle a cell can do but it's certainly not a cell and then an interesting
question that we're beginning to think about is if we have a hard time understanding how
something becomes alive can we understand how things die and that's not so easy either
because there's we think of death in a pretty straightforward way as the brain stops working
but that doesn't have all that much to do arguably with whether something an organism is alive or
dead because many organisms don't have live brains anyway living or dead so I want to show you just
a couple of plots along this axis I'm going to have a liveness and I don't know what that is
and along this axis I'm going to have complicatedness or complexity which are somewhat different
and I don't know exactly what that is either but pictures of this would be in one sense a binary
that is something is dead up to a certain point where it's not alive where a flip a switch flips
and it becomes alive that's binary another would be something of this sort it would be sort of
exponential or maybe it'd be sigmoidal if it's exponential it becomes more complicated it becomes
more alive and you could then ask where we are in this or you could say and I think this is the
kind of in the back of the mind interpretation that we tend to have which is that life started
with nothing it got more and more complicated until it reached the ultimate crown of creation which is
us and maybe that's right or maybe it's not right but then there are other things of this sort and
the one that I think keeps cropping up is folded bifurcations and an evolved bifurcation that
governing equation that would be an exponential here actually looks like this and it has the
characteristic that things are going along and going along and they're getting more complicated
and that at a certain point something happens and it doesn't continue up in that direction it undergoes
a transition it hops but then when you turn down the complexity it comes down here it doesn't
reverse the path it does this it's by stable in that sense and I showed you an example of that
with the thiol chemistry but it could this be what we should be imagining or should we be imagining
this or we should we be imagining this I mean what what is the proper description of how something
goes from not alive to alive and I don't think we have this is not a question of origin of life
a broader question I don't think we have a good answer to that
so when you're thinking about that I think most people who are scientists are now
sufficiently marinated in the world of binary arithmetic that we tend to have a binary prejudice
and I want to just do a quick comparison of binary as in integrated circuits with
whatever it is that goes on with enzymes so when one thinks about an integrated circuit you're
thinking about a collection of switches that are mostly on or off there's a common working fluid
which is electrons everything works with electrons and everything works at a common voltage between
the rail and and ground the function of this system is defined by the fixed topography of the system
that is what's connected to what the switches are binary and they're really fast memory is
capacitors are magnetic domains that are switched on or off that's a a the system is in the sense
non-bolts one that is the on and off are equally energetic that's not quite true but we don't need
to worry about it but the whole system is organized by a common clock so all the things go through
steps in synchrony and that's a way of thinking about it biochemistry is fundamentally different
it's not this it's this everything is sigmoidal the cell is a sac so the dimensions are set by
diffusion there's no topographical organization there are multiple working fluids every compound
in principle can influence every one of the other switches it doesn't slightly synchronized maybe
you get sigmoidal responses it's very slow and it has memory embedded in dnar and they are maybe in
networks so they're fundamentally different systems and should we think about them the same way
how do we think about control and i don't want to go through any of this other than to point out
that in biology you use control strategies that look like this for example for high amplification
molecule a will go to b and b will be converted back to a but b will a catalyst for c goes to d
and d will it be a catalyst for e goes to f and if you look at an important reaction like forming a
blood clot it looks like that why does it have that structure and i don't think we have any idea
why it has that structure but it's a very interesting problem so i've raised with you a number of
questions and i don't think that i can answer really any of them which is why it's such an
interesting area but i think this final slide is one that's good to leave the subject with
you can ask the question what is life and perhaps as with an electron and i mentioned this in the
previous slide when i talked to my friends who are physicists and say what is an electron
what they say is you can't ask that question you can't ask the question of what an electron is
you can only ask the question of what it does and so it may be that we have a slightly confused
impression with this subject of asking what it is as opposed to asking what it does
and you come out with quite different answers when you think about two different things that way
so it is a wonderful subject to think about it actually is one of the big problems in science
it is something which i think only chemistry can do or chemistry chemistry and chemical
engineering and it's something for us to have a good deal of fun working with i can't at the moment
think of a single application of this but that's okay thank you very much for the invitation
thank you george there was a question
so when for example people at nasa when they're looking for another life form
the answer to that is we don't know and if you ask what could another solvent be
you can think of other solvents well let's say one of the characteristics of water
is that you can put a hydrocarbon shell around water in terms of the lipid and make a compartment
that's probably necessary for life as it develops there are other solvents in which you could do
that for example hcn the problem is that it's not so easy to make oceans of hcn and pure hcn
has the characteristic that it's a neat liquid but it blows up so hcn i think would have a tendency
to go wrong my colleague frank westheimer ex-colleague frank westheimer wrote a paper
at one point which he called why phosphate and he simply went through all of biochemistry as he
knew it and asked if there was anything that he could think of that could replace phosphate in
water containing life and he came up with the conclusion nothing could replace phosphate
so that doesn't mean you couldn't think of something else but it does mean it's going to be a hard
thing to do so my guess is that if you want to look for other forms other planets with life
it's good to look for water and you know the figure which i think i've told some of you you hold
your finger at that size roughly at about an arm's length and point in any direction and you see a
billion galaxies that angle sometimes a billion galaxies and each of those galaxies is 10 billion
stars and most of those stars well many of those stars will have planets and at least some of those
planets are bound to be water so i think there's effectively an infinite number of water planets
around there how long life lasts is a different question maybe there were a you know a billion
year phenomenon but you don't know the answer that's again it's a neat question we don't
know very many alkaline events there are a lot more acidic vents that doesn't mean that a slightly
idiosyncratic reaction couldn't have happened in alkaline ones and i agree that there's a lot of
good chemistry that you can do in alkaline systems that you can't do in acidic systems
on the other hand the whole ocean was acidic so that if you're doing something in event and it's
then spewing out into the environment you'd have to do it in alkaline conditions and have it stable
under city conditions yeah i i agree i think they're very interesting and for those of you
who don't follow this subject there is an argument that the initial life if you want to put it that
way the initial cell was not a lipid container but it was a crack in the rock and the crack was
lined with catalytically active minerals and it had stuff flowing by it and may have had a
plug of hydrocarbon junk at the end but it didn't look at all like a cell as we now know it it looked
like a geological feature and it developed later on and it could have certainly developed in an
alkaline environment
my question is about the RNA sort of group and you seem to indicate that there were two
ways of thinking about things but potentially they could be joined and i was wondering if you
thought that some of the work you showed here today could still lead to the development of
RNA in species and then from there we can see where we're going to DNA from this stuff
absolutely yes the question is is there reaction chemistry that goes from the simple pieces that
we can imagine to RNA or did RNA come by through something look like RNA but was simpler and easier
to come by or did it just happen that you know some alkaline environment whatever
coughed up RNA i don't see how you cough up RNA but john southerland thinks that it's possible and
in specially controlled conditions he has made one base
you've raised the difficulties with answering the what is life question by focusing on things
entities and saying is this alive is that alive maybe we can overcome the difficulty by thinking
of life and obviously a series of entities but it's a process that process converted a simple
cell that's a simple life into complex life giraffes etc and then that same process
exactly that same process not formulated in chemical terms converted
inanimate matter let's say dead matter into simplest life and therefore by thinking about
life as a process and focusing less on specific chemicals or materials one can get a better
understanding of what life is i think that's exactly right in fact and as i said to me life
is like a flame that is it is a collection of reactions which has a certain set of properties
and so the reason we focus on reactions and entities is to in a sense provide a plausibility
to things how could you have gotten complexity but a flame even a methane oxygen flame is probably
10 000 reactions and we're very happy with a flame without ever knowing how a flame actually
operates and my guess might if i had to guess i would say life is going to be like that so it is
a series of processes and networks which have a property in their aggregate but maybe have
different forms in between what's so interesting about life as a process you take methane oxygen
you heat it and all of the free energy potential free energy there is dumped as heat what happens
in life is it is exquisitely good at taking that overall free energy gap and pulling off little
pieces of it and using each little piece in a different way and the question is really how
would you go from something that's a big gradient undifferentiated into a series of little ones that
build constructively to something that becomes more complicated and i don't understand how to do that
right now hi george i'm a archaeologist and i'm going to come to dinner with you and i'm interested
to talk a bit more and so excuse this question i'm not a chemist but about three slides before the
end you showed a series of reactions that sort of stepped one to the other and like as intuitively
that looks like a very nice approach in prior to that you talked about the difficulty of some
chemical reactions going into binary and duplicating themselves but that stepwise reaction about
developing complexity in a piecemeal way where each reaction is not at all dependent on what
falls on but it comes to a certain stage and then it gets added on like complexity that that
intuitively looks very exciting is that a common way that chemistry works it's a common way that
chemistry works i mean if you think about complex synthesis you do reactions and reactions and
reactions and each one makes a more complicated piece and at the end you have a very complicated
structure however each is separate it's run in isolation and the conditions are typically
incompatible from one to another and so what seems to happen here maybe this also occurred in a
series of different thermal ponds or something of that kind it's just that we don't know so the
question of how you break up something into these pieces that make stuff that fits together into a
network that shows complex behavior is an interesting question and that system that i showed you with
the network is probably not directly relevant to anything involving life except that the chemistry
is the kind of chemistry that you could easily occur imagine occurring in an alkaline vent or
even in an acidic vent so it is not wildly out of out of whack with what might have happened so it's
a small step if i can just follow up with a short teaser i think it's very interesting this question
about alkalinity versus acidity one of the things i think that's underappreciated about hot spring
fields is that within a single field which may have tens to hundreds of pools you get the entire
range from acid to alkaline and they can exchange information he talked before about the oceans
being problematic in terms of them being very dilute and the problem of concentration
um so i think that's something to consider about the differences between an oceanic versus a
freshwater geothermal stuff one of the things which i've come to appreciate in this is that
if somebody's been studying chemistry for a long while there's an entire universe of stuff having
to do with geochemistry that is critically involved in this story since this is undoubtedly where
much of the free energy came from and the catalysts and the reactants and all the rest of that
i don't know anything about it at all nothing and it's a it's a it's a glaring hole in this
this subject right now we just don't know the chemistry so you and i are going to have a nice
dinner together let's thank you very much
