Lecture 19 Objectivity under Attack
We're going to begin our examination of the response to CUNE's structure of scientific revolutions published in 1962
by looking at responses that CUNE himself would not have been pleased by.
The first one comes from a Harvard colleague of his, Israel Scheffler,
but the other thinkers that I want to look at in this lecture,
Paul K. Feierabend and the French Michel Foucault and Jacques Derrida,
are thinkers whose ideas would have, I think, caused CUNE's deep concern
and in fact did cause CUNE's deep concern because while CUNE himself was, let's say, proscience,
believed that scientific knowledge was in some deep sense objective and progressive,
just not in the traditional sense, the enthusiastic response to CUNE's book
was on behalf of those people who used CUNE as a plank in a building
that they erected that was supposed to house an anti-objectivist set of ideas.
That was, in fact, in some respects, anti-science as objective knowledge
and that was opposed to the idea that reason was a neutral means of arriving at truth and knowledge.
So we're going to look at, in the context of what the so-called social construction of scientific knowledge,
those people distanced themselves from CUNE or rather CUNE did not associate himself with their ideas.
In this lecture, we're going to take a look at first Israel Scheffler's perception
that CUNE's book was a very dangerous book because it threatened to undermine fundamental intellectual
and moral values that are central to what Scheffler perceived to be important western cultural
and social political institutions, that CUNE's critique of the objectivity of scientific knowledge,
CUNE's critique of the traditional notion of the rationality of scientific knowledge
opened the way to the relativization of truth, that it implied that there is no such thing as truth with a capital T
and that that would inevitably slide into intellectual tribalism, into competing ideological camps,
each of which saying, this is true for me and this is true for me, which is, of course, exactly
what Plato warned that Protagoras's man as the measure of all things would do,
that that was what he found objectionable to the sophist, that he drove what the sophist said to the extreme of anything goes,
that if you deny truth with a capital T, if you deny the traditional notion of science,
the image of science by which we are currently possessed, an image that, at the beginning of structural scientific revolutions,
CUNE wanted to dismantle. Well, I guess you can't dismantle an image, he wanted to displace that image and say that that image is incorrect.
We need to look at science more clearly and we'll get a better picture, a clearer picture of the nature of scientific knowledge.
Scheffler argued in his book, Science and Subjectivity, based on a series of lectures that he gave just three years after CUNE's book gave out,
a series of lectures at Oberlin, when he was a visiting scholar at Oberlin College,
that CUNE's new image of science is the one that's incorrect. The image by which we are currently possessed is correct.
It is the view of science as an enterprise of reasonable men, that's what he said in 1965, today one imagines he would say of reasonable people,
but it is an enterprise of reasonable men who use logic and facts, logic and data, in order to arrive at conclusions in ways that compel ascent without coercion.
And that is the beauty and the genius and almost the sacred character of the Western intellectual tradition that we believe in,
that we hold out reason as a means of compelling ascent without physical coercion.
And if you give that up, if you say that no, logic won't do it, that scientific knowledge is not logically justified only,
that logic plays a role in scientific reasoning, but it is not enough by itself to establish the truth of scientific knowledge claims,
that logic and facts together are not enough, but that assumptions that cannot themselves be logically justified,
but only instrumentally justified, and we're familiar with that term instrumentally in terms of their predictive success,
in terms of the control that they give us and their explanatory power, then you have in effect given up the idea that reason can compel ascent.
All you can say is, rhetorically speaking, we think this argument is persuasive.
But I cannot compel ascent in the way, for example, that Hobbes, remember I told you that anecdote about Hobbes as a no longer quite so young man,
who when he first looked at a textbook of Euclidean geometry and saw a theorem that seemed to him wrong on the face of it,
then was told, no, no, if it's a theorem in Euclid, it's got to be true, and he actually followed through the demonstration,
and it struck it, wow, I can be forced to believe, to accept as true something that I was convinced was not true.
That's what converted it into a rationalist philosopher, remember, so that's the phenomenon that Scheffler is pointing to here.
The goal is to have a reasoned account of experience, to deal with experience reasonably in the hope that we can then sit down together
and reach shared conclusions without having to beat each other over the head.
And Tune's book, he says, is an obstacle to that.
It is a threat to the promise that we can overcome tribalism and achieve a unitary vision of knowledge, truth, and reality,
applying this, not just in intellectual spheres, because he was himself a professor of education at Harvard,
but at the level of politics, economics, and the moral and political spheres generally.
So Scheffler defended the claim, you have to read the book whether you decide that the defense matches Tune's critique,
but he defended the case, the claim that there are objective criteria for scientific theory formulation and scientific theory change,
that there is an objective given, that there are such things as neutral facts that determine the kinds of conclusions that you can draw from those facts,
that there is a constancy of method in the history of science, even though it looks superficially,
Descartes used a different method from Bacon and Bacon from Galileo and Newton from Leibniz, that at a deeper level there is a constancy of investigative method,
that there is a constancy in the descriptive language, these are Scheffler's terms, and the descriptive language that scientists use,
and that these allow us to see that science really is a privileged body of knowledge, that it is knowledge in a special way that we need to accept as a model
of what we should be pursuing in other spheres beyond the scientific one.
So he was not a reductionist in the sense of saying all human activity must be reduced to physics,
but he was very aggressive in defending the idea that the notion of reason that is our greatest hope for unifying mankind,
socially and culturally, is threatened by Kuhn's critique of science, because in critiquing science he was simultaneously critiquing the image of reason,
that was the dominant one in the history of the western philosophical tradition.
Well, one strong negative response to Kuhn, from the other side of the spectrum, on the other side of the political spectrum so to speak,
if we see Scheffler's defense as conservative, although he was politically liberal, but he was conservative in the sense of defending the status quo,
defending the classical objective, realist view of scientific knowledge, the other end of the spectrum was the Viennese philosopher of science,
Paul Feuerabendt, who felt that Kuhn didn't go far enough, that Kuhn was not so much wrong, he just wasn't right enough,
because he didn't go far enough in relativizing truth, and frankly saying that the concept of truth is relative, is a relative one.
Feuerabendt, a very interesting career, he was actually a student of music and seemed destined to a career in music,
then he became interested in the theater and worked in the theater.
During World War II, he served in the German army with distinction on the Russian front, was wounded, after the war, went back to the university again,
with a view of a career somehow in music or in theater, and attended some lectures in philosophy,
especially at a meeting when Wittgenstein visited, encountered Karl Popper, and somehow became fascinated with the philosophy of science,
did a doctorate in the philosophy of science at the University of Vienna, then went to England to study with Karl Popper at the London School of Economics,
because he thought that Karl Popper and his notion that the key to scientific knowledge is that scientific theory statements must be falsifiable in principle,
that any theoretical statement that does not falsifiable in principle experimentally can't be considered a scientific statement,
so he went to the London School of Economics, initially was a sort of, if one can say that expression, a fair-here boy,
but quickly became a heretical, because anybody who didn't agree with Popper was a heretic,
and several of his most brilliant students sort of drifted away.
He wasn't a student in the technical sense, but he went there to study with Popper and found that his ideas,
well, first of all, that falsification as a criterion is clearly wrong,
but that Popper's general view of science was not sufficiently radical for Feierabend,
and so he drifted away from the Popperian circle.
I myself took a seminar with Feierabend when he was teaching in Berkeley in the early 1960s.
He was there for quite a long time, and he was quite a fascinating character.
Feierabend's view was that rationality is not the last word, as he put it, in truth and knowledge.
Rationality is not the only means by which we anchor truth claims and knowledge claims,
that he believed in that we should recognize, what we have seen in this course,
a historicist view of truth and knowledge, that what we mean by truth and knowledge are not facts about the world,
but they are conceptual categories that we impose as part of the enterprise of making experience intelligible.
And that means if they're historicists, that means that they are relative.
Now, the one thing that you've really got to keep straight is that relativism does not mean anything goes,
that any statement is just as true as any other statement.
No philosopher, to the best of my knowledge, has ever defended that position.
What relativism implies is that the analysis of truth claims and knowledge claims is relative to the context within which they are made.
The Platonic godly view is that there is an absolute context within which truth and knowledge can be stated absolutely,
that there is an absolute standard.
Now, if you think here for a moment, although this does a little bit of conceptual violence to Einstein's theory,
there is an analogy with Newtonian space and time by comparison with relativistic space and time.
In the special theory of relativity, and even more so in the general theory of relativity, Einstein argued,
there is no absolute frame of reference with respect to which you can measure spatial intervals and temporal intervals,
with respect to which therefore you can measure motion, because motion is change of space over change of position in space over change in time.
So if there is no absolute reference point for measuring space and time, then there is no absolute reference point for measuring motion either.
In Newtonian space, time and motion are defined relative to an absolute framework.
Those were assumptions that Newton made.
The Platonic assumption is that there is an ultimate reality that is the absolute reference framework for all truth and knowledge claims.
It's just out there, it's completely independent of us, and either we discovered or we don't,
either we have right ideas about it or wrong ideas about it, but it has nothing to do with our experience.
Our experience at best is a corrupted insight into bits and pieces of it, and we have to use reason to overcome that corruption.
We see this in Plato, we see it in Descartes, it's a standard.
What Fireobin is saying is there is no such absolute framework, because look, after 2300 years, give it up.
Where's the criterion? Everyone agrees there's no criterion that allows us to step outside experience and see this reality,
so believing it is just a dogmatic religious belief, which is what Dewey had said in his book The Quest for Certainty,
Half a Century Earlier, Fireobin published a book called Against Method in which he argued that, you know what,
there really is no method of scientific research and discovery.
So if anything goes at that level, who knows what you should do? Some people have a dream and they wake up in the morning and they say,
I know what I need to do, I need to make the temperature higher and then the reaction will take place.
Some people follow a very strict empirical regimen and keep very accurate notebooks.
Some people just try any different thing and as soon as something works, then they write that down.
So he argued that it's not that science is irrational, it's just that there is no formal method, there is no one formal method.
That is guaranteed to take you from data to a correct theory of the data, to a formulation of a satisfying theory of the data,
that our notions of truth and knowledge must be understood historically, and that means relatively,
and we must accept that ambiguity and contradiction are elementary features of reasoning,
that ambiguity and contradiction cannot be eliminated from our reasoning about experience.
You can eliminate it from a game where you invent the rules, but you cannot have knowledge of experience that eliminates all ambiguity and all contradiction.
There are always going to be ambiguities and contradictions.
Now I keep saying that because it seems startling for a philosopher to say that you cannot escape ambiguities and contradiction,
it's really not that radical, and in fact, Fierrovent was really not that radical because he too recognized, as everyone must,
that after all, science does work and science is knowledge of a sort.
It's just not the absolute knowledge that scientists and philosophers have historically claimed that it is.
This is what he's saying.
We have today a very well-developed field of fuzzy logic,
which is in fact incorporated even in commercial technologies like washing machines,
computer chips that have not just true-false truth values,
but a range of truth values and falsehood values,
a fuzzy logic kind of reasoning, so to speak, built into the chip,
which allows the device to respond in a much more sensitive and complex way to changing inputs and stimuli.
So the notion of ambiguity and reasoning sounds a little more palatable if you say,
but what he meant was something like what we call fuzzy logic.
And the idea of living with contradiction, how could a philosopher isn't the law of excluded metal
since Aristotle's time recognized as the foundation, the cornerstone of correct reasoning?
Well, as the mathematician early in the 20th century,
the founder of the intuitionist school of mathematics called Brower, a Dutchman named Brower,
argued the law of contradiction is not a law.
It's an assumption.
And he wanted to eliminate it from mathematics.
And he tried to derive mathematics.
He did have a whole school that derived lots of mathematics without assuming the law of contradiction.
And as a matter of fact, today there is a branch of logic called paraconsistent logic
in which contradictions are acceptable, in which you can reason effectively about complicated situations
in which there are logical inconsistencies.
Human beings are loaded with logical inconsistencies.
So psychoanalysis, or more generally psychotherapy,
psychotherapists always have to deal with patients, clients who have inconsistencies
in their beliefs and values and behaviors, for example.
Does that mean that, no, no, you cannot be healthy until you have a logically consistent set
of values, beliefs, and behaviors?
So, Fierobot was not really off the wall, although he was often depicted that way.
He was not Schaeffler's deepest fears realized.
And especially after he married late in life, he became much more known,
could ever accuse him of being a pussycat, but it was much clearer that he was quite rational
and quite a defender of reason correctly understood by his lights in this relativized
and historical way, very strikingly similar to the view of reason as being ambiguous
and contradictory as an incorporating ambiguity and contradiction of the other great
sophist that Plato made fun of, Gorgias.
So in the last lecture I talked about Protagoras, who said man is the measure of all things.
Gorgias had quite, and more of his writings have survived, quite a sophisticated view of reasoning
as not a neutral, absolute tool for solving questions and reaching absolute truth,
but that reason was intrinsically flawed logically, that when we reasoned about experience
and tried to reach conclusions about experience and how we should act in the world,
that we had to deal with ambiguity and contradiction, logical contradiction,
that these were inescapable features of reasoning.
So the people who really were Schaeffler's worst fears realized were the French philosophers,
the sociological philosophers Michel Foucault and Jacques Derrida.
Now quite independently, I believe, of Kuhn's critique, and I think quite independently of the,
perhaps of the anti-establishment political critique of science and technology of the 1960s
in the U.S. and in Western Europe, Foucault and Derrida launched major critiques
that were, for several decades and to some extent still, extremely influential,
especially in Europe, secondarily here in the United States, on the concepts of objectivity and knowledge.
So they weren't specifically interested in scientific knowledge,
but of course scientific knowledge epitomizes knowledge in modern Western culture.
So when you are critiquing the concepts objectivity and knowledge,
then you are willy-nilly critiquing science and scientific knowledge.
Foucault, especially in two books, The Archaeology of Knowledge and the Order of Things,
developed a detailed, historicist view of the concepts that Western societies use,
Western culture uses in organizing experience in a particular way.
So let me be specific here.
He did detailed studies of the concept madness.
That was one study book.
Illness, sexuality, crime, criminality, showing how in each case what we meant by madness
how we defined madness, how we defined illness, how we defined sexuality, how we defined criminality
was, to use a later expression, socially constructed, was relative to changing social context
that over time the conceptual frameworks within which we defined madness, illness, criminality, sexuality
changed.
Which means that madness, illness, criminality, sexuality are, in so far as they mean anything specific at all,
always relative to a particular set of organizing concepts.
So he talked about an archeological method or an excavational method in which by looking historically
at Western culture and its concepts and values, you see you can expose this sense in which they are not
natural, they are artificial, they are socially determined and they reflect changing social context.
He also later in life used what he called a genealogical method, which some critics claim is inconsistent with the earlier method.
I'm not convinced of that.
By the genealogical method he meant looking at how the concepts that we use have implications,
how the value judgments that we make about sexuality are rooted in and follow from organizing concepts of sexuality,
analogous to the way, for example, the organizing concepts of space, time, matter, motion, and energy
then have consequences down the line for how a thermonuclear weapon works, let's say.
It's not an illustration Foucault would have used.
So Foucault's message, so to speak, which was then to extend this study to the concept knowledge,
showing how what we mean by knowledge is not a given, I said in the first lecture,
what absolute dictionary would we look up, the right definition of the word knowledge,
that the concept knowledge itself has evolved over time.
That evolved is, again, not a term that he would use and I think he would have liked that.
I think that the concept knowledge has changed over time.
It is indexed to specific cultural contexts and this is another way of talking about
relativization and historicization, except that in the case of Foucault, he anchored it in these case studies,
showing that, to use the illustration I had in the previous lecture,
that the classification schemes, the conceptual schemes by which we organize our response to experience are artificial, not natural.
Derrida, who was at one point a friendly colleague of Foucault's and eventually they became,
it was a very serious falling out between them,
Derrida launched what I believe is an even more fundamental critique of the western rationalist tradition.
Derrida built on a theory of language of the Swiss linguist Ferdinand de Sassure,
who early in the 20th century apparently argued that language is a closed system of arbitrary signs,
that on the face of it has no connection to what language refers to, which sounds very strange initially,
but it turns out that de Sassure was making a very valuable and probably correct point.
All linguistic meanings are internal to language as a closed system of, for example, sounds or written marks,
all of which are completely arbitrary, of course.
The noises that I'm making now are completely arbitrary noises.
People who speak Chinese then would make a different set of noises, they're also arbitrary,
and it is the relationships among all of these arbitrary signs that determines whatever meaning you're getting,
and it has nothing to do with the external world of pointing to something and saying cat.
The meaning of the word cat is a function of the context, the linguistic context
within which I make the noise or write the sign cat, and that may or may not have anything to do with an animal out there,
because of course the word cat doesn't necessarily mean an animal, the word pig can refer to somebody
who was very untidy in their personal habits.
Now Derrida generalized from de Sassure and developed a theory that, as a matter of fact,
there is no such thing as the meaning of any text, because all meaning is open-ended.
It's a matter of the complex relationships of the elements of that text to one another
and the possible associations that they raise in the mind of the reader of the text.
That even the author of the text cannot say this is what the meaning of the text is,
because even the author is not aware of all of the associations that are going to be liberated
by the particular words that they write, the phrases that they use, the metaphors that they use, etc.
This means that you cannot specify in advance what is a good interpretation or a valid interpretation of a text.
It doesn't mean all interpretations are the same, but it means that you can't give in advance a set of rules
and say any interpretation that follows this rule is a good interpretation.
Until I hear your interpretation, I can't tell you whether it's a good one or not.
We recognize, we respond to, ah, that's a very interesting interpretation of Moby Dick.
It's a Freudian interpretation. It's a Marxist interpretation.
It's a gay liberation interpretation of Moby Dick.
Until you hear it, there's no way of knowing whether it makes sense.
And it would not have made sense before Freud, let's say, but it does make sense after Freud.
So now the next step is to generalize the concept of text, which Derrida did.
So the first step is to say that a text, a written text that you have before you
or speech that you're listening to is open-ended as to its meaning.
It's completely open-ended. So you can't specify in advance and say that the meaning of the text is bounded here,
is bounded just around here, and anything beyond that boundary is just a meaningless response to the text.
No, there's no way of knowing in advance what associations the text is going to provoke.
But then everything is a text. A corvette is a text, a Ferrari is a text, an SUV is a text, metaphorically speaking.
It is a system of science. It's got all kinds of meanings associated with it.
You can read anything, but the readings, you can read meanings from everything that human beings make and do.
But there's no limit that you can say in advance as to what the right meaning is.
Now this is, together with his method that he called deconstruction, which is a way of exposing those levels of interpretation
that are normally hidden from us for rhetorical reasons, because the authorities want us to say this is what Moby Dick means.
This is what an automobile represents in our society. This is a piece of architecture, this building, this is what we intended with this building.
Deconstruction gets behind the scenes, so to speak, to expose those, not just levels of interpretation,
but those tools of interpretation, the associations that authorities want to close off.
And sometimes the authorities, the author, who says, this is what I meant. It's about a white whale.
And that's it. That's all I meant. And we say to Melville, thank you very much, Herman.
And now, ladies and gentlemen, so Derrida and Foucault, both were major champions of hermeneutics,
of interpretation, as opposed to analysis, as the primary means by which we should be uncovering multiple layers of meaning
and apply to science. It means that science is, at any given moment, an interpretation of experience.
But there is no limit to the possible interpretations of experience that we are capable of coming up with as experience changes
or as we respond to it differently, just as we have responded differently to what we mean by madness, illness, sexuality and criminality.
So the same thing is true of experience. So implicitly and explicitly, Foucault and Derrida pushed CUNION ideas,
the CUNION critique of objectivity and of the objectivity of scientific knowledge in a very radical direction,
which we are going to pick up in discussing the theory of the social construction of scientific knowledge in the next lecture.
