Lecture 22 – Science Wars of the Late 20th Century
The Science Wars erupted explicitly and under the name Science Wars in 1996.
But that name was used because for the previous decade, in fact, there had been a kind of
open warfare between the scientific community and the social constructionists and postmodernists
and post-union critics of science and scientific knowledge that we've been discussing in
previous lectures.
Until the mid-1980s, so roughly speaking, from the mid-1960s when Kuhn's book really
began to be taken up and was creating a star and precipitating this consensus that we've
discussed of reassessing the nature of objectivity and the possibility of objective knowledge.
In the case of science, objective knowledge of nature, the science community pretty much
ignored what was going on.
They had apparently better things to do with their time and they dismissed this as more
or less humanist nonsense or, surely, you cannot take seriously this kind of criticism
of scientific knowledge because look at the power and the capabilities of science and
the continual progress in our knowledge of nature.
But by the mid-1980s, things had become serious enough in the academy, that is to say, there
was enough support in the academy for the ideas of Michel Foucault and Jacques Derrida
and, generally, for the French intellectual establishment that was supporting the most
radical application of the theories of interpretation that Foucault and Derrida were spokespeople
for, that some members of the science community began to take this seriously enough that they
needed to respond to it.
And so we see this beginning in the mid-1980s and a kind of counterattack on the part of
the science community.
In particular, I want to single out an extraordinarily lengthy and detailed and thoughtful critique
of Andrew Pickering's book, Constructing Quarks, which we discussed in a previous lecture,
by the American physicist, a highly accomplished physicist, turned historian of physics and
especially historian of quantum mechanics, a man by the name of Sylvain Schweber, and
his collaborator, a French-Canadian professor, historian of sociology of science at the University
of Quebec named Yves Gingra.
And the two of them wrote this extraordinarily detailed review of Pickering's Constructing
Quarks.
And what's interesting is that they chose to publish this review in the Social Studies
of Science, a journal whose readership could be anticipated to be sympathetic to the kinds
of post-cuny and critique of science that we've been talking about, especially the social
construction of scientific knowledge theorists.
So they specifically picked a book, which was written by a physicist, arguing a social
construction view of knowledge in physics, which is about as foundational and as extreme
as you can get, given the preeminence of physics as sort of the foundational science
for the natural sciences, a view that is held not just by physicists, and they chose to
publish it in a journal where, so to speak, the enemy could be expected to be the readership.
And what they argued in this review is that while Pickering's book is a technically competent
history of elementary particle physics since World War II, and it's quite a technical history
at that.
If you are not reasonably familiar with physics, then it's very likely that only the introduction
and the concluding chapter are going to make a great deal of sense to you, but there is
a tremendous amount of rich material tracing the history of elementary particle physics
and the particle accelerators, which, as they became increasingly powerful enough, came
to physicists, revealed deeper and deeper levels of the nature of matter and energy.
From Pickering's point of view, what he tries to argue, of course, is that the quark theory
of matter is a social construct.
And Schwaber and Gingra agree that the history is technically competent, but they say the
interpretation is flawed.
The interpretation is flawed because methodologically, Pickering has done something inappropriate.
He has used his antecedent commitment to the social construction of scientific knowledge
to cherry-pick those events in the history of elementary particle physics that he describes
in the book, and which allow him to reach the conclusions that he wants to reach about
the social construction of quarks, in particular, the primacy of theory to observation and data,
the necessity of contingent judgments, that is to say, judgments about the relationship
between theory and data, and what the data, what the observations that these instruments
allow signify, that those judgments are not logical judgments.
They are not derived from the observations themselves.
They have to be added in the way that we've talked about.
And finally, that the role that the scientific, that the elementary particle physics community,
not the whole scientific community, but the elementary particle physics community plays
in validating what is going on inside the laboratory where the experiments are taking
place and the judgments that are being applied that are being added to the data and the logical
reasoning in order to come up with an announcement that we have found the top quark.
Or matter is, nuclear particles are composed of quarks and anti-quarks.
So that three features here, the primacy of theory to observation and data, the necessity
of, sounds paradoxical, the necessity of contingent judgments that need to be added to logic and
data in order to have a theory, and the role that the scientific community plays in validating
those judgments so that the interpretation becomes a theory and not an interpretation.
It is accepted as a description of nature rather than an interpretation.
We do not announce that we have found after a hundred million dollar experiment a certain
resonance in the energy spectrum given off by some particle.
No, they announce we have found the top quark.
So those are the conclusions that he reaches.
Schwaeber and Gangrasse that his argument for those three are weakened by the fact that
he used his antecedent commitment and did not show this, that he was not telling the
whole story, obviously you can't tell the whole past.
There is impossible for a historian to re-describe the past without being selective for the same
reason that you can't have a one-to-one map.
So given that all history writing is a selective account of the past, so they want, at the
very least, if you are going to be picking those events that support the conclusion you
want to reach, that is not very convincing.
That was the way they responded to Pickering saying that therefore the conclusion that
quarks are socially constructed, that quark theory is socially constructed and is not
a description of nature.
This is a claim that Bruno LaTour builds on in his book Science and Nature, that nature
plays only a secondary or tertiary role in validating scientific theories, that it's
the scientific community's acceptance of a theory that makes the theory true.
That is an echo of the conclusion that Pickering reached in his constructing quarks and Schwaeber
and Gangrasse calling that whole thing into question because how can you get better than
Pickering's book in terms of somebody who is knowledgeable about physics trying to show
that physical theory is socially constructed and he fails.
Now, as a matter of fact, of course, what Pickering was doing was exactly what the social
construction theorists say scientists do.
He was doing what they do, namely that he was interpreting events, claiming that he
was giving an interpretation of what was happening in the laboratory that made sense
within the framework of social construction theory, just as scientists give interpretations
of data and observations within the framework of the assumptions that they have made.
There's a kind of self-reflexive paradox there.
It's not a paradox, there's a kind of self-reflexivity.
Pickering's method was the method of the science that he was applying his method to,
but Schwaeber and Gangrasse did not seem to have recognized that.
Nevertheless, this was, I think, widely perceived as, if not the opening shot, a major response
on the part of the science community.
Concurrently, the whole post-modernist derrida, deconstruction, foucault craze of the 1970s
and 80s, was coming under attack from some members of the academic community who were
not scientists and who, in fact, sometimes were not even conservative politically, but
who were disturbed by the anti-rationality and the anti-objectivity of the social constructionists
and the followers of derrida and foucault and the French intellectual schools that crystallized
around them.
I think, in particular, of three books, one by Alan Bloom, a 1987 bestseller called The
Closing of the American Mind, in which Alan Bloom, a quite flamboyant political philosopher
at the University of Chicago, very smart.
He is the hero of Saul Bellow's last novel, Ravellstein.
He, Bloom, is Ravellstein.
And Bloom argued in this book, in very colorful language, that liberal political philosophy
was undermining not just traditional religious and moral values, neither of which were conspicuously
held by Alan Bloom himself, but it was undermining all cultural values.
It was, in fact, pushing us down that slippery slope of relativism in which it is impossible
to say that Bach is superior to hip-hop, which is, in fact, what bothered Bloom more than
almost anything else, that there were people out there teaching popular culture and teaching
comic books, as if that was on a par with Shakespeare, that there was no way to judge
and using Derrida and Foucault and social construction arguments to undermine the entire
establishment canon of, like, the great books of the Western world, for example, it conspicuously
associated with the University of Chicago.
So Bloom's book is one attack on postmodernism and on the social construction of scientific
knowledge.
That was just a secondary theme for Bloom.
The second was E.D. Hirsch at the University of Virginia, an education professor who also
published a bestseller, also in 1987, called Cultural Literacy, What Every American Needs
to Know.
And Hirsch also was disturbed by this no-selectivity, a kind of cultural leveling phenomenon that
absolutely everybody needs, there are certain things that everybody needs to know to be
called educated.
And this also touched a deep chord, obviously, in the American public since the book was
a bestseller.
And Hirsch then followed with a whole series of books called the Core Knowledge Series
and a Critique of American Education, and his goal that everyone, every child, right through
high school and into college, should be exposed to the same curriculum material, core curriculum
material, so that we all can converse with one another because we all know the same things.
And especially these are the kinds of things, of course, that educated people who were raised
in the early post-war period like Blumen and Hirsch knew and felt that everyone should
know those sort of things, and that's what made you educated and made you able to distinguish
between Bach and hip-hop, and why Bach is superior to hip-hop.
The third book was a more deeply intellectual book and gets closer to the Foucault Derrida
line of thought than the other two, and that was by Alain Reno, a Frenchman who, together
with a number of other French intellectuals, began to oppose what they saw as the negative
social and political implications of the work of Derrida and Foucault, and in particular
of the claim that one finds in Derrida that the self is socially constructed, that what
we mean by the individual self is not some little person that you're born with inside
you and that you have to live a life that allows that inner person to emerge, but that
the self is the result of one's social interactions.
The implication is that society is superior to the individual, and Reno and his colleagues
were disturbed that this opens the way to anti-human rights, anti-individual rights,
and more oppressive governments.
It potentially provides ammunition to oppressive central governments on the ground that individuals
are social products anyway.
And in the era of the individual, Reno argues, I think very brilliantly, that one must distinguish
two lines in Western political thinking and social thinking over the last 300 years.
One of them is the kind of radical individualism that we're all very familiar with, and I've
referred to before as social atomism, and which is quite selfish.
The atom is self-contained, and so relationships between people are adventitious.
They are external to the individual.
You choose to enter those relationships or not, depending on whether you perceive them
to be any advantage to you.
This is an individual version of the social contract.
The second line, which is obscured by the first, but he traces it from the 17th century,
is the notion of the autonomy of the individual in a social context.
That human beings are individuals with innate social relationships, and what we need to
respect is the autonomy of the individual to make their own choices sensitive to the
fact that they are related to other individuals, that they have obligations and responsibilities
to others.
They are not atoms.
They are the difference between the selfishness of radical individualism and the potential
social orientation of the autonomous individual conceived as a node in the network, with intrinsic
relationships to parents and siblings, to family, to community, and ultimately to humanity
as a whole.
These represent pieces of the counter-attack against postmodernism and its subset theme
of the social construction of scientific knowledge.
The single most aggressive counter-attack that came from two scientists or a life scientist
and a mathematician, Paul Gross and Norman Levitt.
Paul Gross at the University of Virginia and Norman Levitt at Rutgers University who wrote
a book called Higher Superstition, which appeared in 1994 and really created a star.
It was a polemic.
It was, to use computer language, a flame.
I think that's what people called it on email, highly negative emails.
It was a flame from cover to cover, frontally attacking the essentially left-wing academics
and their support of a movement which they saw as fundamentally undermining the social
faith in reason and, by the way, in science, which they thought was potentially enormously
damaging to society on behalf of what they critiqued as irrational social and political
agendas, especially taking as their targets feminist science, black science, radical environmentalism
and of course the social construction of scientific knowledge theorists who they argued didn't
know what any science worth mentioning or often misrepresented science and their own
arguments that everything was ideological were self-defeating because, if that's the
case, then so is what they're saying.
All in all, Higher Superstition was a kind of a high watermark in the science wars.
It really made it clear that there was a war here because the many in the science community
cheered Gross and Levitt on and, as a matter of fact, the next year, 1995, the New York
Academy of Sciences hosted a conference featuring Gross and Levitt and about 40 some odd scientists,
namely some philosophers of science, some historians, some environmentalists, read papers
which were subsequently published in a book called The Flight from Science and Reason.
I think that appeared in 1997 and these were almost all sympathetic to the Gross and Levitt
attack.
They added fuel to the counter-attack of science and they included a number of very prominent
and competent women sociologists and philosophers of science who also attacked feminist science
theorists and on the same grounds that this is really quite self-defeating because, if
you're going to argue that science is ideological, then so is the critique of science and then
it just becomes, as Israel Scheffler had warned, a tribalist slugfest.
In 1996, at the, I would say, just about the height of the controversy stirred up by
higher superstition, Alan Sokal, a physicist at New York University, submitted a paper,
an article, to the journal Social Text.
Now, there was the spring-summer edition of the journal Social Text which was a flagship
journal for the social construction of scientific knowledge, the social construction of knowledge
theorists and even more than the social studies of science journal in which Schwaeber and
Gingrass published their review article of Pickering's book.
The social text was not the Bible, but it was certainly one of the most prominent and
explicitly committed journals to the social construction post-modernist movement and the
title of that issue was Science Wars.
And in there one can find Alan Sokal, a credentialed physicist of note, with an article that was
called Transgressing the Boundaries Toward a Transformative Hormoneutics of Quantum
Gravity, in which Sokal argued that the latest, the leading edge scientific theory of quantum
gravity, it's related to string theory, is one of the attempts to find a quantum, a theory
of quantum gravity, is socially constructed.
Now as a matter of fact, the article was nonsense physically.
Sokal deliberately was writing a parody of the kinds of articles that he wanted to make
fun of, that he wanted to critique, he doesn't like to use the word make fun of, that he
wanted to critique, namely articles by sociologists of science, philosophers of science, well
mostly sociologists and historians of science, and sociologists of culture of the post-modernist
stripe.
So he spent some months reading in the literature, getting the buzzwords out, weaving those buzzwords
into an article that from a scientific perspective is utterly nonsensical.
And he took a gamble, he took a gamble that the editors who were among the most prominent
American representatives of the post-modernist movement would be so tickled to have a working
scientist join them.
A working scientist say, you guys are right, scientific theories are socially constructed
and look, quantum gravity is socially constructed that they would not send it out for review.
Because of course, if any physicist looked at that, they would say, this is nonsense,
this is babble, and they did not send it out for review, and they published it.
They published it in the spring-summer edition of Social Text concurrently, and I don't know
this, but I have to believe that there was some collusion involved.
SoCal, arranged with the editor of the Journal of the Newsletter Magazine, Lingua Franqua,
which was a very widely read newsletter in the humanities and social science community.
Not in the science community, it's kind of a newsy magazine about humanists and social
science academics.
He arranged to have published an expose of his hoax in the same issue, so that the Lingua
Franqua issue came out right when the Social Text issue came out, and of course, look
what I did.
He said, it was a modest though admittedly uncontrolled experiment that I wanted to see.
Would these people have the intellectual integrity to submit to peer review, to send
to a scientist an article on science, or would they assume, or are they so prejudiced by
their own commitments that because I agreed with them, they would publish the article?
And this hoax, Alan SoCal's hoax, and you can look on the website, put in SoCal's hoax,
you will find a huge literature on the web, using that term metaphorically, of articles
and articles and articles and letters.
There were shouts of glee from the science community.
We knew that these guys were phonies, and there was gnashing of teeth from the side
of the humanities and social science community saying that this was unethical.
This was cheating.
We can't be expected to know quantum gravity.
He assumed that a physicist, ah, but that really was inappropriate to assume that.
Stephen Weinberg was one of the many, Stephen Weinberg is a Nobel laureate physicist, deeply
committed to a realist and objectiveist view of science.
He was one of the strongest defenders of SoCal.
This was a terrific thing to do, and this puts the nail in the coffin of postmodernism
and social construction aside.
None of these people know what they're talking about.
On the other side, curiously, an Israeli, a recently deceased Israeli historian of quantum
mechanics named Mara Beller, published an article in Physics Today, a serious magazine
read by a very wide segment of the American physics community in which she argued in defense
of the postmodernists in the following way.
She showed by extensive citation that the great architects of quantum theory, like Niels
Bohr, Verna Heisenberg, Wolfgang Pauly, people I've referred to in this course, wrote passages
that sound very, very similar to the kind of stuff that SoCal wrote.
Consciously or unconsciously, what SoCal was writing doesn't sound any crazier, so to speak,
than what these people wrote when they tried to explain why quantum theory could not be
understood as a picture of reality.
So Beller was a professional who defended, in a professional physics journal, who defended
the enemy, so to speak.
Subsequently, SoCal and a collaborator, Jean Brickmont, wrote a book called Fashionable
Nonsense, in which they took passages from the leading figures of the primarily French-centered
intellectual world, and the book originally appeared in French and then on afterwards
in English, Jacques Lacan, the sort of arch-priestess of hermeneutic theory, Julie Christeva,
Luce Irrigaré, who was clearly the arch-priestess of feminist theory, and Jean Baudrillard,
one of the great postmodernist thinkers, and they often used scientific language, and
they used, they referred to non-Euclidean geometry and topology and relativity theory
and quantum theory, and showed that everything they write is utter nonsense.
What they say, but they don't understand any geometry, any physics, they don't understand
any of the science that they claim supports their positions.
And interestingly, again in Physics Today, David Merman, a prominent American physicist,
published a repost in which he said that Brickmont and SoCal are not being fair.
In context, what these people say, even though they don't understand the science, the point
that they make is supported by the references to the sciences that they make.
This appeared somewhere around 1999.
By 2000, the science wars had petered out, not because of exhaustion, but altogether
by 2000, the lustre of postmodernism had dimmed for whatever reason, controls these
cultural phenomena.
It was by 2000 difficult to find anybody in America who would say a kind word about Jacques
Derrida and deconstructionism.
All of those courses on deconstruction, deconstructing literature, deconstructs, Woody Allen made
a movie, deconstructing Harry, deconstruction had become a totally vacuous term applied
to anything you wanted to be critical of.
It was hard to find deconstructionists by 2000, and so in a certain sense, the storm
dissipated.
The storm had dissipated within the intellectual community, and postmodernism was no longer
the aggressive threat to rationality, to reason, to the future of science in America
that it had been.
A much more serious threat to the future of science and technology in America, as the
National Science Foundation, among other organizations, has been pointing out for years now, is the
startling decline in the number of young Americans who are majoring in natural science
and engineering.
The decline since the 1986 in engineering enrollment, and more recently, the decline
in science as a career, which threatens the science base and the technology base of America
much more seriously than these intellectual disputes.
But what we will begin to look at in the next lecture is that the science wars, although
no longer called that, the science wars continued, but now shifting from the intellectual sphere
to the judicial sphere with the religious right challenging the integrity of scientific
truth and of the truth of scientific theories.
We'll move on to that in the next lecture, but let's just step back and make sure we
understand something here that we have to take away from the science wars.
The challenge remains of accepting that scientific knowledge has a historical scientific knowledge
claims, have a historical and socially dependent character, not totally, but that there are
that the social framework, that the scientific community, and their changing assumptions
play significant roles in the formulation of theories which claim to be true.
And so we need to be careful not to throw that insight away because it has very strong
implications for how we want to use scientific knowledge, especially in the resolution of
public policy issues that are increasingly of deep concern to us.
But we will begin in the next lecture by looking at the attack of the religious right on Darwinian
evolution.
