Lecture 10 – Theories Need Not Explain
What we saw in the last lecture was that Fourier's move, which was echoed in subsequent
19th century theories in physical science, especially in the new science of thermodynamics
in Darwin Wallace's evolutionary theory in biology, in the new science of statistical
mechanics in the last third of the 19th century, the kinetic theory of gases, we're talking
a little bit about these, that Fourier's move challenged the pictorial view of scientific
theories in addition to predicting and controlling that those were symptoms of the fact that
these theories were pictures of an underlying reality, revelations of an underlying reality.
Maybe they are. The question is, how would we know absent any access to the independent
reality other than the theory's picture itself? What other access do we have that allows us
to say, yep, that's a pretty accurate picture. It looks just like reality idealized. So Fourier's
move separated that, as I said, that challenged this pictorial view. But now we need to think
for a moment about a point that I raised very early on in this course. Adelaide of Bath,
perhaps you remember that name, the late 11th, early 12th century British philosopher, Monk,
who was also a natural philosopher, who wrote a book called The Natural Questions. And remember
I said that he was, as far as I know, the first to articulate as a rule for natural
philosophy, that nature must be treated as a closed system, that explaining natural phenomena
in terms, must only be in terms of other natural phenomena. It's not permissible. He called
it a miserable refuge. Of course he used Latin, not English, but a miserable refuge to say
that to explain the rainbow by saying that God told Noah that he was going to put the
rainbow in the sky as a sign of a covenant, never to have such a flood again. Yes, of
course that's true, but that's not, that doesn't explain the rainbow naturally. You also remember,
you may remember that what I said was that the rule for natural philosophy that preceded
that rule was that it is the task of natural philosophy to explain experience, to explain
the phenomenon of experience as the effects of causes. And nowadays, in so-called in modern
science, to explain experience in terms of unexperienced causes. And I went through that
last lecture with the examples of the DNA being somehow the motor of who and what we
are functionally speaking, and the example of the Earth's motions, and of course of a vision. So
those are examples of what I mean when I say that the task of science, what a theory is for,
is supposed to be to give an explanation of experience such that experience is the effect
of unexperienced causes. But now let's look at this. Causal explanation is deterministic. The
task of science is causal explanation. Remember what I said in the lecture on you about cause. We
use the term very casually, the light switch you recall, but for philosophers, and until the 20th
century for scientists, a cause is a necessary and sufficient condition. When you have identified
the cause, the effect necessarily follows. It is inevitable. Laplace comes up again in his famous
essay on probabilities. And he was a radical determinist in this matter, for whom probabilities
were only used when we lacked information. Laplace laid it down as a principle of modern
science, that if you had a mind powerful enough, we would say today a computer powerful enough to
plug in the position and the momentum of every particle of matter in the universe at a given
time t zero, doesn't matter what time that is, noon tomorrow, we freeze the universe and we plug
in the position and the momentum of every particle of matter in the universe. Well, but if the
universe is finite, as it was then the amount of matter in the universe is finite, that's a very
big number. But in principle, it's a thought experiment. If you could do that, Laplace said,
then you could predict the future state of the universe with unlimited precision forever. And
you could retro-dict the past with unlimited precision forever. That is determinism. That is
the sense in which cause is used in modern science until the second half of the 19th and the beginning
of the 20th century, when in quantum mechanics it turns out that you can't do what Laplace wanted
to do. In principle, you could not measure the position and the momentum of even one particle
with unlimited precision at a single moment. So it can't be done, but that's because quantum
mechanics change the conceptual framework of modern science, of classical modern science through
physics through the 19th century. So the causal explanation is deterministic explanation.
To explain something means to deduce causality in physics,
mirrors deduction in logic. The conclusion of a deductive argument follows from the premises
the same way analogous to, not the same way, analogous to the way that effects follow causes in
physics or in physical science. So if the task of science is to explain experience in terms of
unexperienced causes, that means that experience must be deduced, particular experience must be
deducible from scientific theories. But what we saw in the last lecture, that Fourier's move
and non-Euclidean geometry called into serious question, whether in fact the role that assumptions
play in scientific theories, can ever give us confidence that the deductions we make
will, in fact, be true of the unexperienced causes, that we are getting true pictures from
these deductions, because the assumptions have to be true for that, and we do not have the ability
if we reject innate ideas, if we reject the idea that we have intuitive ability to recognize
a true assumption, even something as fundamental as conservation of matter,
which scientists were very proud of clarifying from the time of Lavoisier on, for example,
in the 1780s and the experiments that led him to the chemical revolution that was based on his
isolation of what he called oxygen as an element of the air, that from Lavoisier on,
conservation of matter was a critically important principle, an absolute principle,
and in the middle of the 19th century, the conservation of energy when the concept of
energy was clarified in the science called thermodynamics, the conservation of energy was
absolutely critical to science, and then relativity theory came along and showed that
matter and energy are interchangeable. You can destroy matter and convert it into energy
in a very specific lawful way, and you can transform energy into matter. Energy can disappear,
but it has to reappear as matter. So now we have a conservation of matter energy.
This is an absolute principle. Wait a minute. Depending on the circumstances, sometimes scientists
are prepared to tinker even with their most fundamental assumptions. In 1930, for example,
Niels Bohr responded to a very serious challenge to quantum theory that arose
out of experiments that were done in the late 1920s, which suggested that the energy of electrons
that were emitted by nuclei of atoms in a process that's called beta decay, that the energy of these
electrons is continuous, not quantized. Now, that would have been devastating to quantum theory,
if that were the case, because quantum theory claimed that all physical phenomena at the level
of the micro-physical world, at the level of atoms, are quantized. All the processes are
quantized. They come in little units. They're not continuously distributed. You can't have any size
you want. Nature restricts the size of momentum units, energy units. And so Bohr, in order to
rescue quantum theory, proposed that the conservation of matter be allowed to be violated in this beta
decay process so that the result could be interpreted consistent with quantum theory.
His commitment to quantum theory overwhelmed the empirical evidence that he was confronted.
Now, what's interesting about this is that a very significant number of eminent scientists
agreed with Bohr and thought that, well, we may need to give up conservation of matter
as a principle. Now, here we have an assumption that has been, for 100 years, you're telling me this
is one of the most fundamental assumptions of science, and you're prepared to change it. So,
assumptions can never be relied on as self-evident. As a matter of fact, what happened was that the
Wolfgang Pauli, the physicist Wolfgang Pauli, proposed, instead of violating the principle
of the conservation of matter, that we propose that there must be another particle of matter in the
nucleus, which eventually got the name neutrino from Enrico Fermi, a little neutron. The neutron
itself had not yet been isolated. And that this particle, which is heretofore unknown and was
not discovered experimentally for decades, that this particle carries away the amount of energy
that will restore quantization to beta decay. That gives us some insight as to how scientists
make assumptions. I mean, it sounds very Cartesian in the sense of feigning, with the best of
intentions, feigning assumptions that will maintain the consistency of some explanatory framework,
in this case, quantum theory, because there was so much going for quantum theory. If this is what
it takes to rescue the theory, proposing a particle that no one's ever seen before, and figuring
out later what its properties have to be, and then decades go by before they are actually
detected experimentally, and whether they were really detected is a question that we're going
to get onto later, because the theory that detected them was, the instrument that detected them,
was built in accordance with the theory. So, is there a circularity there? Well, we'll get back
to that. Right now, what we're really interested in is the role that assumptions play, and how
non-Euclidean geometry and Fourier's move had the effect of forcing our attention on scientific
theories being successful without necessarily being truths of the world. You can make that claim,
but it doesn't look as though you can justify the claim until you convince me that your assumptions
are true, but assumptions have a checkered history. Now, it's not just physical science that's
troubled by these developments, by Fourier's move and non-Euclidean geometry. Mathematics,
that exemplar of universal necessary and certain knowledge, mathematics was also challenged by
this. If it's the case with Euclid's geometry, then what are the foundations of mathematical truth?
What are, what is mathematics about? Mathematical objects, a circle. Do they exist independently
of the human mind? As most mathematicians historically have believed, and as many continue
to believe, most prominent, most aggressive today is probably the English mathematician and physicist,
and sometimes mathematical physicist, Roger Penrodes, who has written a number of very large
books recently for a general audience, the most recent being The Road to Reality, in which he
aggressively defends the idea that mathematical objects exist independently of the human mind,
of you that is called platonic for fairly obvious reasons, because Plato believed that all,
all reality was ideal forms, immaterial ideal forms, and mathematical objects were among them.
But if mathematical objects exist independently of the human mind,
how do we know about them? We certainly don't learn about circles from experience,
because there is no such thing as a circle in experience. There are lots of circular objects,
but there is nothing in an experience that is a geometrical circle, that is a mathematical circle,
or a mathematical triangle for that matter. Matter is incapable of being shaped into what has
exactly 180 degrees. Mathematical objects exist in the mind. If they also exist outside the mind,
how did they get into the mind? Well, you could believe with Descartes that we have
certain innate ideas, that we are born with mathematical ideas, or with some special capacity
to, for mathematical ideas to crystallize in the mind based on very fuzzy experiences,
which makes mathematics somewhat more empirical. There's a serious question here,
if mathematical objects exist independently of the mind, how do we know them? If we invent them,
if they are inventions of the mind, as Jung, for example, said, then how come they work?
How is it the case that we can invent mathematical objects that tend, that turn out to describe
natural processes so effectively? And sometimes some really strange mathematical objects in the
19th century groups and sets and various very complicated mathematics, which were invented
for no purpose whatsoever, turn out to perfectly describe very complicated physical phenomena.
How can these ideas describe experience if they are free inventions of the mind, like chess?
But chess is just a game, and it does not translate into reality. Mathematical ideas too.
So these questions in mathematics became serious questions for the first time in the history of
mathematics in the second half of the 19th century, because of non-Euclidean geometry,
because of a concern that we no longer could be confident about the foundations of mathematical
truth based on our traditional complacent dogmatic slumbers to paraphrase Kant about the
self-evident character of assumptions, the axiom's definitions and postulates that all
mathematics are based on. So there was an attempt to find out what are the foundations of arithmetic,
what are the foundations of geometry, what are the foundations of mathematical reasoning and
mathematical truth. It sounds really odd that so many thousands of years after Plato, now first
mathematicians are asking the kinds of questions that we are asking about physical science.
And the fact is, these questions have not been resolved at the turn of the 20th century,
the three major attempts to give a theory of mathematical knowledge, analogous to what we're
doing in this course, looking at a theories of physical scientific knowledge, all fail to win a
consensus. But what's really interesting is that at a certain point mathematicians just
shrug their soldiers and say, you know, this sounds like I'm not interested, this is a waste of time.
And since then, very brilliant, wonderful new mathematics has been created and continues to
be created without an answer to this question. So one could legitimately say, this maybe this
question doesn't matter about what are mathematical objects. Maybe we just keep doing mathematics.
And that's it. That's what we do. We do mathematics. Maybe from our perspective,
maybe scientific theories are what scientists produce. And they have the capabilities that
they have. But they are, we don't need to ask, but what are they really telling? What are they
telling us about reality that that we will continue? We have continued throughout the 20th
century to get more and more excellent new science without a clear answer as to what
scientific theories are about or even what scientific theories are for. Most scientists
continue to act and to speak and to write as if they are about reality as if they are for
understanding. But in behind the scenes, so to speak, everybody responds to theories because
they are successful at the level of explanation, prediction and control. It's a very interesting
dilemma that, of course, is sort of the armature around which this entire course
is built. But what matters about it is, is that left unresolved, it is this dilemma
that drives such public and cultural manifestations as the science war.
One of the characteristics of 19th century science is that in the course of the self-consciousness
that these questions that I'm describing to you raise, it undergoes what I like to call
a narcissistic moment, that science becomes self-conscious. Scientists became self-conscious
of the process of doing science. They couldn't just do it because there were all kinds of
questions being raised about what it is that you're doing and how can you justify the claims
that you're making so they become self-conscious about the process of doing science. In the
course of becoming self-conscious, one of the things that emerges is the historicity of science,
a very, very important concept that we are going to explore in greater detail in the next lecture.
But the idea is that science is a historical activity. That means it exists in time. Scientific
theories do not exist outside of time, which of course platonic truth did. Mathematical truth
exists outside of time. There is a history to mathematics in the sense of a chronology,
but mathematical truths really are universal necessary and certain within a framework of
assumptions and they have a timeless character. But scientific theories exist in time and we
must understand them as, I deliberately use this expression, evolving over time. It is a mistake
to think of scientific theories as platonic entities as if, okay, we've got that one, it's in the box,
it's going to never change. We saw that Copernicus's theory of the heavens morphed into Kepler's theory
of the heavens, which is very, very different from Copernicus's theory because it's got physical
forces, it's got elliptical orbits, non-uniform planetary speeds, gives an explanation for the
planetary periods and orbital periods and distances. That morphs into Newton's theory
in astronomy, universal theory of gravity based on his universal theory of gravity,
which morphs into Laplace's celestial mechanics, which morphs into, to jump around a bit,
the Big Bang theory of George Gamow, which was validated in the 1960s at least,
moved out of speculation into an assumption by the discovery of the microwave background
radiation, which morphs and Big Bang theory morphs into inflation theory in the 1980s
by the physicist named Alan Goothe. And so the point here is that a scientific theory is expected
to not just change over time, it doesn't unfold in a deterministic way, it evolves. There was no
way that Copernicus could have anticipated that correcting his theory or improving it would
have meant giving up circular orbits, which for 2000 years had been considered an absolute certainty,
that that was one of the assumptions of Western astronomy is that the planets move in circular
orbits because circular is beautiful. That was a 2000-year-old assumption that Kepler overthrew,
and that's why Galileo didn't pay any attention to him. So this is the historicity of science,
that scientific theories evolve in time, is a critical new recognition in 19th century science,
which emerges out of this focus on assumptions, because we see that assumptions change over time,
and as assumptions change, theories change. Changing is an essential characteristic of
scientific theories. This is a totally different view than the one that's associated with the
Platonic notion of universal necessary certain, because then once you have a correct theory,
it's in the bag. But in the 19th century it became clear that no scientific theory is in the bag,
because experience is constantly changing, and science plays a curious dialectical role
in changing experience, because scientists, by inventing new instruments, create new experiences
which require new kinds of explanations. So they're constantly reinforced, there's a reciprocal
interaction, that's what dialectical interaction, a reciprocal interaction in which A changes B,
when the changed B then changes A, and the changed A change, etc. So scientific theories
have to be understood as historical entities, and I want to use the time remaining in this lecture
to discuss a scientific theory that epitomizes this notion of change over time, because as we'll
see in the next lecture, attributing historicity to reality, attributing historicity to the
that which is behind experience is a fundamental theme in 19th century, thinking across the board.
But the theory that captures this most directly is of course the Darwin Wallace theory of evolution,
because Darwin Wallace evolution, and I like to, I'm talking about evolution in 1859, 1858,
when Darwin read at the meeting of a British Society of Scientists, when Darwin's paper
on evolution by natural selection, and Wallace's independently produced paper on evolution by
natural selection, were both read at the same time, and then in 1859 when Darwin published the
origin of species. At that moment, it was the Darwin Wallace theory of evolution by natural
selection. One of the innovations, I'm tempted to use the word revolutionary here, but one of the
intellectual innovations of evolutionary theory is that time makes a difference.
According to this theory, according to the Darwin Wallace theory of evolution by natural
selection, which means that organisms are continually subjected to spontaneous variation
when they reproduce, that the offspring of organisms spontaneously vary from their parents.
We call that today mutations, but Darwin used the term spontaneous variation, that together with
environmental selection pressures, that over time, new life forms appear. That means in time,
unpredictable new life forms appear, because the variations are spontaneous, are not caused by
the environment. It's a completely random process, the variation, he didn't use that term,
he used spontaneous, but random mutation is our version of spontaneous variation. Random
mutation, environmental change, which is independent of the random mutation in biological
organisms, combine to generate novelty in time. This is absolutely different from what I told
you about Laplace with the deterministic calculator. A divine calculator, a super duper computer,
can in principle predict the future of the universe with unlimited precision.
That means that time doesn't really make a difference and within physics, the equations of
physics, setting aside thermodynamics for the moment, the equations of physics don't care
whether you put in a positive sign for time or a negative sign for time. This leads to a problem
since it seems to us that time only goes in one direction, that's a problem within physics,
the arrow of time and thermodynamics is the science that highlighted that problem.
But in evolutionary theory, we say that I can't tell you now what horses will look like in 500,000
years or in 5 million years. When one could not, as a matter of principle, it was not possible to
know 15 million years ago that the teaching company would be in Chantilly, Virginia and we would be
here saying and looking the way we did and saying the things that we're saying. The emergence of
human of any life form is a novelty in time. So time in evolutionary theory makes a difference.
Darwin and Wallace both came upon the theory of evolution by natural selection independently
of one another. One was tempted to say at the same time but that's not really correct because
Darwin unquestionably got the idea first but he sat on it and built up an enormous database of what
he thought were confirming examples drawn from artificial breeding, especially breeding of
pigeons but also breeding of plants and other animals where through artificial breeding means
you could cause organisms to diverge very far from the original parent stock and create pigeons
that look totally and behave totally differently from ancestral pigeons and the same thing with
dogs for example and and roses and and he sat on this for about 20 years before in 1858 receiving
a letter from Wallace who was at that time in Malaya what we call it now Malaysia as collecting
specimens for wealthy Englishmen and Wallace sent Darwin this essay very short essay just a
handful of pages on the tendency of varieties to depart indefinitely from the original type that
was the title of the essay say what do you think of this idea and Darwin said oh my god I've been
working on this for 24 years and he scooped me what do I do fortunately for Darwin he was in
England at the center of so to speak science or at least British science and and was very well
connected and he sent Wallace's letter to some of the greatest British naturalists who knew what
Darwin was working on he didn't keep his idea secret he had huge notebooks filled with data and
everyone urged him to publish it and eventually it was decided that that they would do this joint
presentation for neither of them is the fossil record of any significance that's a complete red
herring the Darwin recognized that the fossil record was too spotty the important thing about the
theory of evolution for us here for the moment and we're going to pursue this further in the next
lecture the important thing about the theory of evolution is that it it requires a reconceptualization
of time time is a dimension of reality in which novelty emerges in which there are changes that
cannot be predicted as a matter of principle and what we're going to see is that this concept of
the historicity of the earth of life of man of culture of language of society becomes a a theme
that ripples throughout 19th century thought and of course becomes foundational for 20th century
thought but the theory of evolution was a major factor it was a major expression i know it's a
cause or an effect it is a major expression of this theme of the historicity of science and the
recognition that we that that science was a historical activity not just that it had a
chronology the history of science as a discipline becomes a serious discipline in the 19th century
primarily by scientists who start out by studying the chronology of science but in the next lecture
we're going to see how some people some scientists began to recognize it's not a massive matter of
chronology it's a matter of recognizing that science is intrinsically historical that scientific
theories are historical entities that evolve over time just as the production of scientific
knowledge is a collective enterprise something that Hobbes already had noticed but for him that
was pejorative we recognize that science is produced by collectives it is a production
process engaged in by a community of people who share assumptions so once again the question
comes up where do assumptions come from and what role is played by the mind in generating
assumptions keeping in mind cons notion of the self activity of the mind shaping experience
what we want to understand is if we allow the mind to be self active how does that influence the
kind of assumptions that we are going to make that lead to scientific theories and scientific
knowledge claims
