Lecture 9 Science Comes of Age in the Nineteenth Century
What can a scientific theory be about?
It doesn't seem like such a very complicated question.
On the face of it, a scientific theory is about nature.
It describes the way nature is, really, independent of how we happen to experience nature and
independent of our interaction with nature.
What scientists do is tell us what nature is really like, and we take for granted how
different the picture that scientists paint of nature is from nature as we experience it.
For example, just think of the complex motions of the planet Earth according to astronomical
theory.
So first of all, there's the axial rotation, 1,000 miles an hour at the equator.
Then there's the orbital rotation of the Earth around the Sun, which is about 18 miles per
second, definitely higher than the national speed limit used to be.
But we're used to that, however, the Sun is moving around the center of the Milky Way.
It takes a heck of a long time to do one orbit of the Milky Way, and so far I think the Sun
has only made about 20 orbits in the lifetime of our solar system, but that's another motion
of the Earth.
Now, the Milky Way is moving.
The Milky Way is moving around the center of mass of the local cluster of several dozen
galactic and dwarf galactic objects that is called, as I said, the local cluster.
The local cluster, we know, is also moving in the general direction of the constellation
Virgo, and who knows what other motions there are.
Now all of these motions are completely unexperienced by us, but they are real in some sense.
And yet here we are, we're not, we don't feel that we're moving at all, and scientists
tell us we are really moving, and we're not just moving, we're moving in incredibly complex
ways that seem, you would think that if we're moving this way and that way and that way
and that way, that there would be some sensation of all of this.
And I mean, people pay a great deal of money for sports cars that can go 0 to 60 in 3.5
seconds.
If we are for free getting an 18-mile-a-second ride, how can you compete with that?
Think of our bodies.
Here we are, whether you're sitting or standing or on a treadmill while you're listening
to or watching this lecture.
Here I am standing here.
My body is providing the upright posture and the sounds that are coming out of being made
by my vocal cords, etc.
And scientists tell me what's really going on in my body.
Is that, speaking very broadly, messenger RNA molecules are transferring base sequences
from my DNA in a highly selective manner to ribosomes which are producing proteins that
determine cell metabolism, which determine organ function in highly complicated ways
because the proteins interact with one another in networks and the cells are interacting.
So my organ function and the organism function, the function, it's all being driven by these
levels of activity, none of which, of course, I experience.
Or just to take one more vision, because that may be easy.
We see things, and from a common sense point of view, I look out and I see objects and people
and colors and so on, and yet the scientists tell us that what's really happening is that
electromagnetic waves are impinging on receptor cells in the retina.
These are being transformed into electrical signals, chemical signals, which are being
transmitted down the optic nerve and eventually wind up in the visual cortex where they are
composed into what you think you are seeing.
So when we talk about, oh well, this is not such a, how can you have a whole course devoted
to the question of what scientists know, scientists are describing what none of us begins to experience.
They provide us with typically some kind of picture of what is real.
But of course, sometimes these pictures conflict with one another.
So you have Newton's particle theory of light, Huygens' spherical wave theory of light, subsequently
a transverse wave theory of light in the 19th century, replaced by Einstein's quantum theory
of light in the early 20th century, which then becomes embedded in the subsequent development
of quantum theory.
How do you choose among these competing pictures?
And of course, how do you know that any picture is right?
That's the kind of thing we're looking at.
What are the criteria that we, are there drop dead criteria?
Are there criteria that simply answer the question and say now that theory is true?
So the most obvious response is, it's the one that Bacon used quoting the New Testament,
by their fruits you shall know them.
Let's see which ones work.
Actually, this is also a test that emerged out of the Protestant Reformation.
Calvin was a strictly deterministic thinker, actually heavily influenced by the theological
rationalists Augustine of Hippo, the Catholic Bishop of the late 4th century in North Africa.
Calvin was a strict determinist, and so Calvinism, Presbyterianism more familiarly known here,
is a strictly deterministic theology in which your destiny is determined at birth.
There's nothing you can do that will win you salvation or save you from damnation if you
are destined, so predestination is fundamental to Calvinism.
So then what's the point of doing anything?
You might just as well lay around, you might just as well be drunk all the time and not
have to worry about, am I elect or am I not one of the elect?
The answer is, by their fruits you shall know them.
If you strive and succeed, that is a sign of election.
A secular version of that is, if you have a picture of reality that produces positive
results, if you have a theory that makes correct predictions, then the correctness of the prediction
confirms that it is a correct picture of reality.
Note this very well, we have definitely reached a point at which this becomes a very reasonable
statement to make.
A theory can explain to the satisfaction of a group of thinkers, can make correct predictions,
and can even lead to technological applications that work and still be wrong, still not be
true of reality.
It can be the case that Copernicus' original theory leads to better calendars, it doesn't
matter, it's wrong.
It can be the case that Newtonian mechanics and Galileo's equations work when applied
to problems in engineering mechanics and the buildings you build, using those equations
to calculate how thick the beams have to be, given the various loads that are going to
be placed upon them, and they still may be quite wrong.
What's the point?
This is crucial, this is the kind of thing where when we talk it would be nice if you
could highlight it, you know, the way students do with highlighters when they underline
in textbooks.
If you underline enough, of course, it does you no good whatsoever, I see my students
have pages that are completely filled with color, so then when you look at that page
you have to read everything again anyway, what's the point?
But this deserves to be highlighted.
The correlation of a successful theory, the correlation of the theory that we call successful
because we like the explanation, it makes correct predictions, and it leads to technological
applications that work.
Let's call that a successful theory.
The correlation of a successful theory with a claim that it corresponds to reality is
a separate claim from the judgment that a theory is successful.
We can all agree on the criteria for a successful theory, explanation, prediction, control.
Does it give us a better explanation, more predictions, better control than another theory?
We call that a successful theory.
Now does it correspond to reality?
That's a separate question because you can have the first and not have the second, we
know that historically, therefore there's a separate judgment involved.
We have to ask ourselves, what is gained by asking that second question?
Why can't we settle for a successful theory using pragmatic criteria that we can in fact
reach agreement on?
And in fact we do all the time because most scientists are common sense realists and so
are we because a kind of what philosophers call naive realism, the kind of thing that
a philosopher can instantly make fun of, naive realism is a successful strategy for coping
with experience.
A theme that's going to come up in the next 200 years over and over again, well then if
a theory is also a successful strategy for coping with experience, why do you want to
go further and say and it is true with a capital T and it is universal necessary and
certain knowledge of reality?
What is added by that?
What work does that second judgment do?
We need to really think about that question because obviously there would be no science
wars, there would be no internal conflict within science if it were not the case that
scientists typically routinely add that second judgment and it is true, it is a correct picture
of reality.
Let's take a look at a seminal development in early 19th century physics that illustrates
the point and that led to the knowledge problem within science becoming sort of center stage
in 19th century science for scientists to have to deal with and that is the question
of what is heat?
What is heat really?
We experience heat in a certain common sense or naive way but what is it?
Two positions had been formulated in the 17th and 18th century.
One was that heat is the escape of an imponderable fluid, imponderable means weightless, that
everything has an imponderable fluid in it which was called caloric calories.
Caloric is the name for a weightless fluid that everything has it, everything has it
and when something gets hot it is because caloric is escaping from it.
Everything is causing the caloric to be driven off and so that's what heat is.
We experience an object is hot when it is losing caloric.
The second theory was that heat is the motion of the small part that material objects are
made of.
Let's call them atoms but you don't have to be an atomist to believe this.
That all matter has tiny little parts, they may or may not be ultimately divisible and
when they move rapidly then that's what heat is.
We have two major theories of what heat is and here we're focusing on reality.
What is heat?
This is an ontological question having to do with what is real.
There was a tremendous split in the science community about whether heat is caloric or
whether heat is motion and at the end of the 18th century a curious American colonist
who sided with the British king and so had to leave the America and established quite
an interesting career for himself on the continent.
He eventually married Lavoisier's widow and gave himself the name Count Rumford but in
America he was known as Benjamin Thompson.
He did a very interesting experiment which he thought would settle the question once
and for all for him it was a Baconian crucial experiment.
In Baconian terms a crucial experiment is an experiment crucial means crossroads.
Something is crucial if it's an inflection point, if after that point you go one way
or another that's it.
So a crucial experiment is one which decisively chooses between one possibility and another.
There are two options, we do the experiment, it excludes one option, says the only option
that's open to you is this one.
And A is no good, option B is confirmed.
That's what a crucial experiment is supposed to do, it is a central feature of the Baconian
method and what we're going to see by the end of the 19th century is that on logical
grounds the concept of a crucial experiment is thrown out.
But at the moment we're only around 1800 and crucial experiments are still supported especially
by those who take the experimental inductive approach to science seriously quite apart
from the commitment to deductive knowledge and Rumford does an experiment which he thinks
is going to settle this once and for all because he believes that heat is motion, none of this
caloric nonsense.
So he does an experiment as follows, he takes a cast iron cylinder which was going to be
made into a cannon so it has to be bored out, it has to be bored out for the cannon ball.
So he takes the whole gigantic piece of cast iron and creates a mechanism in which it is
immersed in a tank of water and connected to a boring bar driven by a horse.
So the horse walks around and around, turns the boring bar and the boring bar bores out
the iron.
Now of course the iron gets very hot in the course of doing this, eventually it gets hot
enough to boil the water in the tank and what Rumford wanted to show was it doesn't stop
boiling.
That the horse, you can add as much water as you want, you have to keep adding water
as long as the horse is turning the boring bar and the boring bar is keeping the barrel
hot then heat keeps coming out of it.
Now how much caloric could there have been in this piece of cast iron?
It's ridiculous to think that there could be an infinite amount of caloric in everything
so it must be the case that heat is motion.
QED, this is a crucial experiment that throws out the caloric theory.
As a matter of fact it didn't and that same Laplace that we talked about in the last lecture
who was one of the most celebrated mathematical physicists of the period and who was the author
of the Celestial Mechanics etc. and one of the founding figures in probability theory,
Laplace continued to believe in the caloric theory of heat to the end of his life.
So it's not as if, well, dummies stuck with the caloric theory after Rumford, that's not
correct.
A French mathematical physicist by the name of Foulier wrote an essay called The Analytical
Theory of Heat and he submitted it for a prize competition and ultimate publication
in 1807.
Among the judges were Laplace and another brilliant French mathematical physicist of
the period, Lagrange, who largely because of Laplace's objections basically kept this
essay from being published until 1822.
They raised all kinds of objections and Foulier had to revise it, sent it back.
It didn't get published until 1822.
When it was published now as a book, The Analytical Theory of Heat, it made a startling announcement.
Foulier has a mathematical theory of heat that is independent of what heat is.
Who cares what heat is?
That's not a scientific question at all.
It's a metaphysical question.
My equations tell you how heat behaves.
They allow you to predict the flow of heat in a body depending on its thermal conductivity,
the rate at which it conducts heat.
If you take a, suppose we have an iron bar and I put one end of it on a hot plate that
is at 100 degrees Celsius and you want to know at what time will any point on the bar
reach any temperature you particularly want until it reaches, of course, eventually would
all reach 100 degrees Celsius ideally, then my equations will tell you that.
So what else do you want from a theory of heat?
Who cares what heat is?
Let's bracket that question.
Look, we've been arguing about it for 200 years.
We haven't made any progress.
Let it be caloric.
Let it be motion.
These equations describe it.
Now this was, of course, not conceptually, this should sound to you like what Leibniz
said to Newton about gravity.
But here we had a scientist who built this in upfront, who announces at the beginning,
I don't want to get involved in the ontological question of what heat is.
I'm not giving you a picture of reality.
I'm giving you a picture that describes heat behaviorally.
Now this is an illustration of the point I made a few minutes ago that to call a theory
successful, you don't need to say that it corresponds with the way nature is.
You don't need to have a pictorial conception of reality as part of the theory.
The theory can work at the level of experience and not make ontological claims and not make
claims about reality.
Well then, maybe this should be the norm for science.
That's what we're going to see unfolding in the course of the 19th century, that a growing
number of theories are so intensely abstract mathematically that the question keeps coming
up.
Are there a picture of reality here or are these describing nature behaviorally?
And what difference does it really make?
Why do we still have this argument about whether the theory is true with a capital T, that
whether this theory corresponds to reality, why can't we just stick with the phenomenal
representation of experience?
At the level of phenomena, this theory works.
So Fourier was a breakthrough in uncoupling the success of a theory to explain predict
and control from the further claim that it corresponds to reality, second big development
of the period.
Now even though it happened in the 1820s for a lot of reasons that are more appropriate
to a history of mathematics course than to this course, it did not become widely known
until the 1860s, but beginning at roughly the same time, within 10 years of the publication
of Fourier's analytical theory of heat, there was a bombshell in the mathematics community
which was dropped by several mathematicians working independently that what we call non-Euclidean
geometry, a forbidding phrase but really quite simple conceptually and really important to
grasp.
You know, you've heard me say this ad nauseam by now, that Euclidean geometry was the model
for the philosophical conception of knowledge as universal necessary and certain key to
deduction.
Look, Euclidean did it, why shouldn't we be doing the same thing in ethics theory, political
theory, physics, etc.
Euclidean's geometry has certain definitions, certain postulates, certain axioms, all of
which were considered to be self-evidently true, they didn't need any further justification
and then the theorems of Euclidean's geometry are deduced from those axiom's definitions
and postulates.
Kant had argued that it was the only possible geometry, all that we care about is that Euclidean
geometry was by the early 19th century believed for somewhere around 2100 years to be true
with a capital T, to be a perfect example of knowledge.
That means it describes space, that spatial relations are correctly described by Euclidean
geometry which is produced by the human mind, which shows that the human mind is capable
of universal necessary and certain theories of reality.
Non-Euclidean geometry is the same thing with different axiom's definitions and postulates,
but it's just one axiom different, one axiom that people had never been all that confident
was self-evident anyway but no one could think of a way to get rid of it.
But a number of mathematicians said, well what happens if we just change that axiom?
It's the parallel line axiom which says that in a plane, let's say the surface of a black
board idealized, if you have a line drawn, Euclidean line which extends to infinity
in both directions and a point outside that line in the plane.
So a line on a black board and a dot anywhere on the black board, according to Euclid, it
is axiomatic.
It is self-evidently true that you can only draw one line through that point that will
never intersect the given line.
That's it.
That's called the parallel line axiom.
These other mathematicians, a Hungarian named Boljai and a Russian named Lobachevsky and
German Gauss and Riemann, all said, well what happens if you take that axiom out and
we put in a different axiom?
Let's suppose that we put in arbitrarily that there are no lines you can draw through that
point that will ever intersect, that are parallel.
They will diverge.
They go that way.
They go hyperbolic, it's called hyperbolic, or you say that there are no lines that will
never intersect.
They will all intersect because you have, let's suppose like on the surface of an orange,
a spherical shape, you can't draw two lines that would be extended indefinitely around
the orange going through the diameter of the orange and not intersect.
According to these geometries, you now deduce theorems in a perfectly deductive way.
You wind up with theorems that contradict Euclidean geometry, but they have been arrived
at deductively.
In the case of Riemannian geometry, the sum of the interior angles of a triangle because
the lines that make up a triangle are all curved lines, so-called positively curved lines,
then there's more than 180 degrees in a triangle.
In a Lobachevskyian triangle, there's less than 180 degrees, and in the Euclidean geometry
angle, there's always exactly 180 degrees.
Now all three of those claims, they're obviously inconsistent with one another, come from deduction.
Which one is true of space?
To tell logically, you have to do it empirically.
Oh, but empirically doesn't give you certainty.
If mathematical claims need to be validated empirically, then they're not universal necessary
and certain, even though they use deduction.
So whether you follow this or not, the following conclusion must be drawn.
The connection between the products of deductive reasoning and reality is not a logical connection.
This reinforces what I will call Fourier's move.
Fourier's move in separating successful theory at the level of explanation, prediction, and
control from correspondence to reality, what non-Euclidean geometry showed was we could
not presume that the products of deductive reasoning applied to what we believe were
self-evident axioms definitions postulates resulted in truths that corresponded to reality.
That's a separate question that cannot be answered by logic.
Well then why does answer it?
Experience, let's say.
Ah, but then you've lost the universality, the necessity, and the certainty.
One thing that this did was to highlight the role of assumptions.
For 2100 plus years, we've gotten along with Euclid's definitions axioms and postulates.
Now it turns out, for example, when you follow Riemannian geometry and we start looking at
non-Euclidean geometries, the postulate, that a straight line is the shortest distance between
two points, which seems about as self-evident as you can get.
Well, that's only true in a geometry in which there are straight lines.
In a geometry in which there are only curved lines, either negatively curved, as in the
case of Lobochevsky, or positively curved in the case of Riemann, then the shortest distance
between two points in the Riemannian sphere is a curved line, a particular curved line,
namely one that is a section of a great circle.
So that's why when people fly from London to New York, they don't fly what looks on
your map like a straight line between London and New York, they're flying an arc of a
great circle, which is the shortest distance between two points on a sphere.
So what are the right assumptions to make, and how do we choose among these assumptions?
What are the criteria that tell us that these assumptions work better than those assumptions?
Which assumptions are self-evident?
Can we trust self-evidence, since we have been shown by non-Euclidean geometry, that
things that we thought were self-evident for thousands of years, in fact, are not self-evident
at all?
When non-Euclidean geometries turn out to be very important in general relativity theory,
of course, where space is curved in the presence of dense concentrations of energy or matter,
then you have to use curved geometries, especially Riemannian geometries, and in certain applications
of cosmology and string theory, you have to use hyperbolic geometries.
There are regions of space, obviously, around a black hole where Euclid ain't going to work.
So this is really quite a startling intellectual development.
We're going to trace the consequences of this in the next lecture within 19th century science
before the lecture after that, addressing more deeply the question of where do these
assumptions come from?
We know, roughly speaking, we have had several opinions as to where these assumptions come
from.
Descartes feigned hypotheses.
The term is Newtons, but Descartes I don't think would have objected too strongly, except
feigned his negative connotations.
Well, you invent the hypotheses that work, and that's what justifies them.
Newton believed that somehow you could infer from experience axioms that are universal,
and therefore they can't really come from experience deductively because experience is
particular and they're not generalizations of experience, but somehow Newton believed
you could come up with axioms.
So we saw his definitions of space and time and the law of inertia.
Are these self-evident?
Well, we know now that they were challengeable and don't pertain in our world.
Does the conservation of matter, the conservation of matter, the conservation of energy, these
are assumptions that were very powerful in 19th and 20th century physics.
Where do they come from?
Are they true?
How do we know that they're true?
Are they stipulated?
But how can a stipulated definition lead to such magnificent correct predictions about
very complicated and subtle phenomena?
So we need to ask what work do assumptions do in a theory?
Without the assumptions, you cannot have explanation prediction and control.
The assumptions play a pivotal role.
Below the level of assumptions, theories are deductive.
And we get seduced by that.
And we don't focus on the assumptions because the assumptions have not been deduced.
If the assumptions could be deduced, then they would necessarily be true, and then as
a matter of fact, the predictions controlled would have been deduced, and we could make
some connection to reality.
But the assumptions are assumed.
We call them premises, principles, whatever you want to call them.
So the work that they do is to bridge, assumptions bridge, the logically unbridgeable gulf between
induction and deduction.
Where do they come from?
How do we get to the ones that we have?
How do scientists formulate them?
These are questions that we are going to be asking in the next lecture.
But one, in the next lecture, we're going to focus on the unfolding of Fourier's move
in 19th century physics.
