We're almost halfway through the lectures.
This is lecture 12 of 24, and we've learned an awful lot about the universe.
Let's summarize what we've learned so far.
We know first that the universe is big and it's getting bigger.
By big we mean not only do we live in a galaxy, the Milky Way galaxy, with about 100 billion
stars, but we live in a universe which is evenly distributed with galaxies, and a typical
galaxy outside the Milky Way also has 100 billion stars.
And there are maybe 100 billion such galaxies in the observable universe, so it's certainly
big by any standard.
It is getting bigger, which means the galaxies are moving apart from each other.
We can understand that in terms of Einstein's general theory of relativity.
The space in between galaxies is itself expanding, pushing galaxies further apart from each other,
and stretching the wavelength of light as it travels through empty space, giving rise
to the cosmological redshift.
We also have a universe that is full of stuff, but interestingly there's more stuff in the
universe than what we see.
We can weigh things in the universe, we can figure out how much mass they have using their
gravitational fields, so we can take an individual galaxy, we can weigh it by looking at the
motion of stuff outside the galaxy.
What we find is that there continues to be more and more stuff in the galaxy even when
you can't see stuff anymore.
Even when the visible parts of the galaxy stop, there's still more and more mass as
you go further and further out.
This is evidence for dark matter.
This evidence is enhanced by looking at clusters of galaxies, at collections of galaxies moving
around each other.
You can both look at how fast they're moving to measure the total mass.
You can look at the lensing of light that passes through the cluster to measure the total mass.
You can look at the profile of x-ray gas in between the galaxies to measure the total mass.
Any one of these methods gives answers that are consistent with each other and answers
that the total amount of mass in the universe is something like 30% of the critical density
you would need to have to make the universe spatially flat.
So 30% of the universe is a lot, 30% of the critical density is a lot more than we can
account for in terms of ordinary matter, in terms of the particles that we know from the
standard model of particle physics that make up protons, neutrons, and electrons, the ordinary
atoms of which I made and this table is made and everything else is made.
How do we know how much ordinary matter there is in the universe?
I've been emphasizing throughout the last several lectures that we have independent ways
of measuring the total amount of ordinary matter in the universe.
Two ways in particular, we have primordial nucleosynthesis, big bang nucleosynthesis,
the process by which when the universe was one minute old, it was converting protons
and neutrons into helium and other light nuclei.
The efficiency with which that happens, the percentage of helium you end up with at the
end of the day depends very much on how many protons and neutrons you have lying around.
The more you have, the more helium by weight you will end up with.
So the fact that we have a certain amount of helium, about 24% of the universe, of the
visible mass in the universe by weight, means that only 5% of the critical density of the
universe can be made up by ordinary matter.
That's not enough to account for all the mass we need.
Only independently from that claim, we have the cosmic microwave background.
We have slight variations in the temperature of the radiation that comes to us from when
the universe first became transparent 400,000 years after the big bang.
These slight variations in temperature are all statistical.
They're random fluctuations, but different sized regions evolve differently.
Some of them will be enhanced in their temperature fluctuation by moving towards dark matter.
Some of them will be suppressed by pulling away from the dark matter, depending on how
big that sized region is.
So by looking at the distribution of different sized spots on the cosmic microwave background,
we can infer that there must be dark matter pushing and pulling the ordinary matter we
see.
We get a consistent answer.
It's consistent with the claim that 5% of the critical density is ordinary matter, 25%
is dark matter.
There are other ways of getting similar results, ones that we haven't talked about.
For example, you can start with the microwave background, assume that this is telling you
about the primordial perturbations in density, and then letting those density perturbations
evolve to today to turn into galaxies and large-scale structure.
You can do this both with pencil and paper, and you can also do it with giant computer
simulations.
What you find is that in order to make as much structure as we observe on small scales,
small scales mean galaxy sized scales, it must be the case that there is dark matter
in the universe, dark matter over and above what we observe.
So many, many lines of evidence are pointing us to the conclusion that there's a lot of
stuff in the universe that we don't observe directly, and it cannot be accounted for by
ordinary atoms, ordinary things that are neutrons, protons, and electrons.
We need some form of dark matter.
Today's lecture, we're going to get down to the nitty-gritty and talk about what the dark
matter could possibly be.
Now, the answer that we think is right is that the dark matter is some new kind of particle,
some particle that is not in the standard model of particle physics, but is evidence
for new physics that we haven't yet detected in the laboratory.
However, I want you to trust me, I want you to not think I'm pulling something over on
you.
Today, we're going to consider carefully whether or not we might have made some mistake.
Is it possible that the dark matter that we need to explain the motions of things in the
universe might somehow be in the form of stars or gas or dust, collapsed objects that we
don't see because they're just too small, but they're still made of ordinary stuff?
We're going to say at the end of the day, there's good reason to not believe this is
true, but we want to go through the possibility because some of the ordinary matter in the
universe is in fact dark.
Some of that 5% of the critical density, some of the protons and neutrons, we know we don't
see.
We don't see the air in this room.
We don't see different forms of gas and dust in the universe.
In a cluster of galaxies, which we think a cluster of galaxies is big enough to be a fair
sample of the universe, we know that most of the ordinary matter is in between the galaxies.
How do we know that?
Because in the cluster, there's so much stuff that it falls together, heats up, and emits
x-rays, and you can observe those x-rays.
So you know that in a cluster, most of the ordinary matter is not in the galaxies, two
thirds of it is in between.
We believe that clusters of galaxies are fair samples of the universe by which we mean the
ratio of stuff in between the galaxies and stuff in the galaxies should be the same, outside
a cluster and inside a cluster.
So we believe that even if you have stuff that is outside clusters of galaxies, most
galaxies in the universe are not in clusters at all, they're by themselves.
We believe that it still should be the case that something like two thirds of the ordinary
matter in the universe is not in galaxies, not shining brightly in the form of stars.
It's in very dilute gas in between.
But nevertheless, we think that even taking that into account, we don't have enough stuff
to make up the dark matter in the universe.
So today, we're going to talk about different ways in which you can take ordinary matter
and hide it, hide it in ways that are not very obvious.
In yet other words, we're going to talk about dark barions, stuff that started life as protons
and neutrons, but has come into a form where it's not shining and is easy to see, but is
hidden from us somehow.
The simplest way to do this is to imagine we have dark stars, a star that is a visible
star, a bright star, starts life as a collection of gas and dust spread across some wide region
of the universe, but it's a little bit more dense than its neighboring regions.
So just like a galaxy is formed when a whole bunch of stuff comes together under its mutual
gravitational pull, stars are formed when stuff comes together under their mutual gravitational
pull in a much smaller region of space.
The same kind of process happens, but with stars life is actually much more complicated.
The process of star formation is one that astronomers don't claim to understand very
well.
It's a very active area of research and astrophysics right now, because somehow when this cloud
of gas collapses, it heats up, but instead of bouncing back under the pressure force,
it fragments into little tiny stars, and somehow this involves not just the gravitational
dynamics of things collapsing, but things like magnetic fields and atomic physics and
the different ways that radiation travels through collapsing gas and dust.
It's not a process we claim to understand.
What we can do is go out and look at the end results of those processes.
What are the kinds of stars that we actually see in the universe?
The stars like the sun that we see are easy to see because they're shining, they're giving
off radiation.
That's because these stars are so massive that at the center, the hydrogen from which
they are formed is being fused.
Just like in the Big Bang, you're taking hydrogen, protons, hydrogen nuclei, and they're
fusing together, and when you take hydrogen and turn it into deuterium and then into
helium, you give off energy.
The total mass of a helium nucleus is less than the sum of the masses of two protons
and two neutrons, so it's able to give off energy by E equals mc squared.
The question is, are there things like stars, things that are collapsed collections of ordinary
matter, of gas and dust and so forth, yet are not shining?
Maybe they're too small to shine or something like that.
Well, yes there are things like that, and you want to ask how many of them are there,
what forms do they take, how do you get them?
The simplest way is to start with an ordinary star.
Start with a star that is burning its fuel and recognize that there's not an infinite
amount of fuel to burn in that star, there's only a finite fuel supply just like everywhere
else.
So a star will burn, the sun has been burning for about four and a half billion years.
It has about another five billion years worth of fuel left, but eventually it will give
up, all of its fuel will be turned into heavier elements.
If your star is low mass to begin with, the death of that star is fairly straightforward
and calm.
It just gives up, it doesn't have enough nuclear fuel left, in the latter stages it
becomes big, it becomes a red giant, it becomes puffy, and it gives off mass slowly into the
outer reaches of space, and the core just slowly settles down into what we would call
a white dwarf star.
This is a collection of gas that has been pulled together by its mutual gravity, but
has used up all of its nuclear fuel.
So when it uses up its nuclear fuel, the reason why a star is so big in the first place is
because there's pressure created by the temperature that is created by that burning fuel.
The burning nuclear fusion process heats up the interior of the star and that's what
keeps it big.
When you've used up all the fuel, you don't have any pressure to keep it big anymore and
the star contracts.
What is it that stops it from contracting?
Well, remember way back when, when we learned about bosons and fermions, we learned that
fermions have the property that you can't pack them too tightly.
The same reason why this table cannot collapse is because the electrons that are in the atoms
here are taking up space.
The same thing will be true with a star.
If you take a star and let it use up its fuel and just collapse, eventually it will become
the most efficient way to pack the electrons and the protons and neutrons into a very,
very, very dense substance.
That substance gives you a star called a white dwarf.
It turns out that the electrons are the particles that take up the most space.
It's the electrons that define how big that white dwarf will be.
It's the Fermi pressure named after Enrico Fermi of Fermion fame that keeps the white
dwarf from shrinking anymore.
The laws of physics say there's just nowhere to go.
You can't put those electrons on top of each other.
If the star is slightly heavier than that, it will not end up as a white dwarf.
If the star is slightly heavier than that, it can burn heavier elements into yet heavier
elements in a way that a medium or low mass star doesn't have access to.
In that case, it will eventually happen after it puffs up and becomes a red giant, is that
the core will violently collapse.
Unlike a low mass star that just sort of settles down, massive stars undergo core collapse.
Their cores go very, very quickly to a very small state and the outer layers are blown
off in a supernova explosion.
Now later in the course, we'll be talking in great detail about how to use supernova
explosions as standard candles to measure the acceleration of the universe.
So right now I need to let you in on a complication.
These supernovae are not those supernovae.
There are different ways that stars can explode to become a supernova.
This way that we're talking about now is a core collapse supernova, which is known as
a type 2 supernova.
Another way is what's called a type 1 supernova and the type 1 supernovae, which we'll talk
about in later lectures, are the ones that give us a standard candle and those are the
ones that we use to measure the acceleration of the universe.
A core collapse supernova happens when a massive star has burned up its fuel, the core shrinks,
the outer layers are exploded off, that's a type 2 supernova.
So what happens inside?
You might have thought, well, things collapse, they're going to form a white dwarf, that's
what they can form because the electrons just can't be squeezed in anymore.
It's true that the electrons just can't be squeezed anymore tightly, but there's something
else that can happen.
Because you have a lot of energy in these particles, you know that at high energies a proton and
an electron can come together to form a neutron.
So a neutron is a smaller particle than an electron.
One of the miracles of quantum mechanics is that particles that are higher mass take
up less space.
So that's why atoms have sizes that are controlled by their electrons, not by their protons
and neutrons.
It's the light particles that take up the most space.
So if you want to squeeze things together, but you're prevented from squeezing them because
your electrons are taking up space, you do have an out.
You have an equal number of protons as you have electrons because your star is electrically
neutral.
So those protons can come together with the electrons and form neutrons.
The neutrons take up less space.
So if you turn all of your electrons and protons into neutrons, you can get a much more densely
packed object and that object is called a neutron star.
A neutron star is just a collection of particles that have all been turned into neutrons and
it is so dense that if you start with a several solar mass star, you can turn it into a neutron
star that is only tens of kilometers across the size of a city here on Earth, a very,
very dense, high gravity situation.
So you have two different possible end states for big stars.
If the star is big but not too big, it will end up as a white dwarf.
It's white because the surface of the white dwarf is still pretty hot, so it gives off
some light but not very much.
White dwarfs are actually very dim.
If they're far away, you would not be able to see them.
They would be candidates for somewhat dark matter.
Neutron stars are very dim.
Neutron stars are not giving off a lot of energy.
They would also be candidates for dark matter.
Finally, what if you had very low mass stars?
Stars that were so low mass, they were almost closer to being planets than to being stars.
We have in our solar system gas giant planets like Saturn and Jupiter.
These are not stars because they're not heavy enough to burn nuclear fuel inside.
You can imagine objects that come from the condensation of gas and dust but weigh, let's
say, a hundred times the mass of Jupiter.
That is not heavy enough to turn on the nuclear fuel and start becoming a star.
Such an object is called a brown dwarf.
It is an object which is collapsed gas and dust, star-like in its initial stages, but
never hot enough to begin burning, never hot enough to begin shining.
What that means is we have a whole collection of possibilities for ways to take matter,
ordinary matter, and squeeze it down into some small, dense object that doesn't give
off a lot of light, a white dwarf, a brown dwarf, or a neutron star.
These are all candidates for a certain kind of dark matter, not non-barionic dark matter
because all of these come from ordinary protons and neutrons.
They started their lives as ordinary matter.
They still count as ordinary matter in terms of nucleosynthesis or the cosmic microwave
background.
They're just ordinary matter hidden in a way that it's hard to find them.
So people have invented a clever nickname for these compact objects.
They call them massive, compact, halo objects or machos for short.
So last lecture we had WIMPs.
This lecture we get machos.
This is not an accident.
People thought about this for years.
So machos are a candidate for a way to take ordinary matter and hide it.
To put it in a form where it would be hard to see, it would look kind of like dark matter.
So I want to give you arguments that have nothing to do with Big Bang Nucleosynthesis or the
microwave background as to why machos are not a huge part of that 25% of the universe
that we really think is not ordinary matter.
Even if we didn't know from nucleosynthesis or the microwave background that the dark matter
was not ordinary, could it be possible to rule out that possibility by looking at all
the candidates one by one?
I would like to argue yes.
So first let's consider white dwarfs and neutron stars.
White dwarfs and neutron stars are dim.
If, let's say, our galaxy was filled with many, many white dwarfs and neutron stars,
they would act much like dark matter.
They would be hard to see, they don't interact with each other, they don't run into each
other that much, and they're very dense so you can pack a lot of mass into these kinds
of objects.
The problem is that we only have very specific channels for creating white dwarfs and neutron
stars.
First you have to make a big star, you have to make a star that shines, and that star
that shines has to eventually give off its nuclear fuel and condense into a white dwarf
or a neutron star.
In the process of condensation, these stars give off a lot of mass.
In fact it's a minority of the original mass of the star that ends up in the form of the
white dwarf or the neutron star.
Most of the original mass of that star gets ejected into interstellar space, so if you're
trying to imagine that the universe is full of white dwarfs and neutron stars, then you're
imagining that there's all of this stuff that has been ejected into interstellar space
during the process of forming these white dwarfs and neutron stars.
That ejected mass isn't there, that stuff we would be able to see, that is stuff that
would have heavy elements in it, stuff that would be affected in a spectrum that we observed
from different objects.
It's just not there.
So in other words, there's no way to efficiently take ordinary matter and convert any substantial
fraction of it into white dwarfs and neutron stars, no way that we know of.
For brown dwarfs, it's a little bit more complicated.
The brown dwarf is not something that you get by the end of a star, it's something you
create at the beginning as a very, very low mass star.
So how do we know there are not a lot of brown dwarfs in the universe?
So there could be, but our most reasonable extrapolations say that there are not.
What you can do is, you can figure out how many stars are made as a function of their
mass.
You can observe the stars that we do see and say how many very massive stars are there,
how many medium mass stars are there, how many not so massive stars are there, and from
that you can extrapolate to how many brown dwarfs there probably are.
It turns out that the most reasonable extrapolations we have say there shouldn't be that many brown
dwarfs out there.
Now I'm the first to admit this is not an airtight argument.
We could certainly very well be surprised.
After all, if the alternative is new laws of physics, we should be thinking very hard.
So what we can do is come up with an absolutely new way of constraining the number of machos
in the universe regardless of how they were made.
We want to go out there and look for condensed star-like objects even without knowing where
they could come from.
The way to do that is to use gravitational lensing.
Just like we used before to weigh galaxies and clusters, we can look for these tiny star-like
objects using gravitational lensing.
The good news about machos that lets us look for them using lensing is that they move.
The amount of lensing due to one tiny little white dwarf, or one tiny little brown dwarf
or neutron star, is very, very little.
We would not be able to notice a big deflection of a background object.
However, if we get an exact alignment, if a white dwarf is right in between us and a
background star, what will happen is it will focus the light a little bit and that background
star will appear a little bit brighter than it would have without the lens.
It's just like putting a magnifying glass up to the sun makes it look brighter if you're
right there at the point where things are focused on you.
The problem there is, of course, how would you know if something were right in the middle
of you?
And the good news there is that things move around.
These star-like objects, these machos, are moving through the halo of our galaxy or in
between our galaxy and other galaxies, so we can look at a whole bunch of background stars
at once and wait for events, events where the macho goes in front of the background star,
the brightness of the background star will be seen to go up and then go down.
And it will do so in very specific ways.
It will go up and down in a perfectly symmetric way and it will go up and down in a way that
is absolutely independent of what color you look at it.
Every wavelength of light coming from that star will be amplified and then go back down
again in precisely the same way.
So there are projects going on to search for these micro-lensing events and they have found
them.
So the data for one of these projects, this is a light curve.
This is the amount of light that is coming from a single background star.
You observe literally millions of stars waiting for a coincident brown dwarf or white dwarf
to go by.
Here is the light going up and it's going down.
It's perfectly symmetric.
This is a wonderful candidate micro-lensing event.
The point is, like I said, you look at millions of stars.
You wait for these micro-lensing events.
What you find is that there are not enough of them, there are not nearly enough of them,
to account for what we need to be the dark matter of the universe.
So it's not a matter of we don't know how to make them.
If there were enough brown dwarfs, white dwarfs, or neutron stars to be a substantial fraction
of the dark matter, you would have seen them using micro-lensing and you don't.
There is of course one other way to make very, very dense stuff in the universe and that
is a black hole.
If you have white dwarfs as the end points of medium mass stars, neutron stars as the
end points of more massive stars, you can then ask what happens if we squeeze those
neutrons even more?
Within the standard model of particle physics, there really is no place to go when you squeeze
those neutrons.
However, it is nevertheless the case that according to general relativity, something
will happen if we keep adding mass to a neutron star.
It can't last forever.
What we think happens is it just collapses into a singularity where the gravitational
field is so strong that light itself cannot escape.
This is what we call a black hole.
A black hole is the end point of gravitational collapse where gravity is as strong as it
can possibly be.
There's nothing left after that.
Now black holes, you might think, would be hard to detect in the universe after all.
They are black.
But we've told you again and again there are ways to detect gravitational fields in
the universe even if the thing you're looking at that is creating the gravitational field
is not directly visible.
So ordinary matter spinning around a black hole can either be directly visible or it
can give off light as it's spinning.
If you have a small black hole, the end point of a massive star, stuff that is spiraling
into the black hole will heat up and give off x-rays.
This is one of the primary targets for x-ray astronomy is to look at accretion disks as
they are called, disks of gas and dust swirling around into a black hole giving off x-rays
as they go.
There's another class of black holes called supermassive black holes that are a million
or 10 million times the mass of the sun.
Supermassive black holes live at the center of galaxies and we can detect them because
what happens is that stars orbit them.
What you see is stars moving in an orbit and you can actually make movies of these stars.
You can see them going in an ellipse around nothing, around a region of space where there
isn't anything there.
And you know how far away these stars are so you know how big their orbit is.
You can measure the mass confined into a really tiny region.
The only way you can put that much mass over a million times the mass of the sun into a
tiny region is for it to be a black hole.
So there are stellar sized black holes that exist.
There are supermassive black holes that exist.
Could either one of these be an important part of the dark matter?
Well the answer again is probably not.
For stellar sized black holes, all of the arguments that we used for machos still apply.
Number one, we have no way of knowing how to make them.
You could make them from stars but that would eject a lot of mass.
Number two, they would be machos.
They would lead to microlensing events.
We don't see enough microlensing events from black holes or from anything else to be a
substantial part of the dark matter.
But then we have supermassive black holes.
Could the dark matter be million solar mass black holes?
And so almost as I say it, you realize no, probably not.
Million solar mass black holes are hard to hide.
It's true that you couldn't see any one of them but if one of them is moving through
a collection of stars, if it's not all by itself, it would cause a lot of disruption
of the total dynamics of that system of stars.
So supermassive black holes sit at the centers of galaxies but they don't play an important
role in the overall mass of the galaxy.
It sounds like 10 million solar masses is a lot of mass but remember that the mass of
a galaxy is something like a trillion solar masses.
So even though supermassive black holes exist, they're a tiny, tiny fraction of the total
mass of a galaxy.
They're not an important part of the dark matter.
The remaining possibility for black holes is that in fact we could have primordial black
holes.
We could make black holes not from stars collapsing or from things collapsing at the centers of
galaxies but some process in the very, very early universe creates black holes that are
very tiny.
That is something that is actually completely plausible in terms of dark matter candidates.
We have no way of ruling out the possibility that the dark matter is tiny black holes.
If these black holes formed before Big Bang Nucleosynthesis, they would not count towards
a counting of ordinary matter in the universe.
However, once you make the dark matter of tiny little black holes, it's practically
indistinguishable from making the dark matter out of particles.
They're individual, little objects, they're not big, stellar-sized things.
We can't look for them using microlensing.
So we're back once again to the possibility that the dark matter is particles.
And what we're going to do in subsequent lectures is go through all the different possibilities
of ways to make particles that would count as dark matter.
Black holes are one possible candidate for dark matter candidates that are basically
particles.
They're very tiny little black holes.
It turns out that they are not among the most promising candidates.
The reason why they're not the most promising is we don't know how to make them.
We don't have a theory of black hole production in the early universe that would predict a
large density of tiny black holes today.
The best candidate theories we have for the origin of the dark matter are theories where
we have a natural way of making them.
So it turns out that the absolutely best candidate we have for making dark matter
is something called supersymmetry, a new particle physics theory that naturally gives
rise to a set of particles that are stable, massive, and weakly interacting, exactly what
we want the dark matter to be.
There are other candidates.
They're the black holes we mentioned.
There's a particle called the axion.
There's even neutrinos, which are in the standard model.
For neutrinos, there's a good reason why we don't like them.
They're hot dark matter.
The other particles are cold dark matter, but they seem to be less plausible from a particle
physics point of view than supersymmetry does.
However, we are keeping an open mind.
We don't yet know what the dark matter is.
That's part of the excitement of the next 10 years of cosmology.
We'll be pointing our finger very specifically on where the dark matter comes from.
