We have every reason to be proud of what we've learned about the universe so far, both over
the course of these lectures and over the course of the past hundred years as working
physicists and cosmologists.
We know that the total energy density of the universe is about the critical density,
what you need to make the universe spatially flat.
We know that of that density, it's about 5% ordinary matter, 25% dark matter, and 70%
dark energy.
We have a great theory for what the ordinary matter does.
We have the standard model of particle physics, which tells us what the particles are and
how they interact, consistent with all the experiments we've done here on Earth so far.
We don't know what the dark matter is, but we have more than enough different candidates.
It's not a surprise to us or a deep mystery how you could get dark matter to be 25% of
the universe.
We have lots of different ideas for what it could be, and furthermore, we have very good
ideas about how to test those theories, ways that we can create the dark matter in particles
individually, and also to detect it coming from outer space here to our detectors on
Earth.
So now is the lecture in which we face up to the fact that the dark energy is not so
simple.
The dark energy is something about which we do not have very good ideas about what it
might be.
We're going to spend three lectures looking at different possibilities for why the universe
is accelerating and spatially flat, why we seem to believe there is dark energy, at the
end of which you will realize that none of the theories are especially promising.
None of them are like the case of supersymmetry in the case of dark matter, where you have
a theory that does other things, naturally provides you with a candidate, and whether
it's right or not is at least a very plausible scenario.
So let's think about exactly why we think that there is dark energy.
We have a set of evidence for it.
That evidence is very different than the evidence we have for dark matter.
The dark matter evidence comes from the local dynamics and behavior of stuff in the universe,
attracting other stuff.
We have galaxies, we have clusters of galaxies, gravitational lensing, the growth of structure
in the universe.
All of these say there's more stuff here in those bound systems than there is outside.
If we naturally attribute that to cold, non-interacting, massive particles, we seem to fit the data.
Dark energy, on the other hand, is found globally.
We look at the acceleration of the universe due to the kind of stuff that is inside it.
We look at the spatial geometry of the universe, which is a way of measuring everything all
at once.
We find that if we imagine that 70% of the energy density of the universe is smoothly
spread throughout space, taking the same amounts inside clusters and galaxies and outside, and
also persistent as a function of time, not redshifting or diluting away as the universe
expands, we can fit all these data all at once.
So we call this mysterious new substance dark energy.
So what could it be?
The two things we know about dark energy are that it's smoothly distributed through
space and nearly constant in time.
Therefore, certainly the simplest thing it could possibly be is something which is absolutely
100% the same from place to place in space and the same from moment to moment in time.
The data are not yet telling us that that is precisely the case.
The data are, of course, consistent with some slop in that conclusion.
There could be small variations from place to place.
So that's going to be the subject of the next lecture.
This lecture is going to be about the possibility that it really is truly constant, and the
physical underpinnings for those two possibilities are very, very different even though their
observational signatures are pretty much similar.
So we should say before we go there that even though we're going to contemplate in
this lecture the possibility of empty space has an absolutely constant energy known as
the vacuum energy.
The vacuum energy is a candidate for what the dark energy could be.
These are not synonyms with each other.
The dark energy is a label given to whatever it is that is out there in the universe that
is smoothly distributed and persistent, 70%.
The vacuum energy is a specific idea for what it might be, the energy of empty space itself.
It's still possible that what we call the vacuum energy is zero and what we call the
dark energy that is making the universe accelerate is something else entirely.
But for this lecture we're going to concentrate on the possibility of vacuum energy.
So what would we mean by vacuum energy?
We mean the energy of empty space itself, but what does that mean?
That means that you take a little region of space, a little cubic centimeter, and you
remove from it everything you can possibly remove from it.
So it's completely empty.
You remove all the ordinary matter, all the dark matter, all the radiation, all the neutrinos.
There's really literally nothing there.
And you ask how much energy is there is contained inside this cubic centimeter.
In the context of either general relativity, our best theory of gravity, or quantum field
theory, our best theory of microscopic physics, there's no reason why the answer to that question
should be zero.
There is some number, some constant of nature, which tells us how much energy there is in
every region of empty space time.
So this picture that you're seeing here is actually an artist's impression, my impression,
of what dark energy, vacuum energy is like.
You can think of it as a false color image of empty space itself.
Of course, empty space is really completely dark and invisible, completely see-through
and transparent.
So this is just an attempt to make you contemplate the idea that even in this little bit of empty
space, there's still energy there.
The energy is not contained in some substance that is located there and could be moved around.
It's inherent in the fabric of space and time itself.
That is the idea of vacuum energy.
The bare minimum amount of energy you can fit anywhere.
There's nothing you could do to that cubic centimeter, no physical process, which would
lower the energy below that.
So what do we mean by the energy of empty space?
We're saying over and over again the same words, the energy that you have in an empty
cubic centimeter of space.
But you're still sitting there thinking, what does that really mean?
To a physicist, when you say, what does that mean, you're asking, what does it do?
How would we know that it is there?
Is there some operational, observable consequence of saying these words?
And now we get a little bit of a subtlety, actually, because in almost all areas of physics,
the actual value of the energy doesn't matter.
What matters is how much energy changes when one process happens, the energy that goes up
or goes down, or the energy that gets exchanged between two different ways in which it can
manifest itself.
For example, you might be familiar from high school or college physics with experiments
like an inclined plane, a ball or a box rolling down some inclined plane, and people will
talk about the energy that is contained in this ball rolling down the plane.
It will have potential energy, depending on how high it is, and kinetic energy, depending
on how it's moving.
And if everything is very smooth, there's zero change in the total energy, you're just
converting potential energy into kinetic energy.
But here's the thing.
If you ask, what is the total amount of energy of that ball rolling down the plane, it doesn't
matter what the answer is.
If you did exactly the same experiment from the plane being right here, the ball rolling
down, or raising the plane up, so it's up here, the potential energy of the ball would
change, but the way in which the energy goes from being potential energy to kinetic energy
wouldn't change.
And of course, the motion of the ball down the plane would be exactly the same, whether
it was up here or whether it was down here.
As long as the tilt of the plane is the same, the local physics is exactly identical.
The total amount of energy that the ball has is completely irrelevant.
So you might say, even if there was empty space energy, vacuum energy at every point
in space time, how would we know?
The answer is that gravity is the one thing in nature that really does care about the
absolute amount of energy.
Remember, Einstein tells us that gravity responds to everything.
Gravity is universal, and so what's going to turn out to be the case is that the amount
of energy that is contained in empty space doesn't affect anything about, for example,
the standard model of particle physics.
The only thing it affects is gravity.
It acts to curve space time and creates a gravitational field.
That's how you can detect it.
That's how, in fact, we're claiming that we did detect something like it by looking at
the curvature of space and, of course, the acceleration of the universe.
So what is the effect of this vacuum energy?
We've already said that it makes the universe accelerate.
If there is some energy density in empty space, that energy density doesn't go away as the
universe expands.
It's a constant.
It's a constant of nature from place to place and from time to time.
So as the universe is expanding, this vacuum energy is giving a perpetual impulse to the
expansion of space, and we perceive that as the acceleration of the universe.
There are other effects.
If you had infinitely good measuring apparatuses, you would be able to detect the existence of
the vacuum energy using all sorts of gravitational experiments.
The classic experiment that lets us test general relativity in the first place is the motion
of the perihelion of Mercury.
The planet Mercury moves around the Sun in an ellipse, and according to Isaac Newton,
that ellipse should be fixed in orientation once and for all.
If you put aside perturbations from the other planets and imagine a perfect solar system
that just has the Sun and Mercury, that ellipse is exactly the same for all time.
Einstein comes along in general relativity and says that that ellipse should change slightly.
That was actually already known to be the case.
Before Einstein came up with this theory, astronomers had already determined that Mercury
was slowly shifting in its orbit.
That is a way in which we were able to tell that general relativity was a better theory
than Newtonian gravity.
It turns out that if you had a vacuum energy, you would also add a small new effect to the
motion of the planet Mercury.
However, that effect, when I say small, is really, really small.
There's no possible way we will ever be able to test the possibility of vacuum energy by
looking at Mercury.
It's just swamped by things like me sneezing here on Earth.
There's a million bigger effects than the vacuum energy when you're thinking about
how Mercury moves around the Sun.
The reason why we can detect the vacuum energy in cosmology is that because the effects accumulate.
When you're looking at the motion of a galaxy, or the supernova in some galaxy, there are
many, many cubic centimeters between us and that galaxy, and every one of those cubic centimeters
is expanding just a little bit faster because of the presence of vacuum energy.
It's that accumulated effect over cosmological distances enables us to actually detect the
fact that the vacuum energy is there.
The first way the physicist started thinking about this concept of vacuum energy was actually
going back to Einstein himself.
Einstein soon after inventing general relativity started thinking about cosmology.
He knew that he had a very different way of thinking about space and time than Newton
did.
Isaac Newton had a picture in which space and time were both fixed and absolute.
Einstein has a picture in which space and time have a geometry.
They're dynamical and they can change.
So he started thinking about the entire universe.
As a simplifying assumption, we're now talking 1916, 1917, 1918, long before we knew the
universe was expanding, Einstein took as a simplifying assumption that the universe was
pretty much the same everywhere.
He found that within that possibility that the universe is pretty much the same everywhere,
he was not able, with his equation governing the curvature of space and time, to find a
solution in which the universe was static, in which it was smooth everywhere and more
or less staying the same as time went on.
Now we know today the reason why, because the universe is in fact expanding, it is not
static.
And that makes perfect sense if you have galaxies spread throughout the universe, they're going
to pull on each other.
In the context of Newtonian gravity, if you try to ask the question, what could happen
if you filled space full of galaxies the same number everywhere, would they pull on each
other or not?
It's very hard to get an answer.
On the one hand, you might think that yes, they're pulling on each other, therefore
they should come together.
But there's an equally plausible looking analysis that says, here I am, this galaxy.
Every other galaxy is pulling on me, but they're equally distributed.
The net force is zero and I don't move.
Nothing moves.
Within general relativity, there's a different answer that says, you can think about nothing
moving, but space itself can get bigger or smaller.
So in general relativity, if you have nothing but matter in the universe, the answer is
unambiguous.
Space better be either expanding or contracting.
Now there's a little bit of a false story that goes around about Einstein thinking about
exactly these issues.
It says, Einstein was blinded by his philosophical presuppositions.
He wanted to believe, this false story goes, that the universe is static for some religious
or philosophical reasons.
And therefore, when he found that his equations didn't describe a static universe, he was
upset and tried to change them.
The truth is that he did believe the universe was static, but it wasn't because of a philosophical
predisposition.
It's because he asked his astronomer friends.
At that time, in the 1910s, in between 1915 and 1929, as far as anyone knew, the universe
was static.
That was what the observations were telling us.
It wasn't until Hubble, in 1929, discovered the fact that there's a relationship between
the velocity of distant galaxies and their distance did we realize that space is in fact
expanding and dynamical.
So what Einstein was trying to do was to fit the data.
He thought the universe was static.
He showed that his own equations did not allow for a static solution if you'd just imagined
a universe full of galaxies or even full of matter of any sort.
So what did he do?
In 1917, he changed his equation for general relativity.
He added a new term, which he called the cosmological constant.
These days, we consider changing Einstein's equations to be an interesting step but a
dramatic one.
We have very good success with those equations, but you have to remember that Einstein himself
was coming up with new equations all the time.
In fact, the final version of his equation was not anywhere near the first version of
it.
He was trying it to fit things both philosophical and experimental all along.
So finally, in 1917, he said, well, I can add a term to the left-hand side of my equations.
So here are, of course, Einstein's equations.
On the left-hand side, you see the term that tells you how curved space and time are.
On the right-hand side, you have the term representing stuff in the universe, energy
and momentum and so forth.
Einstein put a new term on the left-hand side for which he could then find a solution
that the universe could be filled with galaxies and yet not expanding or contracting.
The solution that he called the cosmological constant, we now know that you can move to
the right-hand side and it's exactly the same as vacuum energy.
In fact, there is some people who like to argue whether or not this term deserves to
be on the left-hand side with the spatial and spacetime curvature bits or deserves
to be on the right-hand side with the energy bits.
Of course, the truth is it absolutely makes no difference whether a term in an equation
is on the left side or the right side.
It functions in exactly the same way and has the same interpretation.
Einstein would have called it the cosmological constant.
We will call it the vacuum energy, but it is the same thing.
So vacuum energy acts to make the universe accelerate.
It basically pushes things apart as the universe expands.
Every matter pulls things together, so basically all Einstein did was find a solution where
those two effects exactly balance.
Now it's true he could find a solution where the universe was not expanding or contracting,
but of course his solution was unstable.
If you perturb it a little bit, if things just started moving together a tiny bit, the
pulling together force would win and it would collapse.
If things started expanding a little bit, the pushing apart force would win and things
would start accelerating.
So Einstein found a solution that fit the data, but it wasn't a physically plausible
solution.
It wasn't something that was robust to small changes in what happened.
Then of course in 1929, Hubble comes along and says, well, the universe is not static.
It's expanding just as Einstein could have predicted in 1917.
According to George Gamov, who later was one of the primary thinkers about the Big Bang
School, Einstein later claimed that his biggest blunder as a scientist was to introduce the
cosmological constant into his equations.
If he had not done that, he would have made a prediction.
He would have been able to say, despite what the current observations say, circa 1917,
I predict that the universe should either be expanding or contracting.
But he blinked and he wasn't able to do that.
He then said away with the cosmological constant, I'm sorry I ever invented it.
Once you do that, you can't undo it.
Pandora's box is not so easily closed.
These days we realize that what Einstein called the cosmological constant is what we call
the vacuum energy, and we can start asking questions like, if there can be energy density
in empty space, how much should there be?
Can we make some sort of reasonable estimate for how much energy there should be in every
cubic centimeter of space, the minimum possible value?
Well, it's a very fuzzy story that goes back and forth.
There is no precise answer to this question.
What should be the vacuum energy according to our current theories?
The true answer is it can be anything at all.
It is a constant of nature.
It's like saying, what is the mass of the electron?
There is no ahead of time answer to what it should be.
You have to go out there and measure it.
On the other hand, there are reasonable answers and unreasonable answers.
You can do a pretty good job of estimating order of magnitude, how big the vacuum energy
should be.
We have both what we would call a classical contribution to the vacuum energy, the thing
that it should be if you ignored all of quantum mechanics, and then as we'll explain, quantum
mechanics adds new contributions on top of that.
Together we get an estimate, we can compare it with what we see.
The answer is it's nowhere close.
The estimated value of the vacuum energy is much, much larger than what we observe.
Let's think deeply about why that is true.
First, we need to talk a little bit about quantum mechanics.
Quantum mechanics is the correct theory of the world, as far as we know, at least the
correct framework in which to be thinking about the world.
It replaces Isaac Newton's classical mechanics.
In both classical mechanics and quantum mechanics, you have physical systems, and those physical
systems do things.
They evolve.
They obey equations of motion.
The real difference between classical mechanics and quantum mechanics is that in classical
mechanics you can observe everything there is to know about the system.
So if I have a system that is a ball rolling down a plane or a pendulum swinging back and
forth or a set of springs, I can measure where all the components of that system are, then
I can use the laws of physics to predict where they will be in the future and where they
were in the past, in principle, to arbitrary accuracy.
In quantum mechanics, meanwhile, there is a rule that says you cannot measure all of
the properties that a system has.
In fact, you are dramatically unable to measure.
Think about a coin which you can flip and will be heads or tails.
While it's still spinning in the air, if you ask, well, is that coin heads or tails,
classically it's somewhere in between.
It's rotating in between being heads or tails.
Quantum mechanics is like a coin which you flip and it's rotating in the air, but nevertheless
every time you look at it, it's either exactly heads or exactly tails.
It's not that we don't know which one it is.
It's that when you're not looking at it, it is some superposition.
It is neither heads nor tails.
It is described by some angle.
When you look at it, you never see that angle.
You always see it to be exactly heads or exactly tails.
For a more realistic example, think about a particle like an electron.
An electron, classically, we would say, has a position.
It's located there and it has a velocity.
It's moving in some direction.
According to quantum mechanics, it's not that we don't know what the position is.
It's that there is no such thing as the position of the electron.
What there is is a function of space called the wave function, and the wave function tells
us if we look at the electron, where are we most likely to see it?
What is the probability of finding it in different places?
But the true answer to where the electron is is not a question that has an answer.
There is no such thing.
When you look at the electron, you always see it in a position, but when you're not looking,
it doesn't have a position.
It has a probability of having different positions.
That is the origin of uncertainty in quantum mechanics.
What you can observe is not what there really is, but what there really is, this wave function,
tells you the probability of getting different answers to your observations.
So let's apply this to a very specific system, which is not exactly the real world, but it's
a good analogy for the real world, and that's a simple pendulum.
Just a weight that can rock back and forth.
It can be stationary, just sitting there, or it can be going back and forth with some
amplitude and some frequency.
This is a good classical thing.
This is exactly the kind of thing that Galileo used to look at when he was falling asleep
in the cathedral in Pisa, and he would time the pendulum with his pulse, because he didn't
have a very good clock back then.
But these days, what we've learned to do is to take classical systems and quantize them,
to put them in a quantum mechanical framework and see what happens.
In the classical pendulum, going back and forth, it has energy.
It has a potential energy depending on how high it's gone up, and it has a kinetic energy
depending on how fast it's moving.
Furthermore, those two things, the kinetic energy, the potential energy, can take on
absolutely any value.
In quantum mechanics, on the other hand, two things happen.
One is that the energy cannot take on any value, it takes on certain discrete values.
That's why it's called quantum mechanics.
For specific energy levels that you can see, you can't see anything in between them.
The other thing is, if you ask what is the lowest energy level, you get a different answer
in quantum mechanics than you would have in classical mechanics.
In other words, all you're saying is, here's a pendulum, put it in the zero energy state.
Put it in the state of minimum energy.
Classically, it's kind of obvious what to do.
You stop the pendulum from moving, you just make it sit there, so it's located at the
bottom of its trajectory.
Its potential energy is minimized, and there's no kinetic energy.
Quantum mechanics says that that would be the same as precisely specifying the location
of the pendulum, and you can't do that.
Therefore the minimum energy configuration still has some uncertainty in where it is,
and therefore still has some uncertain energy.
So this idea of a pendulum is actually quite analogous to the quantum fields that we have
in the real world.
A pendulum has, classically, energy.
Quantum mechanically, it has a slightly higher minimum energy than classically.
What we have in the real world are fields oscillating through space and time, but it
turns out to be quite a good approximation to think of the field at every point in space
as a little pendulum going back and forth.
It has a kinetic energy, it has a potential energy, and quantum mechanically, it has a
little bit more.
But I want you to notice two things about this analogy.
First, if you ask, what is the energy of the pendulum?
Just like the inclined plane, there's no right answer.
The potential energy of that pendulum would change if we moved the whole apparatus up
by a foot.
But none of the physics would change, none of the laws of motion of the pendulum would
be altered in any way.
The quantum fields in space-time have exactly the same property.
There's a minimum amount of energy that you can ascribe to them that is true classically
even in empty space, and it's a completely arbitrary number.
But then, what quantum mechanics says is that on top of that completely arbitrary number,
there's also some quantum mechanical jiggle.
Quantum fields have the same property.
In addition to the completely arbitrary answer to the question, what is the minimum energy?
Quantum mechanics adds an extra contribution to that minimum energy because of the fact
that the fields are jiggling back and forth.
This is just Heisenberg's uncertainty principle.
The fact that you can't localize the quantum mechanical system with absolute precision.
Because of that, there will always be quantum jitters.
In the case of a field, like the electron field or the electromagnetic field or the
gluon field, these jitters carry energy and they contribute to the energy density of empty
space.
They contribute to the vacuum energy, in other words.
Now there's a rule in quantum field theory.
When you look at a field, what do you see?
Just like for a single electron, you have a wave function, but when you look at it,
you see a particle.
For a quantum field, you see a collection of particles.
A quantum field is basically a bookkeeping device that tells you how many particles there
are all over the place.
So you might think that if I have a quantum field, its vacuum state, which to physicist
means its lowest energy state, the state I can put the quantum field in that has the
least energy I can possibly have, would have zero particles.
If there are particles, then you have some energy there.
The vacuum state of the field, the lowest energy state, should have no particles anywhere.
It should just describe empty space.
And that is correct in the sense that there are no particles in empty space that you can
see.
Nevertheless, Heisenberg and his uncertainty principle are telling you there are particles
that you can't see.
We call these virtual particles.
The fact that you can't pin down the quantum field to some precise configuration is telling
us that you can't avoid virtual particles popping in and out of existence.
These virtual particles are not a new kind of particle like we already have electrons
and quarks, now we also have virtual particles.
They are the good old particles that we know and love, photons, electrons and positrons
and so forth, fluctuating in the vacuum, fluctuating in empty space itself.
These virtual particles certainly exist.
This is not some crazy hypothetical thing.
It was a crazy hypothetical thing 70 or 80 years ago, but since then we have detected
the effects of these virtual particles.
They interact with ordinary particles passing through empty space.
And the effects of these interactions change the atomic energy levels in ordinary atoms
of ordinary stuff.
They give rise to corrections to formulas in particle physics and these corrections
have been tested to exquisite accuracy.
In other words, we have a picture in quantum field theory of empty space in which empty
space is not boring, empty space is alive popping with virtual particles and antiparticles
that appear and disappear.
We can't see them directly, we can't pull a virtual particle out of the vacuum and
make it real, but we can tell that they're there because they have effects indirectly
on the behavior of other particles.
For example, they have effects on gravitons.
These virtual particles have a gravitational field, they carry energy, and that energy that
they have is precisely the vacuum energy, a contribution, if you like, to the amount
of energy density in empty space.
What we said then is that just like for a pendulum, if you ask what is the minimum
energy of empty space, there are two contributions.
First, there's a completely arbitrary classical number.
There's some number there in the laws of physics that says if quantum mechanics weren't
true, the vacuum energy would be such and such a number.
We have no idea what that number is.
We also have a quantum mechanical uncertainty, a zero point energy of the vacuum fluctuations
of every field in the universe added on top of that.
Now, what is this energy?
How much is the shift in energy from quantum mechanics?
There we can at least estimate it.
Even if we didn't know the classical energy, you might imagine that the quantum mechanical
shift was of the same basic size as the original vacuum energy.
It turns out that if you do a naive estimate of how much energy quantum fluctuations add
to the vacuum, you get infinity, so that's not right.
In quantum mechanics, infinities happen all the time and we know how to fix them.
When we put on some cutoff, we stop including contributions from very, very, very short length
scales where space time itself might dissolve into some sort of quantum foam.
Then once we have that cutoff, we get a finite answer for what the quantum mechanical contribution
to the vacuum energy is.
In terms of numbers, it turns out to be 10 to the 112 ergs per cubic centimeter.
That is a lot of ergs and erg is a measurement of energy.
If you ask, given the data, given the observations from cosmology, how many ergs per cubic centimeter
are there, the answer is 10 to the minus eighth ergs per cubic centimeter.
In other words, our best guess, our best estimate on the basis of modern physics of how much
energy there should be in the vacuum is 10 to the 120 times bigger than the amount that
we actually see.
1 trillion, trillion, trillion, trillion, trillion, trillion, trillion, trillion, trillion times
bigger than what we actually see.
That's a theory that does not match the data.
This is called the cosmological constant problem and is probably the largest unsolved problem
in theoretical physics.
We had known for a long time that there was a cosmological constant problem long before
we actually detected the vacuum energy.
It was obvious that the vacuum energy was not nearly as big as our naive estimate said
it should be, so we had that problem.
But before we detected the acceleration of the universe, the best idea was that there
was some secret symmetry of nature, some secret mechanism that took this huge vacuum energy
you should have and exactly canceled it, made it equal to zero.
Even though we didn't know what that symmetry was, it didn't seem like such a stretch that
someday we would detect it.
But now that we've found some vacuum energy, now that we've found some dark energy that
we can attribute to the energy density of empty space, the problem has become much harder.
We don't want to multiply the real number by zero, we want to multiply it by 10 to the
minus 120.
It's as if you see someone on the street who is flipping a coin and they flip a coin and
they say, you think it's going to be heads or tails and you say heads and they flip it
and it's tails and they flip it again and it's tails and they flip it 299 times in a
row and it's tails every time.
You don't know why, you don't know what the mechanism is, but if they then say, I'm going
to flip it again, what do you think it will be, you're going to say tails and they flip
it in its heads.
Something made something go away, something made the vacuum energy disappear two to the
299 times, but then there's a left over there that 300th time.
This tiny amount of vacuum energy by all rights shouldn't be there or should be bigger, we're
stuck with the situation where it's there.
So it might be right, it might be that once we finally understand everything, we get a
better formula for predicting what the vacuum energy would be and we get the right answer.
Right now we're simply at a loss.
If the cosmological dark energy is the energy of empty space, it's an idea that fits the
data but about which we have no understanding.
Therefore, we're going to try other things.
We still don't know why the vacuum energy is small, but maybe it is zero, maybe the
actual dark energy we're seeing is something dynamical, that's what we'll be exploring
in the next lecture.
