Dark matter and dark energy taken together are about 95% of the stuff in the universe.
However, they represent much less than 95% of the lectures you can buy from the teaching
company.
So, part of our goal in this set of lectures has been to redress that balance to really
concentrate on that 95% on the dark matter and the dark energy.
When we talked in the last lecture about inflationary cosmology, it's not because inflation gave
us directly a theory of dark matter and dark energy, rather it relates to the background
set of assumptions that we deal with when we start talking about things like dark matter
and dark energy.
When we were cosmologists working and trying to understand the current universe, the idea
that the universe probably underwent a period of inflation at very early times colors how
we think about everything else, and when we discover new things about the universe,
it colors how we think about inflation.
For the obvious example, when we discover dark energy, it helps show that the prediction
of inflation, that the universe was spatially flat, was something that was going to be correct.
Likewise, the physics of inflation, with a scalar field, a field that is slowly rolling
and changing its energy density only very gradually, has showed up once again in ideas
for dark energy.
So today, we're going to be talking about a different background theory, the theory
of string theory.
String theory is what a lot of people have in their minds in the background when they're
thinking about the fundamental laws of physics, both particle physics, as we know it in the
standard model and perhaps beyond, and also gravitational physics, as understood in general
relativity.
Like inflation, string theory is a speculation.
It's not something that we absolutely know is true, but it's something that is caught
on as a very popular speculation.
There's a tremendous amount of intellectual effort going on right now trying to relate
the ideas of string theory to the things that we observe here in nature.
So the idea behind string theory is really extremely simple.
It's just the statement that you replace elementary particles with elementary strings.
In other words, in the conventional way of looking at things, if you take an electron
or a quark or a photon and you zoom in on it with the most powerful microscope you can
imagine, they still remain point-like.
They don't have any extent in any direction.
They're just a fundamental geometric point.
So string theory says that's not right.
Instead, these particles that we think are particles are actually little loops of string.
That is to say they have one dimension of extent that takes the shape of a circle and
that circle is vibrating just a little bit.
We don't know what the strings are made of.
It's not even a sensible question to ask.
They're made of the stuff that strings are made of, but the idea is that different ways
you can vibrate a string correspond to all the different particles that we see.
This theory has caught on for many reasons, primarily because it's a promising theory
of quantum gravity, as we will discuss, but also it's prospectively a theory of everything.
And everything includes dark matter and dark energy.
So we're going to be talking about is the possible ways that the ideas behind string
theory can influence our conception of dark matter and dark energy.
As far as dark matter is concerned, there is sadly more than one possibility for the
way that string theory can give us a candidate dark matter particle.
It's consistent with our ideas of supersymmetry and wimps, also with our ideas of axions and
perhaps even neutrinos.
For dark energy, it's a trickier situation.
You can get quintessence out of string theory, but it's not very natural.
The very intriguing suggestion is that string theory can offer an explanation for the size
of the vacuum energy.
That's the good news.
The bad news is that the explanation involves 10 to the 500 different regions of spacetime
which we don't see.
So we're going to evaluate that suggestion very critically in the next lecture.
In this lecture, we're going to try to set up what string theory is, why we're motivated
about it, and what the current state of the art is, and trying to connect it to other
things about the world.
So the reason why we care about string theory is mostly because it's a prospective theory
of quantized gravity.
One of the themes that we've had all throughout these lectures is that in physics, all the
theories we have and all the data that we have have to be tied together.
You don't have a separate theory for every phenomenon.
You have the smallest possible set of theories that can explain the greatest possible set
of phenomena.
In particular, you know that if your theories are really going to be right simultaneously,
they need to be consistent with each other.
If you have two ideas that work really well in their respective domains of validity, but
are fundamentally incompatible with each other, then you know that something has to
give.
You know that either one of them is wrong and needs to be replaced, or you need to find
a third theory that takes both of them into account and reduces to the two different examples
and two different limits.
So this is a way that scientists can make progress even in the absence of direct explicit
and specific experimental data.
Sometimes you know your theory is wrong because you do an experiment and it contradicts the
theory.
That's an easy way to know that there's something that needs to be fixed about how you're thinking
about things.
But sometimes you know your theory is wrong even though it is consistent with all the
data you have.
And that is a situation we find ourselves in right now.
It's not the first time in the past this has worked.
For example, in 1900 we had the theory of electromagnetism as put together by Maxwell
with Maxwell's equations.
We also had the theory of classical mechanics as put together by Isaac Newton.
But these two theories were not quite compatible.
They had different sets of symmetries.
They gave different answers to what would happen if you observed the same set of phenomena
in two different reference frames.
So just by thinking how to reconcile these two points of view, Einstein was able to come
up with the special theory of relativity.
Almost immediately after inventing the special theory of relativity, he realized that this
new theory was incompatible with Newton's theory of gravity.
He would once again have to reconcile these two things.
There was some experimental guidance he knew about the orbit of Mercury being anomalous,
but nevertheless his primary goal was to find a single framework which could reduce in the
right circumstances both to Newtonian gravity and to special relativity, he ended up coming
up with general relativity.
So now we have a giant looming incompatibility in the fundamental laws of physics.
As far as we know, every experiment we've ever done, here on Earth at least, can be
explained by one of two theories, the general theory of relativity, Einstein's theory of
curved spacetime as gravity, or the standard model of particle physics, a set of fields
and their interactions governed overall by the rules of quantum mechanics and quantum
field theory.
The problem is general relativity is not a quantum field theory, it's a classical field
theory.
Even though in some sense general relativity replaced ideas of spacetime that we got from
Isaac Newton, in philosophy general relativity is very Newtonian.
It says there is a state of the universe, there are equations that govern the evolution
of that state, and we can observe that state in any way we like in principle to arbitrary
precision.
The rules of quantum mechanics say something very different.
They say that we can't observe everything about a system, there is a wave function.
A wave function tells us what the system is really like, but when we observe it we don't
observe the wave function directly.
There are certain observable features of it, and when we look at something, the observable
thing we get depends on the amplitude of the wave function.
What the wave function is really telling us is the probability for getting certain results
when we actually observe something.
So we want to reconcile these two theories.
It can't be the case that general relativity is correct and quantum mechanics is correct.
If general relativity is correct then the source of gravity is energy and momentum.
The quantum mechanics is telling us that energy and momentum are just things we observe, they're
not the fundamental things that are.
In other words we could imagine, at least hypothetically, a quantum mechanical situation
in which you had a gravitating body, and the wave function of the gravitating body said
there's a 50% chance that it's over here, and there's a 50% chance that it's over there.
Now try to ask the question, according to classical general relativity, in what direction
does the gravitational field point?
Does it point towards there or does it point towards there?
The hopefully obvious answer should be that there's a 50% amplitude that it points there
and a 50% amplitude that it points there.
But what that means is that space-time itself needs to be quantized.
We need to have a wave function of the whole universe, a wave function of the dynamical
properties, the curvature of space-time itself.
That is what we seek in a quantum theory of gravity, and we don't have it right now.
It turns out, of course, that we have a set of cookbook procedures for taking a classical
theory and quantizing it.
The real world we think is quantum mechanical.
It's not really classical and quantum mechanics is something we add on top.
It's really quantum mechanical and classical mechanics, a la Isaac Newton, that's something
that is a limit, an approximation to the true quantum mechanical reality that works very
well when objects are really, really big.
When you're working with individual atoms or electrons, quantum mechanics is absolutely
necessary, but when you're working with big objects like the Earth or the Sun or even
you and me, classical mechanics is perfectly fine.
So there's no reason ahead of time that the way to find the correct quantum mechanical
theory of reality starts by taking a classical theory and then quantizing it.
But nevertheless, it turns out to work awfully well in many different circumstances.
The most successful theory that we have within the realm of quantum field theory is quantum
electrodynamics, QED.
This is what won Nobel prizes for people like Julian Schwinger and Richard Feynman.
It is the quantum theory of electrons interacting with photons and it works extremely well.
But we have a classical theory of electromagnetism that also works extremely well.
The way to get quantum electrodynamics is to quantize classical electrodynamics.
When you try to take that cookbook and apply it to general relativity, it works at first
and then it breaks down.
So it's not as if we don't understand anything at all about quantum gravity.
We can take the first few steps.
For example, you can consider gravitational fields that are weak, spacetime that is almost
flat everywhere, but tiny ripples on top of it.
As a matter of fact, in most of the observable universe, the gravitational fields are actually
pretty weak, so this is a very good approximation to many circumstances.
We can quantize weak gravitational fields very easily.
We get a theory of gravitons.
We get a theory of particles that are quantized excitations of the gravitational field in
exactly the same way that when we quantize electromagnetism, we get a theory of photons,
the quantized excitations of the electromagnetic field.
So the theory of gravitons works pretty well.
It makes sense.
We can scatter gravitons off each other.
But then we try to push this theory a little bit harder.
We say, what about when the fields aren't weak?
What about what happens at very, very small distances?
And there it breaks down.
Well we have our two kinds of problems.
We have technical problems.
We also have conceptual problems.
The conceptual problems are that if you have a background spacetime on which there are
fluctuations in the gravitational field, you can quantize those fluctuations and the background
spacetime is still more or less classical.
But if you want to truly quantize spacetime itself, there become questions of what are
we doing?
In ordinary quantum mechanics, for example, the wave function depends on time.
You tell me what time it is, I solve Schrodinger's equation, I tell you what the wave function
is.
But now, in general relativity, time isn't out there in absolute.
It's not a background in which we move.
It's part of spacetime.
It's part of the thing we're quantizing itself.
So should the wave function depend on time?
It's more likely that somehow time emerges out of the correct understanding of quantum
gravity.
Even though I can say all those words, I don't know how it actually works.
This is one of the things that we're trying to address, one of the obstacles we have right
now into making quantum gravity into a sensible theory.
But even without those conceptual problems, we have technical problems.
That is to say, we try to do what we think we know how to do, and we run into nonsense.
There's a famous thing that often happens in attempts to quantize field theories, which
is you get infinitely vague answers.
You can take two particles, you can scatter them, and you can ask, according to the rules
of quantum field theory, how likely is it that these particles actually hit each other
and bump off?
If your field theory is well-behaved, like quantum electrodynamics is, you get a finite
answer.
There might be steps along the way, in which it looks infinite, but at the end of the day
you get a very well-behaved finite thing.
For some theories, that doesn't happen.
For some theories, your first approximation to the answer makes perfect sense.
Your second approximation is infinity.
These break down, and there's no known way to fix them.
Usually in nature, when this happens, these infinities are a sign that new physics is
kicking in that you don't understand.
For example, Enrico Fermi's original theory of the weak interactions had this property.
The first approximation worked well, the second approximation was infinite.
That was a problem.
But now that we understand W and Z bosons, now that we understand the correct theory
of the weak interaction, that problem has gone away.
So this problem exists with gravity.
When you scatter two gravitons off each other and look closely at what the answer is supposed
to be, it looks infinite.
We therefore suspect that there is new physics kicking in, the equivalent of W and Z bosons,
but for gravity.
That is the kind of thing that string theory purports to offer us, the new physics that
makes everything suddenly make sense and gives finite answers.
So string theory is just the idea that everything is made of incredibly tiny loops of string.
If you were able to zoom in with a super powerful microscope on what was going on at very, very
small length scales, you'd be able to resolve individual things that you thought were particles
into vibrating loops of string.
The reason you're not able to do that is because the loops of string are extremely, extremely
small.
They are approximately at the size of the Planck length, a length that was invented
by German physicist Max Planck, to describe the scale at which quantum gravity begins
to become important.
In numbers, it's about 10 to the minus 33 centimeters across.
That sounds like a very small number, and it is.
In fact, we can compare it to the size of a proton.
A proton made of three quarks held together by gluons is small, it's smaller than an atom
by quite a factor, but it's still about 10 to the minus 13 centimeters across.
In other words, the Planck scale is 20 orders of magnitude smaller than a proton.
It's a much tinier length than any of our current particle accelerators are giving
us access to.
So if you look at these tiny vibrating loops of string, you will see them as particles.
They look particle like to us because we can't resolve the fact that they're little one-dimensional
loops of string.
So when we talk about what string theory predicts, we will still be talking as if it
predicts different kinds of particles.
There will still be photons that are particles, etc.
But they will really be different vibrational modes of the string.
That is the idea behind how string theory is able to give rise to all sorts of different
kinds of particles.
It's not that the stringy stuff is made of different kinds of stuff for different kinds
of particles, there is just one essence of string stuff that is the same for everything.
But the little loop of string can vibrate in different ways, and the different modes
of vibration correspond to bosons, fermions, what have you.
Interestingly, there aren't that many ways to start with a vibrating string and get a
consistent theory.
In fact, since the 1980s, when string theory first became very popular, it was thought
that there are only five possible ways to start with a little vibrating loop of string
and get one consistent theory.
These days, as we'll talk about briefly, we think that there's only one way to do it.
Not that we've said that the other ways are inconsistent, but we've found that what we've
thought were five different string theories, are actually just five different versions
of the same underlying theory called M theory.
This is part of the charm of string theory, that you start with an incredibly simple idea.
There's just a loop of stuff, and you quantize it.
How simple could that be?
There's really nothing else there, I'm not leaving out any hidden assumptions.
You find a unique theory somehow.
You find particle physics, gravity, everything you want to find, just out of that little
loop of string.
In actually connecting it to the world, we try to make predictions.
We try to say, how do we relate string theory to particle physics?
Well, the first thing, of course, is gravity.
The reason why string theory was invented in the first place was as a theory of the
strong interactions.
In the late 1960s, the early 1970s, we didn't yet put together what we now call QCD, quantum
chromodynamics, the correct theory of quarks with different colors held together by gluons.
We were still in the late 60s guessing at what the correct theory of the strong interactions
really was.
So, one person noticed that if you look at all the different particles that seemed to
be relevant to the strong interactions, they arranged themselves with their masses and
their spins as if they were little vibrating loops of string, and string theory was born
as an attempt to explain the strong interactions.
But it didn't work, and one of the reasons why it didn't work is because it kept predicting
a massless spin to boson that coupled to every form of energy and momentum.
In other words, string theory kept predicting a graviton and therefore be a theory of gravity.
Even though you didn't want gravity, it kept appearing.
So this is kind of a miraculous thing.
Ordinarily, when we try to quantize gravity, we run into trouble, we run into infinities
or conceptual problems or whatever.
String theory is an example of a model where you didn't want gravity.
You were trying to explain how protons hang together and you kept predicting gravity.
It turns out that not only do you predict a quantum theory of gravity, but it's a well-behaved
theory.
One way of thinking about why you get these infinite answers in ordinary attempts to quantize
gravity is because the Feynman diagrams become exceptionally complicated.
Feynman diagrams describe the different ways that particles can come together and interact,
but to a particle physicist, each one of them gets attached to a number.
You can get complicated loops inside the Feynman diagram and as those loops become small,
the number attached to the diagram can become very large, possibly infinite.
What happens in string theory is that you replace the Feynman diagrams with just lines
connected to each other with the paths of strings through spacetime.
So they look like two-dimensional sheets.
You have a one-dimensional string moving through time.
It describes a two-dimensional sheet moving through spacetime, which could describe a single
particle splitting into two, for example.
The number of possible diagrams you can draw describing such strings is number one, much
smaller than the number of Feynman diagrams that you can draw, and number two, much simpler.
It turns out that what string theory does is to smooth off the sharp corners that would
be there in the Feynman diagrams of ordinary quantum gravity and you begin to get finite
answers.
Even better, you get more than a theory of quantum gravity.
You get, possibly, a theory of everything.
Different ways that strings can vibrate give rise to gravitons, but also to photons, also
to gluons, to electrons and quarks.
All the kinds of particles we know about in the standard model can be reproduced by vibrating
strings.
That's the good news.
The bad news is that to actually reproduce them specifically turns out to be very, very
hard.
Turns out to be very difficult to go from what we think is the unique theory of string
theory to the world in which we live.
That's not really surprising because, in one sense, gravity is very weak.
Quantum gravity is something that is very far away from our experimental reach.
We don't have a lot of explicit clues about how gravity and particle physics get together.
We're left with only our IQ points and sometimes they're good enough, sometimes they're not
up to the job.
So what we're trying to do is to get string theory, match it to the real world, so we
ask what predictions does string theory really make?
The one prediction that string theory makes more strongly than anything else is that spacetime
is ten-dimensional.
Strings want to propagate in a space which is nine-dimensional and one-dimension of time.
The bad thing about that is that it's not the real world, but at least the good thing
is that it is a prediction of something, and the question is, is it possible to reconcile
ten-dimensional spacetime with the four dimensions that we see?
The answer there is actually yes.
It's been known for a long time how to go from a higher dimensional space to a lower
dimensional space.
If it had been the other way around, if string theory only worked in a two-dimensional spacetime,
we would truly be in trouble, but it's easy to get rid of extra dimensions of spacetime.
String theory predicts that there are six dimensions of space that we don't see.
The way to get rid of them is to curl them up.
This is an idea that goes all the way back to Kalutza and Klein soon after Einstein invented
general relativity.
They said that if there are dimensions of spacetime that are dynamical and curved, maybe there
are ones that we don't see because they're curled up into tiny little circles or tiny
little spheres.
So string theory takes this idea and tries to take advantage of it.
It says maybe these extra dimensions that we don't see really are there, but they're
curled up into little balls the size of the Planck scale.
That's the good news, and furthermore, the different ways in which you can compactify
those extra dimensions tell us what the particle physics will look like at low energies.
In other words, if string theory is right, the reason why, for example, we have three
families of fermions in the standard model turns out to be a particular topological
fact about the space on which we've compactified the extra dimensions.
We've turned a statement about the number of particles we see into a geometrical statement
about extra dimensions that we don't see.
It's interesting because it offers a new way to solve the kinds of problems we were
stuck with.
Why are all these particles there?
The bad news is that there are too many ways to curl up the extra dimensions.
The ways that we have to curl them up are not unique.
From the mid-1980s when string theory first became popular to the late 1990s, people were
crossing their fingers and hoping that somehow there would be one way to compactify that
was the best.
So people were trying to look for that and what they found is that with different model
compactifications they could get all sorts of different possibilities.
For example, supersymmetry is a robust prediction of string theory as well.
That's good news for our thinking about dark matter because our favorite theory for what
the dark matter might be is the lightest supersymmetric particle.
But then it turns out that string theory also predicts that there should be axions.
It also predicts that neutrinos should have mass.
So so far string theory is predicting too many things.
It's not picking out one candidate for dark matter as the right one.
Things got slightly worse in the 1990s when it was realized that string theory is not
just a theory of strings.
Remember that one of the virtues of string theory is that it's unique.
You start at a particular place and you derive things that are necessary.
You can't get around them.
The non-uniqueness comes when you go from a large ten-dimensional world and compactify.
There are many, many ways to do that.
But in the original ten-dimensional description, things are very unique.
So people realize that in that unique description there lived not only one-dimensional loops
of string, but higher-dimensional objects known as brains.
The word brain comes from the word membrane, which means a two-dimensional thing.
If you live in three spatial dimensions, the only things you can really easily imagine
are zero-dimensional particles, one-dimensional strings, and two-dimensional brains.
But if you have ten dimensions or nine dimensions of space to play with, then you can imagine
three brains, four brains, five brains that are three-dimensional, four-dimensional, five-dimensional,
et cetera.
So it was discovered in the 1990s that all of these do play a role in string theory.
There are different kinds of brains.
Some of them have miraculous properties.
Some of the miraculous properties are that there can be particles, strings, fields that
are confined to the brain.
In other words, you could have a brain living in some higher-dimensional space, but all
of the electrons and photons of this particular construction were stuck on the brain.
They can't escape out into the extra dimensions.
So if you were made of those particles stuck on the brain, you wouldn't be able to tell
that there were any extra dimensions.
The interesting thing about this is that it makes the problem of non-unique compactifications
worse.
Now, not only do you have many different geometrical ways to curl up the extra dimensions, but
within those curled-up extra dimensions, you can start putting in brains.
You can start saying, maybe we live on some of those brains.
So we're faced now with a bit of a conundrum.
Starting from a set of unique ideas in ten dimensions, we have a multiplicity of ways
of getting down to four dimensions.
The best estimates that we have right now are something like ten to the 500 different
possible ways to go from ten dimensions down to four in an interesting way.
By interesting, we mean a way that doesn't dissolve away very quickly, a potential place
that you could imagine living in the universe of string theory.
That's the bad news.
We don't like it when we lose uniqueness somehow.
We're still struggling to somehow find our way through those ten to the 500 different
possibilities.
The good news, though, is that some of those possibilities are experimentally testable.
We don't know whether or not we're going to be lucky enough to be involved with one
of the testable ones, but the point is that there are new ways that we've realized for
new dimensions of space to manifest themselves in experiments.
In the old days, in the days of Kalutza and Klein, when they first suggested that there
are curled-up extra dimensions, all they did was just curl them up so small that you couldn't
see them, by which we mean no experiment that had been done then could possibly reach them.
And of course, since we haven't directly seen evidence for them, we still do the same thing
today.
But now, when you have brains, a new possibility opens up.
What if we really are living on some three-dimensional brain confined in some bigger space?
Remember, when we say that space is three-dimensional, we mean when we do experiments, we only perceive
three dimensions.
For example, if you take a stick, you can take a second stick and you can tie them so
that they are perpendicular to each other.
Then you can take a third stick and you can tie that third stick so it is perpendicular
to the first two.
That means there are at least three dimensions of space macroscopically.
But try, as you will, you cannot take a fourth stick and tie it so that it is perpendicular
to all of the previous three all at once.
It can't be done.
That is an experimental demonstration that we only have three dimensions of macroscopic
space.
However, what if there are more dimensions but we just can't get there?
Then the problem becomes much harder.
We could have large extra dimensions and just not notice them yet.
The real issue of large extra dimensions is that even though you can confine the particles
of the standard model of particle physics to a three-dimensional brain, there's one
particle you cannot confine, and that's the graviton.
Remember, gravity is a feature of space-time itself.
Gravity is the curvature of space-time.
So if you have some object in a set of dimensions, it's going to have a gravitational field
that stretches out into all the dimensions, not just on the brain.
And how do we know how many dimensions gravity feels?
Well we have Newton's law of gravity.
We have Isaac Newton's inverse square law that says two objects pull on each other with
the gravitational force that is inversely proportional to the square of the distance.
The reason why it's the square of the distance, if you can imagine the gravitational force
lines coming from one object, they fade away as one over the distance squared because the
area they're covering goes up as the distance squared.
But that's only because we live in three spatial dimensions.
If we lived in four spatial dimensions, the force between two particles due to gravity
would go like one over the distance cubed.
If we lived in five spatial dimensions, it would go like one over the distance to the
fourth and so forth.
So if we lived on a brain where the particles of the standard model were confined but gravity
leaked out, Isaac Newton's law of gravity wouldn't be right.
We wouldn't have an inverse square law.
We would have an inverse cubed law or inverse fourth law or something like that.
So the clever suggestion was made in the late 1990s that maybe we do have an inverse cubed
law but only on really, really tiny line scales.
But by really, really tiny, I don't mean the size of a proton, I mean a millimeter across.
So macroscopic length scales, the length scales where we had not yet done experiments.
So people started doing experiments.
They tried to test Newton's inverse square law of gravity on very, very small distances
by taking one heavy plate and bringing it very, very close to another heavy plate.
They were able to squeeze the experimental limit on the size of extra dimensions down
from one millimeter to a tenth of a millimeter.
So that's a whole order of magnitude that's a lot of progress.
But still, it is very plausible to us today that there are extra dimensions of space a
tenth of a millimeter across.
We just haven't noticed it yet.
So we need to push forward with this kind of idea.
We can't get rid of the fact that there should be a quantum theory of gravity.
We have quantum mechanics.
We have gravity.
We have to get them together, especially as cosmologists.
We care about things like where did the universe come from?
Where did the fluctuations come from that we think are due to inflation?
Our explanation for those fluctuations using inflation said that you have quantum mechanical
fluctuations in the early universe during inflation, giving rise to density perturbations,
and therefore we later measure the gravitational fields of those density perturbations.
In other words, the inflationary scenario for explaining the observed density fluctuations
in the universe involves quantum gravity in an intimate way.
If we want to claim to understand those things, we're going to need to understand quantum
gravity.
What we really care about, of course, is dark matter and dark energy.
So in the next lecture, we're going to talk about how to take string theory with all of
its extra dimensions and all of its different possibilities and tease out implications for
what the vacuum energy might be.
There might also be implications for what the dark matter particle is, but right now
that's much harder to get.
When it comes to vacuum energy, string theory offers a very provocative, perhaps scary
theory, perhaps even crazy, but at the very least interesting scenario for why the vacuum
energy of the universe might be the dark energy we observe.
