We've set ourselves the task of understanding the dark side of the universe, the dark sector
that makes up 95% of the stuff that we seem to have in our contemporary cosmology.
For the last few lectures, our strategy towards understanding the dark sector has been to think
really hard, to think about where the universe came from and how inflation could have taken us
from a tiny patch to the big universe we see, and to think about how the fundamental laws of
physics work in terms of the possible role of string theory, extra dimensions, and the multiverse.
These ideas come into our conception of dark matter and dark energy because they give us a
framework in which to think about what are natural values for different things to have,
what is the natural value for the dark energy to be, for the dark matter to be, etc.
But thinking hard is great, sometimes it's all you have, but experimental data is always better.
In either case, what we're trying to do is to go beyond our current understanding. Sometimes you go
beyond your current understanding because your current understanding is mutually inconsistent
with itself. Special relativity and Newtonian gravity were inconsistent, Einstein used that
to invent general relativity. Now we have quantum mechanics and general relativity being inconsistent,
that's how we get to string theory. But it's never as good as actually having a piece of data
that says your current theory is wrong. Part of the reason why we have not had great theoretical
progress in particle physics in the last 30 years is because the standard model is too good.
It fits all the data really, really well. To move beyond to get a better idea for what's going on
next, it is always better to get a new experimental piece of information which doesn't fit our current
theory. So the good news is we have a huge amount of experiments coming online in the next few years
which hopefully will teach us more beyond what we already know. I will remind you, you've probably
heard it by now, we have a model that fits the data. We have a picture of the universe in which 5%
of the universe is ordinary matter, particles from the standard model of particle physics,
25% is dark matter, and 70% is dark energy. The dark matter is some particle that is massive,
moves slowly, and doesn't interact very strongly. The dark energy is some form of energy that is
smoothly spread through space and slowly evolving through time. So that's fine, that's a model that
fits the data. If it fits all the data we have, should we therefore declare victory? If we stopped
collecting more data, we wouldn't have any discrepancies. But we want more than that, we want
to understand what is going on. Even though we know there is dark matter and we know there is dark
energy, we don't know what these things are, so we're going to push our experiments forward.
Remember that when we push these experiments forward, sometimes we learn a little bit more
about what we were studying, but sometimes we're completely surprised. One of the supernova groups
that tried to measure the deceleration of the universe titled themselves,
measuring the deceleration, they eventually discovered the acceleration. Those are the
best kinds of experiments. So even though we can talk about what experiments we'll be doing over
the next few years, we cannot talk about what we will learn from them. We have things we hope
to learn, but we need to keep an open mind, maybe we'll be surprised. So we can characterize the
kinds of experiments we'll be doing by the kinds of things they will be looking at. In other words,
are they looking at photons? Are they looking at neutrinos or what have you? Photons, of course,
are our favorite way to look at the universe. They always have been. So we'll start by looking at
what we can learn by measuring photons coming from the sky. There's also photons we can make here on
the ground, of course. Traditionally, all of astrophysics and all of astronomy meant studying
photons you get from the sky. Photons across the electromagnetic spectrum from radio waves at
very, very long wavelengths, through microwaves and infrared up to visible photons that we see
with our eyeballs and then to shorter and shorter wavelengths through ultraviolet x-rays and ultimately
to gamma rays. It says something about the state of our progress that we even make a meaningful
distinction between looking at the sky in photons versus anything else. For the first time in human
history over the last couple of decades, we've begun to look at the sky in other kinds of things,
but nevertheless, it's still photons are giving us the overwhelming amount of information.
You might think that we could organize the kinds of experiments we're going to be doing
by what kinds of photons we'll be looking at x-rays versus ultraviolet, for example. However,
it turns out that for some kinds of objects in the sky, they are best understood by looking at the
same object in different wavelengths. And therefore, let's organize how we will be looking at the
universe by what we will be looking at rather than what wavelength of photon we'll be using.
So let's go from the largest things in the sky to the smallest thing. The largest thing is really
the cosmic microwave background. The microwave background is the leftover radiation from the
Big Bang, a snapshot of what the universe looked like about 400,000 years after it began. It's
the tiny variations in temperature that the microwave background has from place to place in
the sky that teach us a tremendous amount about what the early universe was really like. It's
already been a treasure trove of information about what the universe was like then and what it
must be like now. We've learned from the temperature fluctuations in the microwave background,
number one, that space is flat. And therefore, you need, if the Friedman equation is right,
enough energy density to account for a spatially flat universe. Number two,
ordinary matter is not enough. In order to explain the different size splotches of hot and cold
that we see in the cosmic microwave background, it is necessary to introduce stuff other than
ordinary matter and that of course is the dark matter. So what will we learn by going beyond
what we've already done with the microwave background? Well, the first thing we can do
is the most obvious, which we can have better resolution. We can look at smaller angular scales.
The most interesting angular scale, if you had to pick one on the microwave background,
is an angular scale of about one degree. That one we've pretty much mapped out,
but there could be surprises waiting for us at smaller and smaller scales.
One of the predictions of inflationary cosmology is not just that there are perturbations at
early times, but relationships between the amount of perturbations at different wavelengths,
at different distances on the sky. So a big project for the future will be comparing
fluctuations on large angles on the sky to what fluctuations look like at smaller angles.
To do that, we have a satellite that is supposed to be launched in 2008
called the Planck Surveyor after the German astrophysicist Max Planck and that's going
to go up and give unprecedented to the accurate views of what the microwave background sky looks
like at very, very tiny angles. What you will get from that is a high precision way of measuring
the cosmological parameters. Not just how much dark energy there is, but how much dark matter
there is, how much ordinary matter there is, and what kind of fluctuations there were in the very
early universe that grew into the galaxies and structures we observe today. But even then we
won't be done with the microwave background. We're still going to try to squeeze more information
out of it. We've already mentioned that we have recently discovered the polarization of the microwave
background. The wavelengths that we're getting from the CMB are polarized in different directions
depending on the temperature fluctuations. But in addition to the intrinsic polarization which
we've already observed, there's an additional component hypothetically due to gravitational
waves created by inflation. These have not yet been observed. One of the major projects upcoming
someday, hypothetically with a satellite mission, will be dedicated to looking for the polarization
imprint of gravitational waves from inflation. If you could find those and they had the properties
that were predicted by our currently favorite models of inflation, that would be the best evidence
we know how to get that something like inflation was true in the early universe. Right now we have
models of inflation that are consistent with everything we observe, but their predictions
are kind of vanilla. They're that the universe should be flat, that the perturbation should be
approximately the same on all scales. The tensor perturbations, which are what we call the perturbations
you get from gravitational waves, are a specific and quantitative prediction from inflation.
So if that turned out to be right, we would really think we were on the right track.
After the microwave background, the next largest thing we can look at is large-scale structure
in the universe. In other words, we can map out the stuff that you see in the later universe,
the galaxies and the clouds of gas and dust. Right now, the current state of the art is
something called the Sloan Digital Sky Survey, along with a slightly smaller survey called the
two-degree field. The Sloan survey has about a million different redshifts for galaxies
collected at a telescope in Arizona. The two-degree field survey has about 250,000 redshifts
collected from Australia. Together, they have given us unprecedented views of the way in which
structure stretches across the universe. So by matching to the microwave background,
which is a snapshot of the universe 400,000 years after the Big Bang, to redshift surveys,
which are a snapshot of the universe 14 billion years after the Big Bang,
we're beginning to piece together how structure has evolved from early times to late times.
That is a messy and complicated astrophysical problem, even if you knew from inflation what
the initial perturbations were, and you knew the ingredients of the universe in terms of dark
matter and dark energy, it's still quite a bit of work to trace from those initial perturbations
to what we see today. So there's a lot of dirty, important astrophysics that needs to be done,
and observations of the distribution of structure are going to be crucial in making sure that we're
on the right track when doing that. One of the most important roles of redshift surveys,
of surveys of galaxies across the sky, will not simply be to use those data all by themselves,
but to be to compare them to other kinds of data. So one thing that we'll be doing is surveys of
gravitational lensing. Only very recently have we been able to develop cameras that can take images
of what's on the sky to such precision that you can tease out the slight perturbations of the
shapes of galaxies due to gravitational lensing. It's this weak gravitational lensing that is going
to be a treasure trove of information for future cosmologists. Remember that if gravitational lensing
happens, the beam of light that you get from a background galaxy is deflected by some mass
distribution, and by the amount of deflection you can measure how much mass there is. That's more or
less the simple basic picture if you're lucky enough to get one heavy object acting as a lens,
one background object that you observe on the sky. The real universe of course has many many
galaxies in it, many many clusters of galaxies. It's a messy configuration. That's bad if you only
want to take one picture and get one piece of information, but what we're learning how to do
is to use that messiness to our advantage. We are now learning how to make 3D maps of where the
stuff is in the universe using the amount of gravitational lensing that is undergone by galaxies
at different redshifts. So by combining redshift surveys to tell us where the galaxies are in space
with lensing surveys that show us how their images are distorted on the sky,
we are mapping out where the stuff is in the universe. This is something which literally was
first done in 2007. It's a technique which we're going to be perfecting and improving in the next
years to come. The great leap forward in doing these kinds of surveys will be something called the
LSST, the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope. This is a telescope that has been on the drawing board
for quite a while now and will be for quite a while to come. It is supposed to start construction in
2010, be finished by 2013 being built in the mountains in Chile where the air is very thin so
you get a very good view of the sky. The goal of the LSST will be to survey a large patch of the sky
every single night. So what something like the Sloan Survey does is over the course of years
it takes images of different patches of the sky and pieces them together into an image of what is
going on. The LSST will basically be doing that every day. So we'll be collecting a huge amount of
data unprecedented in astrophysics over a petabyte of data per year. So just like a gigabyte is 1000
megabytes, a terabyte is 1000 gigabytes, and a petabyte is 1000 terabytes. So one petabyte is
the equivalent of 250 billion songs on your iPod, a huge amount of data so much so that just surfing
through the data looking for different pieces of information is an incredibly difficult computer
science problem. In fact you will not be surprised to learn that scientists working on the LSST
project are collaborating with researchers from Google who are the best people in the world at
searching through large databases and finding things. So astronomers want Google's technology
to search through their database. Google wants the data that astronomers have because astronomers
are the only people in the world who collect huge amounts of data and then give it away for free.
So what we're going to be getting from LSST is huge amounts of data,
lensing will be an important goal to be able to look for the 3D structures of the universe,
but the other thing is that we'll be looking at the same region of the sky
over and over again. In other words we can be collecting data in the time domain,
something that astrophysicists have traditionally not done because it's just too expensive.
In other words we will not just get weak lensing and large-scale structure, but we will also discover
supernovae and furthermore we will discover asteroids that are coming to crash into the
earth. This is a major funding source for the LSST. It will find objects in the solar system that
might be a danger to us. It doesn't tell us anything about dark matter and dark energy,
but it's still a useful goal. So going to smaller and smaller things in the universe,
next let's consider clusters of galaxies. Remember clusters are on the one hand the largest bound
structures in the universe. On the other hand they are a fair sample of what is in the universe.
So by studying clusters so far we've been able to learn about the relative proportions of let's
say dark matter to ordinary matter in the universe. The new thing we will start doing with clusters
of galaxies is to count them. By counting the number density of stuff in the universe you're
tracing out how the universe has evolved. People have always known this is true, but historically
this is a very difficult technique to use because when you're counting things it's crucially important
you don't miss anything. In astrophysics some things are bright some things are dim and when
you try to count things you don't know that you've found all of them, but clusters of galaxies are
special. In a cluster the galaxies fall together, gas and dust falls in along with the galaxies,
and the gas and dust heats up. There's something called the Sunaya of Zeldovich effect in which
it's not that we're looking at the gas, but we're looking at the shadow cast by this hot gas
on the cosmic microwave background. So you look at the microwave background
in the sky and you look for a little dot on it, a little dark spot. That dark spot is caused by
the fact that the photons from the microwave background come into the cluster, scatter off
the gas and don't get to you. The reason why this is important is because if you were just looking at
the light emitted by the cluster it would become dimmer and dimmer as you get further and further
away so it's harder to find far away clusters. But if you're looking at the shadow that is cast
by the cluster it's a shadow. It doesn't get any dimmer the further away you get. So by doing a
survey for the Sunaya of Zeldovich effect you'll be able to find all of the clusters of galaxies
in the patch of sky on which you're looking, an unbiased sample of all the clusters of galaxies
in some region of the universe. We are currently doing that with something called the South Pole
Telescope, a 10 meter radio telescope set up in Antarctica at the South Pole that starts operation
in 2007. Once the South Pole Telescope finds clusters of galaxies we will then follow up with
X-ray observations. It's X-rays that will allow us to actually weigh these clusters of galaxies
and measure how much mass is in them. But more importantly it's the number of clusters of galaxies
that count. The dark energy making the universe expand as the dark energy takes over it stops
structures from forming. When you have a matter-dominated universe the matter gradually collects
together and forms bound structures. But when the dark energy takes over the matter is pushed
apart and galaxies stop falling together. So the number of clusters of galaxies as a function of
distance in the universe is a very sharp way of figuring out how much dark energy there is.
It is arguably competitive with supernovae and other measurements. We don't know yet because we
still don't understand the fundamental physics of clusters of galaxies very well but that's
something that numerical simulations are teaching us about right now. Meanwhile of course we're not
done with supernovae. Supernovae are the way we discovered the dark energy in the first place
we want to do better. The important role there is that we would like to understand the fundamental
intrinsic nature of the supernovae themselves. If you collect enough examples instead of 20
or 30 or 40 supernovae if you have a thousand supernovae then you can start talking about
what the distance redshift relationship is for each individual possible kind of supernovae.
What it looks like for supernovae in elliptical galaxies. What it looks like in spiral galaxies
and so forth. You can search for possible systematic effects that might put you on the
wrong track. By doing this we will be able to measure the equation of state parameter of the
dark energy. What we call W but should be minus 1 if the dark energy is truly constant and something
like minus 0.8 or 0.9 if it's some gradually declining quintessence. So looking for supernovae
at very high redshifts is our best hope for figuring out whether the dark energy is truly
constant or slowly varying. Finding supernovae at large distances is hard if you're here on earth
and therefore there are proposals to build a dedicated satellite to do exactly that.
Right now the plans are for NASA and the Department of Energy to team up to build something called
the Joint Dark Energy Mission, JDEM. However I can't promise you it will be built. These things
depend on things like Congress and money and other things that scientists don't have much control over.
Finally in terms of looking at photons we can look at gamma rays to look for evidence for
indirect dark matter. That is to say we have dark matter particles in the universe. We can of course
look for them here on earth but we can also look for them in the sky by waiting for dark matter
particles and dark matter antiparticles to annihilate. If the dark matter is a weakly
interacting massive particle then the real dark matter density comes from both particles and
antiparticles. Occasionally they are going to annihilate and give off gamma rays. Right now we
don't have much of a capability for looking at gamma rays in the sky but the new glass satellite
is scheduled to be launched in late 2007. It will give us our first direct view and might lead to an
indirect detection of dark matter. Of course those are not the only particles we use. We don't only
use photons to look at the universe these days. We use other kinds of particles. For example we
use neutrinos. Ever since the solar neutrino problem was noticed in the late 60s early 70s
we've been able to find neutrinos from outer space not just neutrinos here on earth.
Besides the sun the one kind of neutrino that we've been able to detect from outer space
is neutrinos from supernova 1987a. So one of the things that neutrino physicists have been doing
is planning for the next supernova. They are ready to get even more information about fundamental
neutrino properties from whatever supernova goes off next within our own galaxy. We don't know when
that's going to be but it typically happens once every 100 years so you never know. Meanwhile we'd
like to learn more about the fundamental nature of neutrinos which has recently opened up as a
growth field within physics. We now know that neutrinos have mass. They're very light but they
have some mass and because they have mass they can mix. In other words we said that there were
things called electron neutrinos, things called muon neutrinos, things called tau neutrinos but
these neutrinos can change into one another as long as they have mass. This has been experimentally
found and it's the kind of thing that we're trying to understand better and better. The role for dark
matter is that none of the three neutrinos we know and love can be the dark matter but there could be
others. There could be kinds of neutrinos that we haven't yet directly detected. For example sterile
neutrinos which do not interact with W and Z bosons. The only way that sterile neutrinos interact
is through gravity and with other neutrinos so we're trying to build neutrino detectors that
will be able to tell the difference between sterile neutrinos and ordinary neutrinos because that might
play an important role in the dark matter mystery. Getting more and more exotic we can look at
gravitational waves. Just like electromagnetic waves arise from electric charges moving up and down
gravitational waves are created when heavy objects move back and forth. For example if you have two
objects orbiting each other they'll be emitting gravitational waves. Now gravity is a very weak
force. These waves are not very easy to notice. We have never yet directly detected gravitational
radiation. We do have an observatory that is trying to do exactly that. We have LIGO the laser
interferometer gravitational wave observatory which finally right now in 2007 has begun to
collect data at the rate it was designed to do. It has not yet detected any objects and it may or
may not succeed in doing so. We have a better plan for a gravitational wave observatory in space.
This is called LISA the laser interferometric space antenna which would be three satellites
five million kilometers apart from each other. It would be looking for gravitational waves in a
completely different wavelength than LIGO is looking and that's actually good news for cosmology.
One of the things that LISA will be looking for is if you have a tiny black hole orbiting a super
massive black hole a million solar mass black hole and it'll be orbiting and spiral in giving off
gravitational waves all along. It turns out that just like supernovae are standard candles
inspiring black holes can be standard sirens. You can learn enough about the parameters of
the black hole binary to figure out how much gravitational waves were given off at the source.
So by detecting them here and measuring how strong the gravitational waves appear to us
we can figure out how far away it is. This is a completely independent way to measure distances
in cosmology in a very very clean way one that doesn't get messed up with the messy astrophysics
that ordinary objects giving off photons do. If we can turn standard sirens into a useful cosmological
tool we'll be able to get unprecedented precision in mapping out the expansion of the universe out
to very distant redshifts. Next up we have dark matter remember we can look for dark matter by
using photons by looking at the gamma rays that are emitted when dark matter and anti dark matter
particles come together but of course we can also look for dark matter right here on earth.
We can build underground detectors that will wait until our dark matter particle to come in
bounce off a nucleus in the detector and leave a little bit of energy there. We have detectors
working right now unfortunately we don't have a very precise prediction for when they will be able
to observe things. There's a lot of freedom in the predictions there so we can't say what year by
which we should be able to detect things but it could very well be any moment. There's a detector
called CDMS Cryogenic Dark Matter Search which is underground in Minnesota and working right now
and currently has the world's best limits. There's another detector called Dama in Italy
which works on an interesting system where it doesn't look for the total amount of signal
it looks for the variation in signal throughout the year as the earth revolves around the sun
and moves through the dark matter cloud around it. The reason why I mentioned Dama is because Dama
has claimed to find a signal. They claim that they have already detected the dark matter. The reason
why this is not earth shattering news is because most people don't believe them. The current consensus
in the dark matter detection community is that they have some systematic error they haven't yet
detected but there is an interesting alternative possibility. It could be that there is a new
kind of dark matter some specific particle physics model which shows up more easily in something like
Dama than something like CDMS and the other detectors. In other words this is why we do
experiments. We do experiments because the real world might be more complicated than the simple
models that we write down. So stay tuned for news from dark matter detection experiments. We might
be very quickly learning important features about 25 percent of the universe. So coming in closer to
home we can also do besides looking at things in the sky we can do experiments closer by. Before
ordinarily closer by would mean here on earth in the laboratory but these days you have to extend
it to at least the solar system. We can send satellites throughout the solar system to help
us do physics experiments. The most obvious example is testing general relativity. We already
mentioned the Cassini mission which primarily had as its goal to take pictures of Saturn and
Jupiter and the other outer planets but also tested Einstein's theory of general relativity
by sending signals to us that we measured the time delay of. There are new upcoming missions
that will also test general relativity. There's something called the step mission the satellite
test of the equivalence principle will be asking if different objects made of different stuff
move differently in a gravitational field. Remember a very firm prediction of Einstein's
theory of general relativity is that everything responds to gravity in exactly the same way
that is known as the equivalence principle. If there is a fifth force if there is some new
light field that stretches out over macroscopic distances it will show up as a violation of
the equivalence principle. Quintessence might be exactly such a field we don't know but if
quintessence exists it's a very light boson that could give rise to forces that violate the equivalence
principle so experiments like step will be looking for exactly this it's an example of a high risk
high payoff thing probably they will not see anything but if they see something it would
truly change the way we think about the forces of nature. Of course we're doing similar things
here on earth we're looking for new forces and for new features of old forces so we're doing
experiments here on earth to look for violations of the equivalence principle looking for different
objects being accelerated by different amounts in the gravitational fields of the sun or the earth
we're also looking for violations of the inverse square law of gravitational dynamics
when we talked about string theory and extra dimensions we mentioned the possibility that
some of these extra dimensions could be pretty big they could be as big as a millimeter across
right now we've been able to squeeze down the limit on the size of the extra dimensions down
to one tenth of a millimeter we're going to continue to try to squeeze that down more and more
this is again an example of an experiment for which if you find something you absolutely win
the Nobel Prize you found something incredibly important in the history of physics the smart
money bets they won't find anything but you don't know until you look so we need to have some
experiments that spend their time on the high-risk projects finally let me emphasize the role of
particle physics experiments in the future of cosmology we've been talking about dark matter
and dark energy 95 percent of the universe the evidence that we have for dark matter and dark
energy comes from looking at the sky from doing astrophysics from taking observations of galaxies
and clusters of the microwave background and supernovae in the whole universe all at once
but ultimately the explanation for dark matter and dark energy will have to come from particle
physics the dark matter is some kind of particle either an axion or a supersymmetric particle
or something the dark energy is even more mysterious either quintessence or vacuum energy or something
even worse to get a good idea of which of those models is more plausible than the others we need
to understand particle physics beyond the standard model so doing laboratory experiments here on
earth to increase her understanding of particle physics is probably the single most promising
way to learn more about the dark sector right now we have the tevetron at fermi lab just outside
chicago as the highest energy particle accelerator on earth but later in 2007 the lhc the large hadron
collider at cern outside geneva will turn on starting in 2008 cern and the lhc will be doing
high energy particle physics in a new realm we have never looked before we're going to be looking
at exactly the regime where we should be able to find the higgs boson supersymmetric particles
and other particles just beyond the standard model not only will we looking for things that might
very well be dark matter and might very well therefore be 25 percent of the universe we'll
be hoping to learn things about supersymmetry and extra dimensions we'll be hoping to learn
things about phenomena that come into the discussion when we talk about dark energy now i realize
that's a very vague construction i didn't promise you anything very specific right there but the
point is that dark energy is so mysterious we need all the help we can get there's no known way
that we can think of to do a particle physics experiment to detect dark energy or to see
exactly what it is but by learning more about the big picture something that seems very unnatural to
us might suddenly make sense so we're extremely hopeful that particle physics over the next five
years will be surprising us we'll be teaching new things about the fundamental nature of space and
time and matter which ultimately will illuminate the nature of 95 percent of the universe we live in
you
