In previous episodes, I've been simulating Wolfram physics using graphs like this one.
But you may have come across simulations of Wolfram physics using hypergraphs like this
one.
So what's the difference?
What is a hypergraph?
Let's go back to what a graph is.
A graph is a collection of nodes and edges where each edge goes from one node to another
node.
Remember that the direction of an edge matters.
An edge from node 1 to node 2 is not the same as an edge from node 2 to node 1.
It's important to keep in mind that what I'm showing you when I'm showing you a graph
is a visualisation of an abstract mathematical construct.
In this visualisation, for example, I've chosen to represent the nodes as white dots
and the edge as a white arrow.
But I might have chosen instead to represent the nodes as brown crabs and the edge as a
pink snake.
These crabs and snakes aren't real, they're just my way of visualising the nodes and edges
of the graph.
And the same goes for the dots and arrows, they're not real, they're just my way of
visualising the nodes and edges of the graph.
So what is real?
What when it comes down to it is a graph?
Well, I've said it already, a graph is a collection of nodes and edges where each
edge goes from one node to another node.
It might help to lose the crabs and the snakes, lose the dots and arrows even, lose the visualisation
entirely and represent the graph using numbers instead.
That edge from node one to node two could be represented as the number one followed
by the number two separated by a comma in curly brackets.
Again, the direction of an edge matters, an edge from node two to node one could be represented
as the number two followed by the number one, again separated by a comma again in curly
brackets.
Using this numerical notation, the edges in a complex graph like this one could be
represented as a long list of pairs of numbers in curly brackets.
All those numbers in the list, between one and two hundred and three, represent the two
hundred and three nodes in this graph.
And all those pairs of numbers in curly brackets, such as one comma thirty four and ninety eight
comma two oh three, represent the four hundred and two edges in the graph, such as the edge
from node one to node thirty four and the edge from node ninety eight to node two hundred
and three.
OK, so it's much easier to see what's going on in this graph if we do visualise it with
dots and arrows.
But that list of pairs of numbers in curly brackets is just as good a representation
of the graph.
In some ways, the numbers are a better representation of the graph than the dots and arrows.
I made many arbitrary decisions when I created that visualisation.
And no, I'm not just talking about using dots and arrows rather than crabs and steaks.
I made some far more pernicious decisions than that.
For example, I decided to lay out the nodes in a two dimensional space.
In a way, this was just a matter of convenience.
The screen on which you're watching this video is two dimensional, so it made sense to visualise
the graph in two dimensions.
But as we've seen, this graph is not two dimensional.
It might be two and a half dimensional or three point three seven dimensional or nine
dimensional instead.
Check out episodes nine, ten and eleven of the last theory about dimensionality for more
on this.
By laying out the nodes in two dimensional space, I imposed on you, the viewer of the
visualisation, an assumption, an incorrect assumption, as it turns out, about the dimensionality
of the graph.
Perhaps even more pernicious were my decisions as to precisely where to position each of
the nodes in two dimensional space.
Again, in a way, it was just a matter of convenience.
I wanted the visualisation to be as clear as possible, so I spread the nodes as evenly
as possible over the space available, and I tried to make each of the edges about the
same length.
But as we've seen, nodes don't have positions and edges don't have lengths in some putative
space outside of the graph.
Rather, the graph is space.
And again, check out episodes six and seven of the last theory about space for more on
this.
So again, by positioning the nodes as I did, I imposed on you, the viewer of the visualisation,
assumptions, deeply misleading assumptions, about the nature of space itself.
That list of pairs of numbers in curly brackets might not be so helpful when it comes to seeing
what's going on in this graph, but at least it doesn't misrepresent the universe.
So let's do an experiment.
If the numbers are a better representation of the graph than the dots and arrows, then
let's take the numbers seriously.
If pairs of numbers in curly brackets, such as 1, 34 and 98, 203, are a true representation
of the universe, then I have a question.
Why pairs of numbers?
Why are there always two numbers inside the curly brackets?
Why not three?
This question might never have occurred to us if we'd got on visualising graphs using
dots and arrows.
But now that we're using pairs of numbers in curly brackets to represent the graph,
it's an obvious thing to ask.
So let's put three numbers in each set of curly brackets and see what happens.
We've been visualising a pair of numbers in curly brackets, such as 1, 2, as an edge
from node 1 to node 2.
So if we're going to put three numbers in curly brackets, such as 1, 2, 3, how would
we visualise that?
Well, we can still interpret the numbers 1, 2 and 3 as nodes and visualise them as white
dots.
And well, there's still an order to the numbers, so we can still visualise the relationship
between the nodes as white arrows, though we'll now need two of them, an arrow from
node 1 to node 2, and another arrow from node 2 to node 3.
But we're not quite there yet.
The trouble with these two arrows is that they look like two edges, one from node 1 to
node 2, and another from node 2 to node 3.
We need some way of showing that we're not looking at two relationships, one between
nodes 1 and 2, and another between nodes 2 and 3, but at a single relationship between
nodes 1, 2 and 3.
We can do that by joining the three white dots and the two white arrows with a transparent
white web.
So what should we call this relationship between three nodes, represented by three numbers
in curly brackets, and visualised as three white dots, two white arrows, and a transparent
white web?
Well, what if we've been calling a relationship between a pair of nodes, represented by a
pair of numbers in curly brackets, and visualised as two white dots and a white arrow?
We've been calling it an edge.
So let's call this relationship between three nodes a hyper-edge.
We can apply rules to hyper-edges in exactly the same way as we apply rules to edges.
Here's the rule I used to generate the graph I showed you at the start of this episode.
It's the rule I've used many times before, where we find two edges from the same nodes,
delete one of them, and create three new edges from the three existing nodes to a new node.
And a quick note for the algebraically-minded, now that I've introduced the numerical notation
for edges, that rule can also be written x, y, x, z goes to x, z, x, w, y, w, z, w.
OK, that's too algebraic for you, don't worry, just move on.
So here's the rule I used to generate the hypergraph I showed you at the start of this
episode.
To apply this rule, we find a hyper-edge, any hyper-edge, we delete it, and we create
three new hyper-edges from the three existing nodes each to two of three new nodes.
Again the rule can be written algebraically, x, y, z goes to x, u, v, z, w, y, w, u, and
again just ignore that if you don't like algebra.
Point is, if we apply this rule over and over again, a beautifully bubbly hypergraph emerges.
So there you have it, an edge joins two nodes, a hyper-edge joins three nodes, a graph is
a collection of nodes and edges, a hypergraph is a collection of nodes and hyper-edges.
With this, we've dramatically expanded the repertoire of rules we can apply in Wolfram
Physics.
As well as applying rules involving edges to evolve graphs, we can apply rules involving
hyper-edges to evolve hypergraphs.
In future episodes, that's precisely what I'll be doing.
So this is good, right?
Except that this expansion from graphs to hypergraphs raises more questions than it answers.
Here's one question.
When we mix edges and hyper-edges in the same graph or hypergraph, here's another.
If we can pick two or three numbers in each set of curly brackets, then why not one or
four or seventeen?
In other words, if an edge joins two nodes and a hyper-edge joins three nodes, then what
joins one or four or seventeen nodes?
And here's a more fundamental question.
Some graphs of nodes and edges to represent the universe seemed like a good idea when
we started exploring Wolfram Physics.
These graphs look a bit like space.
Applying rules to evolve these graphs looks a bit like the evolution of the universe over
time.
Using hypergraphs of nodes and hyper-edges to represent the universe seems similarly promising.
Again, these hypergraphs look a bit like space, and again, applying rules to evolve these
hypergraphs looks a bit like the evolution of the universe over time.
But it's all starting to seem a little arbitrary.
Which is it?
Is the universe a graph, or is it a hypergraph, or is it something else entirely?
Maybe it's a hyper-hyper-hypergraph of nodes and hyper-hyper-hyper-hyper-edges.
With all these mathematical constructs looking a bit like our universe, how do we choose
one over any other?
Well, that's it for this video, and I'll see you in the next one.
