Let's talk about hypergraphs. Wolfgang Physics reimagines the universe as a graph of nodes
and edges, or to get a little bit more technical, as a hypergraph of hypernodes and hyperedges.
And just for our listeners who've not seen my previous videos, in graphs each edge involves
two nodes, and in hypergraphs each hyperedge can involve any number of hypernodes. So that's
just an extension of graphs. So why do you think that the hypergraph is such a promising model
for the underlying nature of reality? That's a really interesting question. Okay, so I think it
ultimately has to do with... Okay, to answer that, let me make an analogy to another discrete
approach to doing quantum gravity, which is causal set theory, CST. So in causal set theory,
the idea is, you know, it's the sort of... The nice thing about CST is that it's kind of conceptually
the minimal discrete model for spacetime that you could think of, right? So Penrose taught us
that everything you really care about to do with spacetime, you can encode in its causal structure,
or you can encode in what you might call the topology of its time-like curves. That basically,
spacetime is some big collection of events. For every pair of events, that pair of events is either
space-like separated, light-like separated, or time-like separated. And that gives us a causal
structure. And that causal structure is invariant under conformal transformations, those conformal
transformations encompassing both boosts in reference frames from special relativity,
but also changes in gravitational frames from general relativity. So Penrose taught us really
that if you know the causal structure of spacetime, if you know this partial order that tells you
which events are causally related and which events are not causally related, then you kind of know
almost everything there is to know about the spacetime, right? You, in fact, 9 tenths of the
metric tensor is determined by the causality, the remaining 1 tenth is determined by the volume.
And so CST, which is a set of ideas that really goes back to Raphael Sorkin, had this idea that,
okay, well, therefore, we can imagine just discretizing spacetime by considering it to be
a countable collection of events, and then causal relationships between them, discrete
causal relationships between them, which you can represent using a graph. You could represent that
as just a directed acyclic graph called a Hassa diagram for that spacetime. And then, you know,
then the idea is that the structure of the graph gives you the causality, and then the number of
nodes inside a region, and the number of vertices inside a region gives you some discrete analog
of volume. So immediately you've got some discrete version of relativity, and then you can start
building off that. So this is a good idea, right? CST is a good idea, and an interesting one,
and one that's worth pursuing. But, you know, the kind of thing that limited CST was the fact that
they didn't really have a promising dynamics, right? Everything that they were doing was really
kinematical. They kind of said, well, let's start with a continuous spacetime, let's construct a
causal set that approximates it, and let's see what we can reconstruct about the spacetime from
that causal set. That's a perfectly interesting and reasonable thing to do, and it's a good first
step towards developing a discrete theory of quantum gravity. But of course, it's just kinematic,
right? What you want is some kind of procedure for actually building that graph, for building the
causal structure that is your discrete approximation to the spacetime. And causal set theory didn't,
and to be honest, kind of still doesn't really have that. I mean, there are models of dynamics
that have been proposed, things like classical sequential growth and quantum sequential growth,
but they're really quite trivial and not very interesting. And the pathology that they suffer
from is that they are dominated by very, very non-manifold-like causal graphs, right? Or non-manifold-like
causal sets. In other words, the dynamics that they defined had the property that the causal graphs
you get out of them, almost all of them, in fact, you can prove that as a theorem. You can prove
that the non-manifold-like ones are so-called entropically dominant. So almost all of them
have the property that they are very, very far away from being good approximations to continuous
spacetime, which is clearly bad as a model of quantum gravity goes, because you know,
say what you like about spacetime, but it certainly, it does a very good job of looking
continuous. So we want our discrete model to be as close to a continuum approximation as possible.
Okay, so CST had this problem that it didn't really have a good kind of growth dynamics.
So one thing you might think to do would be to say, well, let's define some explicit algorithm
that lets us build these causal graphs, that lets us build causal graphs, causal structures
that are good approximations to spacetime. Well, how might we do that? So one thing that you want,
and the thing that CST really suffered from was the fact that the causal graphs you ended up
having were highly non-local, that if you try to take this graph approximation of your spacetime,
and you try to slice across it to kind of reconstruct a notion of space, that the notion
of distance on that space was very, very far removed from the notion of distance, the so-called
Romanian distance that we're used to in relativity. In particular, things that looked like they should
be very far apart ended up looking very close together and vice versa. So somehow the notion
of distance, the notion of locality, all these things that you get out of these CST models from
growth dynamics weren't very good. They were very far removed from the things we know to be
accurate from relativity. And I should mention actually one guy who is a sort of predecessor
of mine, a spiritual predecessor of mine, Tomasso Bolognese, who I think was really the first
person to seriously suggest that it was worth investigating rewriting systems as a way of
generating causal sets. So the idea there is you say, well, if I've got a data structure,
I don't know, say it's a string, a string of characters, I've got some basic data structure
and I apply some rewriting rules to it. I can look at the causal structure of those rewrites,
right, because I can say for some rewrites, they will have the property that you couldn't
have applied this rewrite unless this other rewrite had previously been applied. So for
instance, maybe the first rewrite made use of some characters in the string that were only
produced because the other rewrite had been applied first. So you can say in some meaningful sense
that the second rewrite caused the first, that there's a causal link between the two.
So the idea is you can use some abstract rewriting system, and this is an idea that
Stephen really kind of pioneered in NKS, this idea of causal graphs for rewriting systems.
You can use an abstract rewriting system to build a causal structure. So okay, this seems
promising. This seems promising as a way to define a dynamics for building a discrete spacetime.
But what kind of data structure would you use, right? That's really the essence of your question.
Well, strings are pretty bad as are cellular automata and Turing machines and things for
various reasons. But one of the core ones is that they're far too rigid, right? If you think about
a cellular automaton, or a character string or a Turing machine, you have a rigid array of cells
laid out in space, you have an a priori notion of space. First of all, that's pretty bad for
relativity point of view. It's a very rigid structure. It's very hard to see how you could
make something like a cellular automaton, compatible with Lorentz invariance and special
relativity, right? How you would make things like length contractions and so on work with when you've
got such a rigid kind of register. And it also, you know, it separates the notion of space from
the notion of time. It separates the notion of space from the notion of states of cells. And,
you know, we know that there are these deep principles of physics, like in particular this
principle of general covariance that basically says you can't do that, right? You can't neatly
separate the notion of space from the notion of time. They're somehow they have to be combined in
some neat way. So those data structures that you might think of using clearly aren't going to work
if we want a plausible model for physics. Yeah. So graphs and hypergraphs then just kind of drop
out as the next most plausible and the next thing you might think to do that isn't obviously
stupid, right? So yeah, you know, the nice thing about graphs and hypergraphs is they have an
a priori notion of spatial distance. Because you can just, you know, if you want to know the
distance between two points, you can just count how many hyper edges or how many edges you have
to traverse between the two. And so because of that, they're rewriting rules preserve locality,
they preserve spatial distance in the causal structure in a way that these other models don't
necessarily do. So that's already good because it means that now, if you try and build a causal
graph or a causal set out of a out of a hypergraphic writing system, it's much more likely to be
manifold like than if you just grew it from some more arbitrary algorithmic dynamics.
Couple that with the fact that there's a very nice relationship
to general covariance, because now you can make a correspondence between different updating orders
in the causal graph and different rewriting orders for the hypergraph. And so each each
updating order in the causal graph will give rise to a different hypergraph that's produced by a
different sequence of rewrites. And that corresponds effectively to a new space like hypersurface.
Again, this is not something you could make work with a cellular automaton or a string or a
or a Turing machine or something, just because it has such a rigid notion of space. Because in a
graph or a hypergraph, the notion of space is kind of maximally dynamic or maximally unstructured.
Suddenly, you can make that work. And so it becomes much more plausible that you can have
compatibility with things like general covariance. And so once you've discarded the other things
that you might have thought to use, graphs and hypergraphs just turn out to be the next obvious
thing and they work beautifully. Yeah. And it's almost sort of obvious that this is going to be
the case because of some of the reasons that you say, I mean, you look at a hypergraph and it sort
of already looks like space. It already has those kind of properties of locality. And although we
draw them in space, because we have to draw them on our computer screen somehow, they're not actually
something that are in space, they are space. And so they don't suffer from any of those problems of
those other approaches. Thanks for listening to The Last Theory. Join me for fresh insights into
Wolfram Physics every other week. Subscribe to the free newsletter, podcast or YouTube channel
at lasttheory.com. After all, this might be the most fundamental scientific breakthrough of our time.
