Going on an extended vacation, where should we travel to?
Morocco and Africa. All right, done deal.
Actually, traveling is one of the few things that I'm not doing. There's a lot going on that
I've sprinkled throughout some of these videos in the past. Like, this is going to be one of the
last few videos in this office. Over the next, I've been thinking about two to three weeks,
Molly and I are going to be gone out of this house into a new house. And I try to share as
much as possible with y'all. I kind of feel like I have two different lives. I have my YouTube
software engineering life, which is my full-time job plus YouTube, my part-time job, if you will.
And then I have the rest of my life. Like the fishing, the going out on the boats, the dog,
a lot of other things that are going on. I've always floated with the idea of either starting
a whole other channel just so I can kind of post more of non-software development stuff over there,
or if I want to just start working on integrating a lot of different aspects of my life into this
channel. Let me know what you think in the comments below. I don't care one way or another. I'm just
going to try to figure that out. But that's not why most of y'all clicked on this video. You're
trying to hear about my regrets as a computer science student. If you don't know, last May, so
May of 2018, I graduated from ODU with a computer science degree. And in this video, we're going
to go over a few things, quite a few things that I felt like I should have done better, that I regret
not doing better and things that I would do if I had to do it all over again. And I also want to
talk about a few things that I don't regret. Things that I did and retrospectively looking at it,
I did right. Now I'm going to be the first to say that there are more things that I did wrong than I
did right, but I figured out, you know, kind of try to balance out the video a little bit. And I
know I specified computer science in the title. This very well could be my regrets as a college
student, but I wanted to specify computer science because computer science is a hard degree to
obtain. I mean, you have to put in a lot of work. If my major back in college was incredibly simple
or just overall easy, not much problem solving, not much involved work, then I probably wouldn't
have these regrets. So let's get into them. First and foremost, it is treating college
like high school. In high school, I didn't have any homework. If I did, I got it done in
study block or in class or it was very, very minuscule. And in high school, I didn't study.
I didn't feel like I needed to and I seemed to pass the classes just fine. So I didn't do homework
and I didn't study. I went to class. I did my work that needed to get done in class. And when I went
home, I went home. I kind of like clocked out of work, if you will. And in college, it doesn't
really work that way. While high school, you go for let's say seven, eight hours a day, and then
maybe you have one to two hours of homework at home. For college, you go to class for one to two
hours a day, and then you have seven to eight hours of homework at home. It completely flipped
everything around where everything in high school you could do in class. Your teachers were there
to teach you everything. While college, you needed to be doing everything on your own. Sure,
you had the resources of your teacher. They just kind of go over things and you have to figure it
out yourself. At least that's how it was in computer science. It's a lot easier to write a paper in
class or do a math worksheet in class, whatever it may be. Calc one doesn't matter. Then it is to
write an involved program in class with a language that you need to Google every other thing that
needs to get done in that program. That's definitely, that was definitely a big one. I also regretted
not completely understanding the aspect of computer science prior to signing up for computer
science degree and attending the computer science classes. In all honesty, I thought it was more
like a software development degree where I was going to go in, I was going to learn how to code,
and that was basically, that was the focus and sure I take electives here and there to make
sure I'm a well-rounded student, but I thought most of my computer science classes were going to be
programming, coding, but it was a lot of theory, a lot of math, a lot more work and a lot different
work than I previously thought and that was my own problem. I didn't do enough research going
into it. I was just naive. One thing I don't regret because I remember very vividly my early years
of college, something that helped me get through my college was when I signed up for Angelus. Now
this isn't necessarily a sponsor, but it kind of is in a way for this video. I remember back in
my early years, I signed up for Angelus. Think of Angelus as a place for startups, tech startups,
or what have you to put their company on this platform and then software engineers, software
developers, or anyone who would be needed in a particular tech space to put their resume,
similar to LinkedIn, but for startups and something that I remember scrolling through my
early years of computer science just dreaming about one day, maybe I can get this iOS development
job. I have a potential to get three to five percent equity and make $80,000 a year and work
remotely. I just remember scrolling through all of those things down through Angelus and that really
helped me drive forward and try to just pursue that dream. And if you're someone who is interested
in just checking out Angelus, if you're interested in being a software developer at a startup,
maybe you are a startup, I'm going to leave a link in the top of the description. It's a free
for life account to Angelus. You just go there, you sign up. This isn't a free trial. This is
you sign up just like you would be signing up to a social media account and you go from there.
That is a real thing. I'm glad I did simply because it helped me get through to the next step. If I ever
felt, if I ever had like, you know, the imposter syndrome or just kind of felt like I wasn't good
enough. I just remembered of where I wanted to be. I would scroll through that and then I would
work in order to hopefully one day get there. Now we're going to get a bit more generic. This can
go for all college students. My next regret is neglecting office hours. Something you got to
understand. While you have, you know, your class one to two hours a day per class and then you have,
you have your homework that you need to get done. When you do your homework or your projects or
whatever the heck you want to call it and you face a problem, especially in computer science and
you're trying to figure out a problem, stack overflow, whatever else your search engine, your
internet will show you, you need to use your office hours when you've exhausted all resources. If you
can't figure something out, go to your, you're not an advisor, but your professor for that class,
for that project so they can help guide you through it. Make sure you have a decent understanding
of what your problem is. You want to talk to them about the solutions that you've tried and sometimes
you'll figure it out yourself. Like the rubber ducky method, if I were to, you know, talk to this
globe right here, try to describe my particular problem to this globe, I can maybe figure it out
because I'm trying to formulate words in order to describe the problem at hand. Now that may not
happen and if that doesn't happen, that's where your professor will come into play and say, well,
maybe you got to do x, y, and z and that'll help you get over that hump and onto the next problem,
basically. So always use those office hours wisely because they are incredibly valuable.
You're paying for it. You're paying a lot of money to go to college, regardless of what degree
you have. That money pays for a lot of different things, a lot of which is the curriculum, the
professor's teaching you the stuff, and then your professor's office hours. Just imagine how much
money you're wasting by not using those office hours. Now, can you call something a regret when
you still do it to this day? Like, I regret procrastinating so much in school, but yet,
even in my own life, on particular things, I still procrastinate quite a bit. I've gotten better at it.
It's a process, but in school, procrastinating was worse. Like, you would be down to a couple
days left or maybe just the night before you have to turn something in, and you get stuck on a bug
or an error, especially if you're trying to write some type of program for a class,
and you can't go to office hours. Your professor probably won't be responding to emails, and if
they are, how many other people procrastinated just like you until the last night to ask a professor
via email about their problems? All emailing your professor, trying to figure out the problems while
your professor, they don't have much time. They may be trying to respond to emails at 11 p.m. when
your thing is due at 11.59 p.m., but who knows if they're going to get around to you. It's a lot
better in terms of your grades and in terms of how much you'll learn. If you work little by little
on these projects that you have two weeks to complete, if you start off on it on the
second or third day in which it's assigned or even the night of, then you're able to use those
office hours like I suggested in the previous regret. So just make sure you leave yourself
enough time. Don't procrastinate. Don't procrastinate. This is me talking to myself because, like I said,
and I want to leave this on a positive note with something that I felt like I did right,
and that is getting in on internships early. Like I could have maybe done earlier, but I think it was
the summer after my sophomore year where I got my first internship, computer science internship,
and then that following fall I had an internship, and then the next summer I had an internship,
and then that last year, my senior year, I just kind of did all the work I needed to get done so
I could graduate. So if you're going to college for anything, especially computer science,
try to get in on internships early. Don't worry about, I'm not good enough for, like they don't
expect much out of you. A lot of the work you're going to be doing is typical internship work,
something that someone from a computer science degree all the way down to a communications
degree. You're going to be doing the typical intern work like Excel spreadsheets, building
PowerPoint, basically anything Microsoft Office. You could be rewiring a whole entire data center,
which that's just pulling out plugs and plugging them back in and using new power strips and what
have you. Or your company is going to be sending you over to Chicago for documenting a manual
process in which needs to be automated, but that manual process occurs from 1 a.m. to roughly 10
a.m. That was another one of mine, or you could actually get a coding internship, and that could
be, that would be pretty cool too. Just don't be worried. They know you're an intern, you're a
student. They don't expect the world out of you. Just be willing to do the work and ask questions
when you run into a problem. And that's it. Those are my regrets as a computer science student,
and I sprinkled in a few positive things that I think I did right. I know I'm going to think
of something as soon as I hit that publish button on, oh man, I should have included that in the
video. I should have included that. Literally, I've been adding to this list over the past few days
ever since I came up with the idea for this video, and I know I'm going to have so many other regrets
or non-regrets that I had as a computer science student. So in order to fill that void, if you
all have anything similar to what I laid out in this video, leave those down in the comment below.
Comment section below. English is a fickle mistress. Be sure to give this video a big thumbs up if you
liked it. Subscribe if you aren't already, and don't forget to sign up for your free-for-life
angel list account down below. And let me know about the whole vlog thing that I feel like I
kind of want to integrate into some of these videos, or maybe have their own standalone videos on
this channel, or if I should just make a whole entire other channel regarding everything else
that's going on in my life. Until next time, guys, have a good one. Peace.
