Push to not feel fear, slash not feel the ego, quote-unquote, slash, etc.
can be dangerous, not because the lesson is false, though it may be,
but because of the social pressure around those words.
In fact, there's a universally frowned upon quality called being egotistical.
Ego is embedded in it.
And also to be seen as retreating is the same as being seen as being defensive,
which is the same as being fearful, which is seen as being lower on the spiritual hierarchy.
Perhaps it's true that you should feel less disquieted about certain facts,
though perhaps your disquietude is justified for where you are now, and that's okay.
It's 100% okay.
It took me about one year to realize that, in fact, perhaps more than one year.
It took me over one year to realize that these spiritual lessons
tend to not have the physics notion of path dependence.
Perhaps you shouldn't uncritically adopt an Eastern practice in a Western world and vice versa,
or perhaps certain truths are dependent on the path that is where you are now
rather than being independent of anything.
Frankly, it's embarrassing to reveal myself as so selfish and malicious and cowardly
and to do so so unguardedly to Carl Friston and even to you
as I'm a relatively thin-skinned person, at least currently I am.
But hopefully, in the end, it's a net benefit.
The dangers of going on to journeys of investigations into consciousness,
the self, computational reality, and even the phenomenon
as it can lead to a spiral down some viciously dark paths
that are at least ostensibly irrevocable
while having certainty that your new founded conception of reality is indeed truthful.
While I don't like to state personal opinions
because I generally don't have many strong views
and the views that I do have are fickle, changing week by week sometimes.
My current conclusion is that if it's not life-affirming, if it's not loving,
if it's not something you can tell others without others being horrified and frightened for you,
then use that as a sign that what you're experiencing or what you're feeling
or what you think is not truthful, please seek help.
Don't suffer alone, you're not alone.
And you can verify that simply by talking to as many people as you can.
If you're listening to this podcast, then it's likely because you at least have some trust in it,
so trust that statement or at least test that statement out.
Now, on to the guest.
Carl Friston is a professor of neuroscience at University College London
and is one of the most cited individuals in his field.
He's also the inventor of the free energy principle
and is someone who's made advances in the field of active inference that's matched almost by no one.
He may be one of the most insightful and brilliant people on the planet.
I've been lucky enough to speak to Carl before
in a substantive four-hour podcast, linked below,
which is best watched at least twice to properly understand.
This episode is an outlier in the Toe Channel
because this will serve as an introduction to that episode.
As many after watching that were still unclear as to what the free energy principle is.
If you feel like you're lost, that's okay.
Let that be a theme.
Understanding is less like a light switch and more like a stove top.
That is, it's not like all of a sudden you have an insight
and then you understand some phenomenon.
You went from zero to one.
It's more like you get a gradual increase in understanding
where a modicum here makes more sense and then a smidgen here.
As Wheeler says, and I like to quote,
the point isn't to drink from the fire hose, but instead to get wet.
Trusting that your conscious befuddlement is part of the process
and unconsciously more is becoming clear.
Click on the timestamp in the description if you'd like to skip this intro.
My name is Kirchai Mungle.
I'm a Torontonian filmmaker with a background in mathematical physics
dedicated to the explication of the variegated terrain of theories of everything.
From a theoretical physics perspective,
but as well as analyzing consciousness
and seeing its potential connection to fundamental reality, whatever that is.
Essentially, this channel is dedicated to exploring the undirived nature of reality,
the constitutional laws that govern it,
provided those laws exist at all and are even knowable to us.
If you enjoy witnessing and engaging with others
on the topics of psychology, consciousness, physics, etc.,
the channel's themes,
then do consider going to the Discord and the subreddit
which are linked in the description.
There's also a link to the Patreon
that is patreon.com slash kirchai mungle
if you'd like to support this podcast
as the patrons and the sponsors are the only reasons
that I'm able to have podcasts of this quality and this depth,
given that I can do this now full-time
thanks to both the patrons and the sponsors' support.
Speaking of sponsors, there are two.
The first sponsor is Brilliant.
During the winter break,
I decided to brush up on some of the fundamentals of physics,
particularly with regard to information theory,
as I'd like to interview Chiara Marletto on constructor theory,
which is heavily based in information theory.
Now, information theory is predicated on entropy.
At least, there's a fundamental formula for entropy.
So, I ended up taking the Brilliant course.
I challenged myself to do one lesson per day,
and I took the course's random variable distributions
and knowledge slash uncertainty.
What I loved is that despite knowing the formula for entropy,
which is essentially hammered into you as an undergraduate,
it seems like it comes down from the sky arbitrarily
and with Brilliant for the first time,
I was able to see how the formula for entropy,
which you're seeing right now, is actually extremely natural
and it'd be strange to define it in any other manner.
There are plenty of courses, and you can even learn group theory,
which is what's being referenced when you hear that the standard model
is predicated on U1 cross SU2 cross SU3.
Those are lead groups, continuous lead groups.
Visit Brilliant.org slash TOE to get 20% off an annual subscription,
and I recommend that you don't stop before four lessons.
I think you'll be greatly surprised at the ease
at which you can now comprehend subjects
you previously had a difficult time grokking.
The second sponsor is ALGO.
Now, ALGO is an end-to-end supply chain optimization software company
with software that helps business users optimize sales and operations,
planning to avoid stockouts,
reduce return and inventory write downs while reducing inventory investment.
It's a supply chain AI that drives smart ROI
headed by Omjad Hussein,
who's been a huge supporter of this podcast since near its inception.
In fact, Omjad has his own podcast on AI and consciousness and business growth.
And if you'd like to support the TOE podcast,
then visit the link in the description to see Omjad's podcast
because subscribing to him, or at least visiting,
supports the TOE podcast indirectly.
Thank you and enjoy.
Let's do an introduction once more.
So what is the free energy principle specifically?
Specifically, it's relationship to a theory of everything
as that's what this channel is about.
Right.
So my usual response here is,
do you want the high road or the low road?
Let's take the high road,
given that we're talking about theories of everything.
So the free energy principle is a principle of least action.
So it's a method, really.
It's put most simply a method that allows you to identify
the most likely dynamics,
the most likely way a process will unfold.
What is the process that we're talking about here?
Well, we're talking about things like you and me,
particles or people.
So the first thing to note is that you can apply
standard variational principles of least action to any system,
specifically a random dynamical system of the kind
that can be described by, say, a launch van equation
that underwrites most of the physics we know.
But the special thing about the free energy principle
is it tries to understand the relationship of something
in relation to everything else.
So you're starting from the premise that something exists
and then you have to think carefully, what is a thing
and how do I distinguish it from something else?
So immediately you have to introduce a partition
between the states of things that comprise states
that are internal to the thing
and states that are outside the thing
and thereby think carefully
about how those states are coupled.
And what happens is that you have to introduce
a further set of states
known as blanket states that constitute a Markov blanket
that mediate a bi-directional exchange
between the internal states and the external states.
So you've got this notion now of taking the states
of any universe, any system
that you want to try and understand
and partitioning it or carving it into four subsets,
internal, external and then sensory and active states
that constitute the blanket states
where the active states mediate the effects
of the internal on the external,
the inside on the outside
and the sensory states conversely mediate
the influences of the external on the internal.
So with this particular partition, which you wouldn't need
if you wanted to now just move on
and develop, say, quantum mechanics
or statistical mechanics
or long-term classical mechanics,
we're now in the special case
of dealing with a system that has this partition.
And in this special case,
those conventional variational principles of least action
translate into or can be used
to associate the paths of least action,
the most likely paths that the system will take,
particularly the states of the particle or person
that we're talking about.
We can associate those paths of least action
with paths that minimize something called variational free energy.
So that's basically it.
And then the story is, well, what's variational free energy?
Well, variational free energy is, as with all actions
in physics, it's just a path integral
or a time integral, a sum, an accumulation
of a functional, usually known as a Lagrangian,
where in this instance, the functional in question,
this variational free energy,
can be read as exactly the same quantity
that statisticians, psychologists,
people trying to understand data
would treat as a proxy for the evidence
for some model of the world.
So this is known as Bayesian model evidence.
Statistically, it's also known as a marginal likelihood,
the likelihood of these sensory data,
the sensory path through the sensory states
under a particular model
that would try to explain a hypothesis
that would try to explain those data.
So you've got this interpretation,
or certainly the fact that the functional form
of this variational free energy
that is being minimized by the paths of least action
of the autonomous, the active and the internal states
of something, a particle or a person.
Now, looks as if it is trying to minimize a quantity
which provides an approximation or a negative approximation
to marginal likelihood or model evidencing.
So in other words,
it looks as if the most likely paths
are trying to maximize model evidence.
So one can read that in many different ways.
One can read that.
And as Yaakov Howie has read it,
a philosopher and neuroscientist who has a commitment
to understanding to this kind of formulation
as self-evidencing, literally interacting
with your environment, actively inferring,
engaging with your experience to all your eco-niche
in a way that looks as if you're trying to solicit
the most evidence for your model of that world.
This quantity is also found in machine learning.
It's known as an evidence lower bound.
I should qualify or just clarify them.
In machine learning, this free energy is the reverse
of the free energy used in physics.
So in machine learning,
they try to maximize the negative free energy aka
an evidence lower bound or elbow while in physics,
you're always articulated in terms of minimizing
a potential energy or minimizing in the system.
So variation free energy.
So you'll find that exactly the same functional,
the same quantity, the same measure of the goodness
of some model of how you think your sensations,
your sensorium was generated in terms of this variation
of free energy that leads you to an interpretation
of people, particle, persons inferring, accumulating evidence,
making inferences about the states of the world
that are generating their sensations.
So that in a nutshell, or perhaps not a nutshell,
is a sort of formal explanation of the free energy principle.
I did so slip in at the beginning very much like things
which you may be familiar with when you were at school.
Say Hamilton's principle of station reaction.
It is just a method.
It allows you to identify, predict, simulate, engineer
those trajectories, those paths, those dynamics,
those processes that will minimize this action functional,
all the path integral of the variation free energy.
So what that means is that if you now understand
or have at hand the functional form of your variation free
energy that depends upon posterior beliefs or beliefs
about the outside world under a geratin model,
quite simply a probability density over the external causes
of the consequences that are the sensory states,
then you can use that methodology, use that principle
to start the simulate to build sentient artifacts
that behave in the way that we assume under the free energy
principle that you and I are behaving.
Let's see if I can make a nutshell of the nutshell
for some people who are more familiar with physics.
So let's say you have a ball.
You want to know the dynamics of the ball.
You can understand this with Newtonian force
and that's useful for certain calculations
or you can think of it as minimizing a Lagrangian
and then that actually provides a more useful for most cases
way of calculating the trajectory of the ball.
So then right there when I said ball,
we've identified the ball.
Now here you're not just limiting yourself to balls.
You're saying let's say cells instead of talking about people
because we can break it down simply at least for me
for myself.
I find it much more easy to think of a cell.
Okay.
So then we want to know what are the dynamics of the cell?
How is the cell a single cell going to act?
Okay.
Firstly, the first step would be identifying that cell
and when you mentioned the word Markov blanket,
that's a way of identifying what this object is
because in order to identify what an object is,
it's often useful to identify what it isn't at the same time,
what it is and isn't.
So that Markov blanket delimits the cell.
Now is that correct so far?
Absolutely.
Yeah.
So you're adding the cell is a perfect example here.
You've got a cell is just defined by the boundary
which would be the surface of the cell
and that would essentially be the sensory states
that I was talking about before.
The insides, the intracellular states would be the internal
states and then the milieu in which that cell lives,
which is usually in a bunch or a family of other cells
would constitute all the external states.
So you've made the very first step just talking about a cell,
a thing.
You've defined it in terms of this partition into internal,
external and the sensory states that bound and separate the
inside from the outside.
You may be asking where the active states come for a cell.
I usually like to associate those with something called acting
filaments that just lie underneath the surface,
the sensory states and actively push the cell surface.
Say all the filia and the the the mechanisms that cause motion
of the cell should it move around.
So those parts, those states that are responsible for cellular
motility, so when now thinking about a moving cell or a swimming
cell, for example, then you need to supplement that partition
with active states.
So that's absolutely the first step.
And then you're going to go on and now translate the ball.
What's the ball in this metaphor?
You also mentioned the word bi-directional earlier.
And when I was learning about this, the way that I like to
understand this was that in computer science, generally
computer scientists think and can only think in terms of you
have an input, then there's a black box and you have an output.
And that's essentially computer science in a nutshell.
It's a bit more complicated than that, but it's in a nutshell.
Do you have an input?
You perform some calculation and you get an output.
The reason why you said bi-directional, at least the way
that I understand it, so please correct this, is it's because
of actions in that model where there's input, black box, output.
That's generally if we want to use the term embodied cognition,
more on the cognition side.
So you're just this black box where you're impressed with
sensory information.
The input is your senses.
You're sensing all of what's happening.
And then this output now is the actions that generally a computer
sits there, but we're creatures in this world.
At least we think we're creatures in a physical world.
The black box has a model and then one way of maximizing
or showing that your model is correct is by updating your model
or it's by changing what you've sensed in order to match the model.
Now to change what you've sensed is to act.
So it's useful to think of two black boxes.
So there's one that's inputting to the other and then the output
goes into the other, which is external.
This is the internal.
This is the cell.
It senses and then it acts upon the world and then that changes
the world, which then changes what you sense.
So is that the reason that you said bi-directional?
Yeah, I think that's a really important observation.
Yeah.
So, you know, before we were talking about these states
that separate the inside from the outside and I made a big thing
that they had comprised sensory and active states and that there
is a two-way traffic here.
That two-way traffic instantiates exactly what you're talking
about, which is a circular causality.
So, you know, I use the word self-evidencing and described it
as soliciting evidence for sensory data that provides evidence
for your model of what's going on.
But in soliciting, this is something that a computer would
not normally do a passive or a sessile artifact like a computer.
It would not be in charge of nor would it terribly worry or
indeed be equipped with the capacity to select the inputs,
to select the data, say it had to analyze.
So just having a statistical package, you give it some data
and it produces an outcome, say a p-value or some kind of inference.
So a lot of computing and a lot of machine learning, you give it
data and it provides a prediction or a classification.
That's not the kind of computational process that is implied
by the free energy principle.
It's much more as you put it inactive.
It has, you know, the aspirations to provide a mathematical image
of the action perception cycle where, crucially, you have to go
and decide what data to base your inferences on by acting upon
the world.
So that sort of inactive aspect is the thing that distinguishes
this kind of formalism, this calculus, this Bayesian calculus,
which is quintessentially inactive.
You know, it's not just a good computer.
It can be made a good computer, just by removing active states
if you want to.
But that, you know, that would be a limiting and a rather biophysically
unrealizable and unsustainable kind of artifact.
You know, the whole point here is that there is a reciprocal
exchange of the world.
So your notion of having two black boxes talking to each other,
I think is a really nice notion.
And indeed, when applying this principle of least action,
of the energy principle, to interesting scenarios, one ends up
very often putting two sets of internal states, each equipped
with Markov blankets, talking to each other.
So the active states of one blanket, or one particle,
or one person now constitute the sensory states of the other
and vice versa.
So you've got now two systems trying to model each other.
And if their game is to effectively provide or solicit the most evidence
for their model of the rest of the world, which is just another artifact
very much like you, who's doing, trying to do exactly the same thing,
what you were, what will inevitably emerge from that joint minimization
of free energy or the maximization of marginal likelihood
is the kind of active engagement that renders, say you and me as the two black boxes,
renders us mutually predictable.
So what we will do is we will come to share the same generative model,
the same narrative, so that I can predict exactly what you're going to say next,
given that's the kind of thing that I would say,
because that's the sort of world that I'm trying to model.
So immediately you have this picture of the minimization of the joint variation of free energy
or the maximization of the joint marginal likelihood for shared models.
And one gets from that sort of quite compelling and interesting formulations
of multi-agent games, communication, synchronization between conspecifics,
that all rest upon trying to resolve uncertainty in the service of securing actively a listing,
asking questions of the other black box, you asking me questions, me asking you questions,
just so I can understand what's going on out there, where you are going on out there.
Can any system, let's say it's more than two.
So in the example that I gave and that we were talking about,
there's one cell and then the external world, but obviously the world is much more complex than that.
And let's just imagine slightly more complicated, there's two cells and then an external world.
Is it always the case that from the perspective of one cell,
you may as well just treat the external world, even though it comprises an external world,
plus another cell out there, can you always treat that as its own singular black box
such that we can always understand the dynamics as two black boxes?
Or is there ever a need for a third, a fourth, a fifth?
I think there probably would be a need if out there, if the external states are themselves partitioned into things.
So if my universe is composed of external states that can themselves be carved into natural kinds,
you're like other artifacts and objects and air, planets, liquids, natural kinds.
As soon as you talk about a natural kind, you're talking about a kind of thing.
As soon as there is a thing that's in play, there's a mark of blankets.
And what that tells you is, in principle, it would possible to take all the states that constitute, say, an eco niche.
And this find, identify the thing of interest, say me, and my internal states.
And then I would identify my blanket states.
And then I got the rest of the states.
But now I can start again.
I can find another set of internal states and identify its blanket states,
and then take those states off the table and then start again and recursively tile all the external states
so that now I've eliminated, effectively, external states and replaced them by the internal and the blanket states of all other things.
And then on that view, what happens is that because there's a statistical insulation or separation of internal and external states by the blanket states,
that means I can never see your internal states.
I don't need to know your internal states because everything that is knowable about your internal states is on the surface on your blanket states.
So now the picture that emerges is an ensemble of things, natural kinds, that are coupled to each other via their blanket states.
No individual particle or person or thing will ever be have access to the internal states of anything else.
But there will be coupling influences that are mediated by the blanket states, the active states, and possibly the sensory states.
Mathematically, you can actually have the sensory states also influencing the outside.
But for simplicity, let's assume that sensory states do not influence external states.
It is just the role of active states to actually couple back to the outside.
You mentioned something extremely interesting and I want to pick up on this.
You said that the sensory states can influence the external states.
At least that's not how I understand it.
So how can a sensory state influence an external state?
So I said that mathematically, that is possible.
So if you think about from the point of view of somebody who is trying to understand the statistical behavior, the probabilistic behavior of a set of dynamics described as differential equations or coupled systems,
then the name of the game really is to ask what statistical dependencies that define a Markov blanket specifically a Markov blanket renders the internal states conditionally independent of the external states given the Markov blanket.
So that's their role.
That's what that's what is implied by a separation of the inside from the outside.
But all you need to know is the blanket states because given the blanket states, the inside and the outside are conditionally independent.
So the question now is what kind of sparse coupling among all the states at hand give rise to that conditional independence that definitively specifies the Markov blanket.
It so happens that all you need is a following rule.
Internal states can only influence themselves and active states.
External states can only influence themselves and sensory states.
That's all you need.
So with that condition in place, you now immediately have a Markov blanket or a particular partition.
From that follows the conditional independence and therefore the interpretation of the autonomous dynamics, which is a description of the trajectories or the paths of the processes taken by the active and the internal states of a particular of a particle.
So that means that it is actually mathematically allowable in the sense that you don't you do not destroy that Markov blanket or the statistical properties of that Markov blanket.
It is allowable for the sensory states to influence active states.
And you may be thinking, well, that's a bit silly.
There's a way in which my photoreceptors or my my cochlear in my ear materially affect the outside.
I think that's absolutely true.
So for things like you and me, then you would not normally expect the sensory states to influence the external states.
But that's not the case for much simpler things.
When when you look at much simpler things where most of the dynamical influences, the coupling that we're talking about, you'd write down in terms of the differential equations, the Langevin equation.
Most of those influences are basically short range.
So, you know, we can preclude action at a distance, for example, if you're a single cell, you know, unless you're next to me, I don't really know what you're up to.
I'm having to exclude here all sorts of interesting things about long range electrochemical communication and electrical gradients and the like.
But let's just take a bag of cells that that just diffuse stuff locally.
They just they touch each other.
And that's the only way that they can they can influence each other is by being proximate in some Euclidean space.
So everything short range.
Now, in this situation, you have a very different kind of structure.
So here, the cell, the sensory states are the cell surface.
And when these active states that lie underneath the cell surface, change the environment, they do so by pushing the cell surface into the external milieu and cause changes in the sensory states, the surface states of other cells.
So being a cell is probably a good example of where your sensory states, which just are your surface states, actually do all the heavy lifting in terms of changing the outside, the spatial spatial relationship with all the other cells that you're co inhabiting a particular organ, for example.
So, you know, it's a little bit counterintuitive, but I think a really interesting sort of, you know, thought experiment and actually a practical consideration when it comes to looking at the different ways in which insides couple to outsides and the nature of interactions between the internal states of something and the external states of something.
And we sort of take it for granted that we can do action at a distance, you know, literally, I can talk to you in Canada while you're talking, while I'm in London, you know, that is, that is a beautiful example of this action to distance.
That means that, you know, we have quite a special kind of coupling between our sensory states and our active states. That is not a gift of very simple cellular like structures or automata that can't interpret signals or be subject to or be sensitive to influences at a distance.
Just so you know, or people who are listening and if this wasn't obvious enough, the free energy principle is famous for or perhaps infamous for being somewhat inscrutable for people who have a physics background or math background.
What would be the minimum prerequisites? This is how I like to conceptualize the podcast before I interview someone. I think about, okay, what are all the pieces of knowledge I need to know prior to interviewing them?
So obvious example is let's say QFT. You need to understand classical mechanics, Lawrence of variants, quantum mechanics, perhaps bundle theory if you want to understand Yang-Mills and so on, properly.
So what would be the prerequisites for someone to properly understand the free energy principle? Let's say if they have a math or physics background.
It wouldn't be, it would be probably much less than you'd expect to encounter a university. You'd certainly need to know sort of, you know, the basics of variational calculus.
It would be really nice if you understood where a Lagrangian came from and to understand the simplicity of action, you know, basically, you know, exactly Hamilton's principle of least action and how that inherits from pathotropals of Lagrangians and how that arises from
a dynamical systems theory of a very simple sort where you can write down any random dynamical system as, you know, a stochastic differential equation or a long van equation.
I think that's probably quite sufficient. You know, what, what you would need, I think, to appreciate all the interpretational richness afforded by what happens to the paths of least action when you have a Markov blanket.
You'd need to know a little bit of probability theory. You'd need to know what a conditional distribution is. You'd need to know the important, you know, what, have an intuition as to what is meant by model evidence, for example, or marginal likelihood.
So, you know, with, with, I would imagine, you know, a week's foraging on Wikipedia, you could probably acquire that if, you know, if you felt, if you were fluent already in sort of empathetrical like formulations of the kind you could find on Wikipedia.
So that you certainly wouldn't need, you know, what sort of bundles where you wouldn't need category theory, you wouldn't need to know anything about gauge theories.
You wouldn't even, you wouldn't even, you need to know about Lagrange multiplies. But you'd need to know, you know, the basics of how to, how to understand differential equations with, you know, with random fluctuations with a probabilistic or stochastic aspect to them.
And how you can understand paths of least action in these kinds of systems.
Your example of Wikipedia is, is on point because the way that I conceptualize this interview, this podcast, and the way that we spoke about it prior to going on air via emails is it's going to be tendrilike or gossamer like where you have these words.
I'm imagining what you're saying is like a Wikipedia page and you say certain keywords, which would be if you were a Wikipedia page underlined in blue and worthy of their own investigation in and of themselves.
So some of these I'm going to pick out and interrupt you sometimes and I apologize for that like I did earlier in order to in order to properly set the prerequisites because we had a four hour behemoth before and that was meant to serve as an introduction to the free energy principle.
However, there are some people who were still uncertain as to exactly what the free energy principle is.
So this will serve as an introduction to that introduction.
Okay.
You mentioned marginal likelihood slash model evidencing and I believe you see those two as the same and I'm unclear as to what any of those two are.
So can you give an explanation what is model evidencing slash marginal likelihood.
Excellent question. So this is where you would need to be slightly fluent in the, the concepts and constructs that statisticians would bring to the table.
So, if I now want to use probability theory to articulate the, the job of a statistician, trying to make sense of data, and just know that that sense making is basically the interpretation we're putting on these passive least action.
Then you'd start off by understanding the problem in terms of estimating under uncertainty, sort of assimilating data whilst quantifying and accommodating uncertainty due to random effects.
So, you know, the random effects here can be read as the random fluctuations or the vener fluctuations or the innovations in some stochastic process from the point of view of a physicist from the point of view of statistician.
Those that randomness is inherited as random effects. Observation noise, for example, will be one. If you were dealing with a state space model, which is really a model of a dynamical process as the statistician might use to do data assimilation,
given some time series data, there may be a distinction between observation noise or sensor noise and the noise or the random fluctuations on the states that can't be directly observed, and that would be known as state noise or system noise, for example.
They both describe the same thing, but from the point of view of statistician, this becomes noise or uncertainty or random effects.
So how do you deal with this? Well, basically, you're confronted with a problem of some data, and you have a hypothesis or a model about how those data were generated by some latent states, sometimes known as hidden states.
Hidden here, I think, just as to try and connect it to the Markov blanket, they're hidden behind the Markov blanket, so the statistician can, if you think of it like being in internal states, surrounded, they're enshrouded by a Markov blanket.
The data is impressing themselves on the sensory veil. There's something on the outside that are latent in the sense that they're hidden behind this veil.
So they only have access to the data. They don't know how the data were caused. So for example, they might have a hypothesis that this drug treatment
had a materially affected some pathophysiology that reduced the symptoms that were measurable or recordable by the doctor.
But it's only the observable data that the doctor can get from the patients that the statistician has at hand. Now, the statistician now has to infer, was there a drug effect?
And what she will do, she will create a generative model that if there was a drug effect of a certain size, then I'd expect a separation of the data, for example.
Now, that generative model at the end of the day can always be written down as a joint probability density over the causes and consequences where the causes are the latent or the hidden states that you are trying to estimate,
and the consequences of the observable data that you have at hand.
Given that generative model, you can now estimate, given some data, the most likely hidden or latent states or causes of that data, basically the treatment effect that you are hypothesized.
So that's the posterior distribution. That's the probability of some hidden state, say the external states Markov blanket, given conditioned upon the data.
So that's the holy grail usually of a statistical analysis and what your most classical inference, for example, those based on t tests or F tests, right through to more sophisticated and informed log odd ratios such as base factors.
These are just scoring the evidence for an effective interest expressed in this latent state space in terms of the probability of one model relative to another model.
And usually in signs that would be the altered hypothesis versus the null hypothesis. And then you can look at the, the ratio of the likelihood of this model or specifically the likelihood of the data, given this model, divided by the likelihood of the data,
given another model, usually the null hypothesis. So to come to our example, our example of, you know, the statistician trying to infer whether the drug has had a remedial effect or not.
What she would do is compute the probability of her data with an effect and then compute the probability of her data, if there was no effect of the drug. So, you know, the data sets from the treatment and non treatment group were treated as from a single group.
And then she would use that to make an inference that there was indeed an effect. So that that probability, the probability of the data, given a particular model, a specific model, be it the altered hypothesis or the null hypothesis, that's the marginal likelihood.
So why is it called a marginal likelihood? Well, what you've done is you've estimated, given your genetic model, the probability of the data having marginalized or averaged away the thing that you don't know, which is the effect size, the treatment effect.
So the probability of the data given a model is the average probability of the data given that model and the effect size averaged under your beliefs about the effect size. So that's why it's called a marginal, a marginal likelihood.
That's a great question because, you know, it actually leads one to the genesis of variational free energy on one reading by in the context of Richard Feynman's pathological formulation of quantum electrodynamics.
He had this marginalization problem.
So he wanted to, or one could read the history as him wanting to evaluate the marginal likelihood of paths of say small particles, which would necessarily involve computing or marginalizing, integrating of extremely high dimensional probability distributions.
Which is intractable. So, in order to solve the marginalization or the integration problem to ensure everything sums to one effectively to get your partition function.
He introduced the variation free energy. That was a really clever move because he converted what was an intractable and non realizable and incomputable marginalization or integration problem into a tractable optimization problem, simply by introducing this variation free energy, which was a band on the marginal likelihood.
So that's why it's called an elbow or an evidence lower bound, simply because it now becomes a computable object or mathematical functional that you can evaluate given some data and a generative model that is always in machine learning lower than the log of the marginal likelihood.
In my world, the physics world is the other way around, but let's stick with the machine learning world. So the negative variation free energy of the physicist is always smaller than the thing you want to actually evaluate.
And you just optimize by pushing up the elbow or the variation free energy until you can't make it any larger. And under the assumption that the bound, the tennis of the bound is high, you've not got a good approximation to what you were chasing, which is the marginal likelihood.
And once the statistician has that marginal likelihood, she can repeat the process for another model, so the null hypothesis with no treatment effect, and then she can take the ratio of the free energies, the variation free energies and start to compare the models using base factors and then go back to the doctor say look,
I am pretty confident that that drug really did have an effect. And I can say that because the evidence in your data suggests that the marginal likelihood of a hypothesis or a model that included an effective drug was 52.6 times greater than the marginal likelihood if I assume that had been no, no change.
So that's where the notion of a marginal likelihood comes from. So the marginal, marginal likelihood just is the evidence for a model it just is the probability of some data.
You know, in the present context, you know, sensory or from the point of view of the free energy principle, the sensory states or the sensory trajectory is a time series, given a particular model, marginalizing away all your beliefs about a particular
effect size and the parameters and all, all the quantities that were responsible for generating those data, you know, under the structure afforded by the model.
Is that, is that, is that clear? I mean, you know, these are the fundamentals of, you know, machine learning data simulations, the system identification, and, you know, you could actually argue, this is one way of a new one,
in the scientific process, not quite in using the rhetoric of Carl Popper that certainly has this Poparian aspect to it, that every bit of scientific inquiry, including the way we live our lives, is just about hypothesis testing.
And we just generate alternative explanations for the evidence at hand. And then we try to evaluate the evidence for this hypothesis relative to that hypothesis, evaluate the marginal likelihood of the data at hand for this hypothesis versus that hypothesis, this model versus that model.
And then we usually commit to the model with the greatest evidence, this just is evidence based scientific progress.
You're having committed to or selected, technically, known as Bayesian model selection.
This hypothesis, you then think about, okay, what's the next space of hypotheses or what's the next portfolio of ideas or models that I want to now go and gather evidence for.
And this analogy is quite nice. I'm glad you've let me tell this explanation, because because a good scientist that the good one will generate new hypotheses.
And then the problem contending the scientist who's been just chasing these marginal likelihoods or model evidences for her models of her fielding of inquiry is to design a good experiment.
So here we come back to the, you know, the other side of the coin that takes us beyond machine learning as a black box or, you know, give it some inputs, give it an output.
We now come back to the design of our experiments, how we actively secure and solicit the evidence that will best disambiguate among our hypotheses.
And I repeat, usually when you're writing scientific papers, it's a null hypothesis. This is not a hypothesis, but in real life, and in real scientific thinking, people, you know, normally have eight hypotheses or 100 hypotheses.
And they're scoring all of them by evaluating the marginal likelihood of the data that they have carefully solicited by Bayes optimal experimental design to maximally disambiguate in terms of the marginal likelihood of the model evidence between all of their hypotheses.
So that, that sort of brings another aspect of probability theory to the table, which would be an important complement for somebody wanting to understand Bayesian statistics.
The Bayes aspect, of course, is that as soon as you start to talk about conditional distributions of the kind that a marginal likelihood is, it's conditional in the sense that it's a probability of some data conditioned upon a model or given a model, having
a centralized way, all the parameters of that model. And, you know, building a posterior, the probability of my hidden states, the parameters of my model, given the data falls out of Bayes rule.
So we're talking about Bayesian inference here and just straightforward probability theory that can be articulated in terms of Bayes rule.
So another really important application of Bayes rule, which speaks to this sort of inactive situated statistician where statistician now is not simply in the service of the doctor supplying her with data and asking a particular question.
Now, the statistician is in charge of designing the perfect experiment that gives her the data that allows her to make the most efficient and statistically powerful inference about whether there was a treatment of that.
And that's the problem of optimal experimental design. There is an answer to that. It's called the principle of optimal Bayes optimal design, first articulated by people like Lindley in the 1950s, and then re-articulated by people
like David McKay in active learning. And it is, if you like, the other side of the Bayesian coin when it comes to Bayesian assimilation of statistical assimilation of data and inference.
And one could also argue it's the other side of the coin when it comes to things like Bayesian decision theory as well, but that's a slight distraction. I think we just stick with the big idea here that, you know, there are good.
Let's look at it like this. If it is the case that the marginal likelihood is just the probability of some data given a model, and your job is to evaluate that quantity and usually optimize the marginal likelihood or maximize the evidence for your model.
You can either change the model or you can change the data. And that means that you've got sort of two problems to solve, as it were, if you cast this as an optimality problem as a maximization of an evidence low bound or a minimization of variational free energy from a
finite point of view. And that's, I think, comes back to your original point about the sort of two black boxes, two computers inferring each other.
And, you know, where there are, I can either change my mind about you, or I can try and change you by querying you asking a question, performing an experiment on you to get some better data from you that resolves my uncertainty about you.
Is there a relationship between changing your evidence versus changing your model and the psychoanalytic repression? So repression would be saying, you know what, that data doesn't exist. Let me ignore it, versus the perhaps a cognitive behavioral therapy technique would be to say, no, go out and perhaps update your model of it, view it differently, view that maybe it's our arachnophobia, for example.
I think it's a beautiful analogy and, you know, not probably beyond an analogy, there are people in computational psychiatry who think exactly like that.
And, you know, you can find articles, trends in cognitive science reviews and the kind of, you know, some of the deal with, you know, how do you, how do you resolve cognitive dissonance, how do you understand wishful thinking.
So examples, you know, I think that's a perfect example of this way of maximizing the evidence for your models of the world.
In that case, it sounds like at least the colloquial understanding maybe in the West or maybe throughout the world, I'm unsure, is that you should update your model, you shouldn't try to change the evidence to match your model, you should update your model.
And in fact, there are some political implications, I'm sure people shout that on the streets across various political divides.
So is this an argument to say that updating the model is actually the one that should be primary?
Because the way that I understand from how you've explained it is that both are equally valid.
However, when I look across the world and I look at how we think just in terms of common sense psychological advice, at least to us in the 21st century, it sounds like you should update your model.
But I think you're right to say that, you know, it would be disingenuous from a mathematical point of view to privilege the model versus the data.
So how does one choose between those? Mathematically, how does one choose?
I don't think you can in the sense, you know, you can't spit a coin, a coin has two sides to it.
The whole point of this inactivist take on sense making is that you have to optimally go and listen to the right kind of news, talk to the right kind of people in order to solicit the right kind of data that's going to maximize the evidence for your model.
While at the same time, you are updating your model, sometimes known as basing belief, updating or basing model selection, for example.
So the two things go hand in hand. I think one way of resolving or answering your question is just to say in a political or perhaps even sort of communication science sense.
And these sort of the social aspects of it.
What you're saying is that there is now, once you acknowledge that you also are in charge of getting the data, then you also have to contend with the problems of how much weight you afford to that data versus that data.
And where you get your data from which news channels do you do forage, who do you listen to, who do you trust, who do you ignore.
And we do this all the time we do this in a very skillful way so personally, in terms of deploying our attention.
So if you're an engineer, and you were thinking about assimilating visual information using a Kalman filter, for example, then one of the most artful challenges or artful resolutions that the Kalman filter brings to the table is to get the Kalman game right.
How much weight do you afford the prediction errors that supply the upper term of a basing or a Kalman filter.
We do that on the fly all the time right down to the level of turning on and off the attention or the precision or the gain afforded visual information.
So my favorite example is Socatic Eye Movements. So just to demonstrate that, you know, one can do this experiment at home, you can just sort of look from one side of your visual scene to the other side and back and forth and back and forth with Socatic Eye Movements.
And you will not perceive the world jumping around. However, if you reproduce the same visual impressions just by palpating your eye in the spirit of Helmholtz.
What's that palpating eye? What does that mean?
You can literally do this now if you just take your finger and place it gently on the outer aspect of your eyeball and just gently press in until you see the world shift around and move around.
So you can see visual motion. That is a consequence of optic flow in introduced in this instance by you pushing your retina, translating your retina with the input fixed.
And that is basically exactly the same from the point of view of the retina, the back of your eyeball as moving the eyeball with the world stationary.
But notice you only saw motion of the world when you were moving your eyeball.
When you move your eyes in the normal way, you don't see that motion.
And the reason is that your brain ignores visual input during eye movement.
And that's called Socatic Suppression.
So I think it's a beautiful example of fact that every moment we are selectively ignoring information that is not newsworthy.
We are selecting it. We don't know we're doing it, but we do it all the time.
Of course, at a much more abstract and epistemic level, exactly the same principles apply when we choose which newspapers, which Twitter accounts to follow, which friends to talk to, which universities to go to.
Is it going to be a Scholarpedia or Wikipedia?
Now, all of these decisions that we make in terms of securing the right kind of informative precise data that will literally have assailants in the sense that it complies with the principles of optimal Bayesian design in the sense that it will resolve the most uncertainty about what I don't know.
So this is absolutely crucial, this sort of being in charge of the data, even before thinking about the consequences of your belief updating.
You're getting, just knowing that you have to submit the right data. And of course, you're the, you know, from a sociopolitical point of view, what we're talking about now is how to disambiguate between fake news and true news.
How to solicit data in a way that precludes as being isolationist or precludes as succumbing to cult like ideologies.
You know, precludes fundamentalism of a dysfunctional sort. Or why is it dysfunctional? Well, usually because that kind of fundamentalism does not speak to and does not minimize that joint predictability of that joint free energy that we were talking about several minutes ago.
So what you will find is that that dialectic between changing your mind on the basis of some evidence and changing the evidence by changing where you look for that evidence, that balance is at the heart of action and perception.
And indeed, you could argue that all of action is simply in the service of gathering better data. What do you mean by better? Those data that minimize your surprise, minimize your expected surprise or your uncertainty, resolving uncertainty about the way you think the world works and more particularly how you work in that world.
This sounds like a deeper issue than just a political problem. It sounds like an issue for the process of suggesting that the conclusions that one has come to was from a dispassionate assessment of the evidence.
So you hear people say this, generally people who like to think of themselves as extremely rational people who've come to their conclusions because they have objectively analyzed some situation. It sounds like that is a doomed project because we're all sampling different data without realizing it.
Now, is that the case or no?
Yes, no, I think that's absolutely right. I don't think there's anything bad about it. I mean, that's just the way things are.
So how does one overcome that? What do we do? How is it that the scientific process seems to work?
Well, it works because the operational definition of working simply is maximizing the marginal likelihood, but you're a liberty to actually maximize the marginal likelihood by either changing the data or changing the model.
So notice that in this instance, you're not going to make any false inferences provided that all the data you solicit is always very consistent with your model. You won't need to change your mind.
If you've got the wrong model, the data will provide disconfirmatory evidence and you may well try and get data from another source. And if you can do that and continue engaging until your model is fit for purpose, what you have basically done is find a niche for yourself where your ideology, your
conceptions, your understanding of the world, the way the world works is perfectly fine. So you've found a cultural eco niche or possibly a physiological eco niche or an information eco niche that suits you and you will have a high adaptive fitness and survive and persist in that eco niche.
If you can't, you'll move to another one. And so now we have a model of speciation. We have a model of shared narratives, shared convictions that can be communicated, so supply and teach each other.
And that is self-assembling and self-constructing, co-created simply because you are looking at the same time, you're looking for information that resolves the uncertainty about your models of how the world works, which makes it look as if from the outside, you're basically changing the world to make your hypotheses come true.
And that, of course, is just another way of describing action. So if we come away from the sort of the exchange of information as a scientist or somebody who reads the news or somebody who's trying to do a PhD or indeed just make sense of recent political events, if we can sort of bring it back down to simple things like moving your eyes.
In a sense, that is you changing the data to match your model. So this falls out of the free energy principle because if it's the case that the autonomous paths, the dynamics that constitute our active engagement with the world,
they're trying to minimize free energy. And we, in this instance, minimize free energy as a prediction error or surprise, remembering that it's the negative of the marginal likelihood.
If something, if the probability of these data, given my understanding of my construction of the world at this point in time, is very, very low, then it will have a very, very small marginal likelihood or have a very, very high free energy.
And therefore it was surprising given my model of the world. Some people like to articulate the other that surprise in terms of a prediction error. What I predicted was going to happen is nothing like what I actually sense the data I actually got.
So imagine how, imagine now you applied that sort of concept that the autonomous states that include the active states are just in the service of minimizing prediction error.
How would you understand that in terms of elemental movement and behavior? And one way of understanding that is that basically your models of, say, how you're going to move are actually realized by creating data that is consistent with your predictions.
So I have in my head a model, a hypothesis, the notion that I'm going to raise my arm. And all that's happening in that notion is that that's my belief about state of the world.
And I'm telling my spinal cord and my musculature and my muscles, that's how I expect the world to be. And then my reflexes are driven by the prediction errors, driven by the free energy gradients, literally like the ball rolling down the hill, to realize, to change the world so it supplies the kind of data that I predicted.
I just wanted to mention that that notion of movement as simply a realization of predicted endpoints, intentions to move, is physiologically fully licensed by things like equilibrium point hypothesis in motor control and motor physiology.
But it goes back even further to idea motor theory. So this was in the Victorian age, how people understood movement, that basically it was a physical manifestation of beliefs about the way my body should be posed or what my body should be doing.
So to me, that is, if you like, an elemental and quite fundamental example of the importance of changing the data, not the model. So if you changed your model in the context of I'm going to stand up now, and you looked at the data, and nothing is happening, you would immediately change your mind and say, Oh, I'm not standing up.
What would that look like? That would look like Parkinson's disease. That would be a failure to properly attenuate the evidence that are not moving when I strongly believe that I am about to move.
And of course, you can understand now the pathophysiology of Parkinson's disease, that's due to a failure of neuronal message passing and particularly the weight or the gain afforded proprioceptive information in that light.
It's a failure of active influences, a failure of the active states to properly respond to the evidence that or change the evidence at hand.
So this is a lovely example of ignoring, selective ignoring, just like the second suppression with the eyes that enables movement. If you didn't do that, we couldn't move.
So what I'm trying to say is that, you know, right from the inception of these kinds of this kind of thinking in the inactive domain, in terms of idea motive theory, the there is a there is I think a fundamental importance of,
you know, of the other side of the coin from changing your mind, which is basically changing the data upon which you make you which causes you to change your mind through through sense making.
And without that we wouldn't have action so you can almost say that action and perception are the two sides of the same coin. The perception is changing your mind by changing your model to maximize the marginal likelihood given a particular model.
Action just is changing the data by acting upon the world to maximize the marginal likelihood basically maximize changing the data so the probability of the data given the model is so active inference so that coupling of action perception is essentially trying to realize your beliefs about or your models of your lived world.
And if you're successful in doing that you've got the right eco niche, you will have a high marginal likelihood, you know, from an evolutionary perspective you will have a high adaptive fitness from a social perspective you will be.
You will listen to you and teach your job into these podcasts, suggesting you do indeed solicit that kind of information that causes people to, you know, to go to your channel to attend to your stuff.
Simply because they think they're going to get good stuff and they're going to get uncertain to resolving stuff. So this this this I think is is puts the balance back on the I'm getting the data right on the data data foraging right.
Okay, well perhaps let me undermine my own credibility here.
So, a few weeks ago, and I think about a year ago, or so we talked, and I had some experience about, and I was worried and you said Kurt don't be worried don't have some experience where I thought I heard a voice.
I was at an hypnagogic state so it's just about to fall asleep when many people that shouldn't be a state that I attribute much credence to. But I remember being afraid because I heard my wife either say okay or just some one syllable word.
And then I was so worried and I worked myself up into anxiety thinking do I have schizophrenia. Oh my gosh, there was no other voices since then, but I was extremely anxious.
And then you told me don't worry and even Kurt even if there is there's medication and many people go through psychosis and or psychotic breaks and so on.
But luckily I didn't luckily there was nothing wrong with me and your words did calm me so thank you for that. However, and coincidentally, perhaps not but coincidentally a few weeks ago.
I had a strange experience Carl and it wasn't sure if I was going to bring this up on the podcast for one reason because I don't want you to think that I'm someone who's beset with psychological issues.
But on the other side, I am driven by a filmmaking adage, which says that the more personal the pain the more widely applicable it is. And the opposite is also false the opposite is false so if you try to speak generally you end up speaking to no one.
What happened a couple weeks ago was I had this sense and it was so and even to talk about it now is a bit frightening. I had this sense that I was like, oh shoot, solipsism is everything in my head, just that thought.
And I've because I'm on this podcast and have entertained many ideas, it's extremely taxing to do so because I tried to take different people's points of views seriously.
And perhaps I shouldn't, but I feel like in order to give them a fair shake, I need to embody them in some way shape or form. So if they say, well, all is mind, for example, that's the idealists.
I'm trying to imagine what would that be like and if someone's a materialist well what does it mean that this was dead and it somehow emerged that we have consciousness.
Either way, the point of that is to say, I've been feeling like for almost a year and a half now just in a void, not sure what is true and what's not true.
That's fine. I can deal with that, except that that led me to this spiraling of such. It was probably the most terrifying experience I've ever had in my life.
And it took me weeks and I'm still recovering from it where I felt like, shoot, am I all that exists? And then just that thought alone.
I'm like, I don't want to believe that that could be the case. And I remember looking at my wife and thinking, is my wife even real?
How much of an imbecile and how ungrateful and how foolish is it and how that I would even think that I feel bad that I would even entertain that thought.
Oh my gosh, I'm scared. I don't want to go to the hospital because I felt like if I was to truly accept that thought, I could I was on the brink of just losing it into an insensate spiral.
I became extremely scared of myself. And I think that I'm the type of person, I am an anxious person, and I am the type of person that tends to obsess over thoughts.
So then I started to obsess over this. And for the past couple of weeks, I was so scared, so scared of my own mind.
So almost like a hypochondriac for mental disorders where I didn't want to even look up what's the definition of schizophrenia or psychosis was because I was afraid that I would see the signs everywhere.
For example, a few days ago, or about a week ago, I remember generally we all speak to ourselves in our own heads.
And sometimes I use the phrase, so I don't like that, or I like that I use the word I in my own internal monologue.
Sometimes the words, yeah, you can do this, you can do this. So sometimes they use I, and sometimes they use you.
And I imagine we all do that. It's colloquially okay to exchange those two. However, then I thought, oh, shoot.
What if I felt distance from my thought? What if the one that's saying you is a thought speaking to me like a schizophrenic may hear, oh my gosh, oh my gosh, I don't want to hear this.
I was so afraid, and I felt derealized and depersonalized when you mentioned Parkinson's earlier, that the difference between the model and then the data, that didn't strike me as a symptom of Parkinson's.
The way you were describing it struck me as a symptom of derealization.
Anyway, I'm bringing this all up and I actually feel good about speaking about it. It somehow feels curative to even voice these concerns.
I, well, actually, I don't know. I don't, I don't know why I'm voicing this, mainly to, mainly, okay, how about this?
I just verbally cascaded incoherently, perhaps. What are your thoughts on what I just said?
The reason I'm saying this one more time is that people in the comment section, when they view different theories of what consciousness is, what reality is, that's the theories of everything channel in a nutshell.
I see many of them in a similar place where they feel lost. For example, I've heard that some people who view Yosha Bach's ideas that this is all an illusion or this is all simulated consciousness, some people become suicidal.
That's actually extremely terrifying. Luckily, I'm not suicidal, though I'm scared that I could, because I've heard that other people could.
I'm not sure if my problem is just obsessive thoughts or if it was indicative of something else and I was so afraid. And it's such a scary feeling, Carl, to be afraid of one's self, to not even be able to sleep at night because you're afraid of your own thoughts and what that may lead to.
Does any of that make sense? And I know that sounds like it's completely off field, but perhaps it's not.
No, I think it follows on very gracefully, but you've taken it right now to some of the most important aspects of modelling, which we all contend with, which of course is, I mentioned before, getting models for our lived worlds,
but of course, the most important part when we're a baby of the world is our body. So first thing we have to do is to build a model of our body and work out what things that we are able to move,
you know, hence motor babbling and wrackling, probably more important than that, of course, is exchange with the mother and developing a sense that mother is an object and crucially an object that is separate from me.
And that's quite a skillful move and takes a lot of my belief updating and changing your models and building a coherent explanation for all your sensations, both ability to touch on them, and the physiological intercepted consequences of being suckled, for example, and being cared for.
And I'm taking this route to the key thing, which is basically models of self and selfhood. And so, you know, if we are coming back to this picture of some mathematical universe that I've now tiled with multiple Markov blankets, encapsulating or defining lots of particles.
And basically, we inhabit a universe that is constituted by things like us and initially, you know, mom and dad and brothers and sisters and peers at school.
That means that our models of our lived or experienced world have to have models of other in it, which means you need to be able to disambiguate between sensations caused by others and sensations that you caused as a fundamental structural aspect of the models you're going to bring to the table just to live in a world, which is constituted by creatures like you.
And that brings with it, you know, something quite special, which is a model that encompasses selfhood.
You don't need this if you were lived in a world that did not involve an exchange with other conspecifics. But because we do live, you know, our world is constituted by other things like us.
We need to be able to contextualize and make the inference, I did that, or you did that, or it's my turn, or it's your turn, or you've got that intentional stance, and you know, I've got this intentional stance.
And just having as part of the generative model of the hypothesis, you know, the hypothesis that I am me and you and you is something which characterizes one would imagine very high life forms.
Now we go even higher to basically philosophers and people like you.
But if you have, if you spend your life worrying about the, what is the self, does the self even exist?
Well, precisely. Yeah, well, I mean, that's that that seems to be the essence of your existential angst and all its attendant, interceptive and emotional consequences, you know, do I exist.
I think really usefully you brought to the table the notions of depersonalization and derealization. If this is for physicists, then can you explain to your audience what those things are?
I think it would be really useful for people who do not know what derealization is.
To be quite frank, Carl, I didn't want to look up this exact definition because I know that I'm a valedudinarian and I would just obsess over myself having these issues.
So I can give an explanation of my experience and then perhaps you can delineate what the psychopathology is.
Okay, I'll make an aside first. Some people say that what we need to do is realize that the self is an illusion. You can hear this in the more eastern end.
And I know that many people who watch this channel also feel like they take these people seriously, like I took them seriously, and I don't know if that's exactly true.
Not whether or not the truth of the self being an illusion is true, but whether or not that is indeed useful for everyone.
It may not be. It may be. At least for me, it was extremely harmful and perhaps still is.
And it may be dependent upon where you are in psychological development, spiritual development, and sometimes these lessons that are told to us by philosophers
or spiritual gurus or people seem like spiritual gurus, perhaps they should be taken with such a grain of salt.
And I've come to the conclusion that if it's not life affirming, then perhaps don't follow that. Perhaps use that as a clue that that's a pathological path.
And don't do anything that can be drastic. Don't give up because I felt like I was in a state where I could snap and feel like, well, this is all a dream.
I remember feeling, looking at my arms and feeling like, am I even behind? Like right now I'm feeling great and I don't seem like it.
But I'm speaking with you. I feel safe. I love my wife. I've actually, whatever, I'm feeling happy right now.
And I feel like I would a month ago, which is I'm behind my eyes and this is a person speaking a week, two weeks ago, three weeks ago.
I was feeling like all of that could be a model. I could emulate anyone else's head. I could be anyone else. This could all be in my head.
So debilitating, destabilizing, walking around feeling like, is this a dream?
Constantly checking my fingers because that's one of the signs you can check for lucid dreaming. How many fingers do you have?
And then also feeling bad like, why the heck am I thinking this is a dream? Shoot, what if it is a dream?
Just spiraling, spiraling, tumbling, tumbling thoughts.
Okay, that's what I had, slash still have to some degree though not right now.
I wouldn't say that I'm over it because it was such a recent experience. I'm not going to say that I've solved it.
I feel like it's tapering off. Luckily. Anyway, that's what I had. I would characterize that as derealization in the sense that I didn't feel like it was real.
I don't know if it's depersonalization because I don't know the difference between those two nor dissociative identity disorders.
So I don't know the differences between those.
It's nice to bring all those three. The phenology is very, very closely related, but the way you described it, it was almost perfect.
Either a derealization, which people normally describe as they're looking, they are sensing something that doesn't quite seem real.
The outside world seems like it's a movie. It's lost that tangibility. There's no grip that can be attained, that reassures you that stuff is actually out there.
The converse, of course, is I'm no longer a person, and that could be even more frightening.
And both of these, I think, speak to this dissociation that comes with a dissolution of selfhood or at least one's construction of explanations for the self in a lived world.
You used a phrase which I think was quite permanent here, which is, you know, one should not pursue this kind of thinking and self exploration and introspection unless it is a firmatory and self-affirmatory.
And in a sense that's exactly from the sort of mathematical and dry perspective of the free energy principle that just is maximizing model evidence.
It is self-evidencing. It is, you know, if you can affirm through all the right kind of interactions, be the emotional, social, sexual, intellectual,
you've got the right kind of model of your world, which is constituted by people like your interviewees and your wife and all your colleagues.
And then affirming that model simply is securing evidence for that good model of your rich and encultured world, that just is that sort of a firmatory process.
However, there are dangers that you look in the shadows, which you've clearly contended with, to do that properly, to be able to secure the right kind of evidence that you are living in a world of positive, constructive,
nourishing, enabling human beings, others, other things like you. You have to be able to communicate. To be able to communicate, you actually have to entertain the idea that there is self and other.
And simply, you know, to engage in turn-taking, you need to have this explicit part of your generative model that I am a self.
In so doing, you will also have contextualized as part of your generative model, self in a number of different states.
And you need to have, remember before we're talking about the good scientist having a portfolio of hypotheses, we're generating a new set of hypotheses so that we can now gather evidence for these hypotheses.
So that's part of what you are doing. In doing these podcasts, you are on a journey of developing different hypotheses about ways of being.
The danger, though, when it comes to different ways of me as a self existing is that you can sometimes lose, entertain the null hypothesis that I am not a self or I do not exist in a sentient fashion,
in the fashion of having particular kinds of qualitative experiences. This is a perfectly viable hypothesis.
It can be had in a non-emotional context when you meet people like philosophers, entertain things like the zombie hypothesis or brain of that thought experiments.
These are all really interesting instances of a very high order life form.
Thinking about, well, what would it be like if I was me without me hood, if I was a zombie? What would it be like if it wasn't actually me talking?
What would it be like if there was no reality? It was all just me.
All of these alternative ways of being that speak to selfhood or its negation or its nihilism now become plausible hypotheses for which you have to search for evidence.
And of course, if you are just doing this in your head and ruminating and introspecting, there's going to be very little evidence available to you to disaffirm your hypothesis.
Perhaps I'm not me. If you don't actually engage with somebody else, there is no evidence at hand for to refute that hypothesis.
So on the one hand, that is a remarkable capacity. The very fact you can have this hypothesis in your head, I am not me.
Or it is not me having these thoughts. It is not me having these qualitative experiences.
It's quite remarkable. It's a very, very high level ability, which I would imagine where you and I are the only kinds of sentient artifacts in the universe that can entertain that kind of counterfactual hypothesis, which is necessary to explore different models.
It's necessary indeed to actually just behave and have plans. You have to have counterfactual hypothesis about the future and different ways of being.
And of course, it comes with it comes with a price if sometimes you entertain a hypothesis for which there is no evidence on hand that could possibly refute it.
And certainly, if you adopt a particular behavioral strategy or engagement with the world that precludes soliciting evidence against the hypothesis that you are, say you.
Examples of that would be things like obsessive or compulsive disorder or agriphobia or your rumination disorders where you physically or possibly even pro socially prevent yourself from acquiring any further information that would allow you to change your mind.
And of course, once you realize that's a possibility, you, you can always or you can also get into the negatively valenced emotional aspects of entertaining these hypotheses.
So if I've got schizophrenia.
Now offers a very plausible hypothesis for these dissociative experiences. Why am I having these dissociative experiences, or one very plausible hypothesis I am having I have a dissociative order, or I have disorganized thought disorder that characterizes schizophrenia.
It's a very plausible hypothesis. How would you go secure evidence against that.
Well it becomes very difficult because the whole prop point of having these very high order counterfactual hypotheses or models at hand to explain your experienced world is that they're very, they're very plausible explanations and it's very difficult.
If you've got schizophrenia, you're not going to be able to trust any information anyway because they could be illusionary. So it's one of these wonderful self fulfilling hypotheses that are very difficult to to dismantle.
And you see the same phenomenology in many instances, you mentioned behavior therapy before, and in a way that doesn't have this quite the same horrible existential angst that you clearly experienced, you can actually construe many phobias for example,
of the same kind, in the sense that if you are very frightened of spiders, you're very unlikely to actually go and solicit the evidence that would, that would confirm the ultimate hypothesis that spiders are not frightening, because you just don't go in a spiders.
So this is the kind of hypothesis that maintains itself, because it's undermined the way that you active this list of evidence for your beliefs. But for you, of course, you know, you know, it's not a question of being frightened of spiders, it's a much more existentially deep and
some notion that in fact you're not you or you're not even a self, and you're not even perceiving reality. And these kinds of hypotheses that come along, qualified by or associated with plausible explanations, I'm going mad,
are very difficult to refute in the moment, especially if you if you ruminate on them.
They will go away as soon as you start re engaging with other people.
So what I found to be the case, Carl, is that the more I talk about it, the more I'm speaking with you to just speaking with people and not being so in my head, almost instantaneously, it starts to dissipate.
And also, just so you know, there's a danger for the people who watch this channel that it's seen as a spiritual triumphant state to be egoless, to have ego death.
So then, just so you know, when I was feeling that I was then telling myself, but am I supposed to have ego death is this what ego death is like. And now I feel bad, am I just not strong enough as a person, which then I feel like I'm less on the social hierarchy,
because I'm just a coward who cannot deal with who isn't psychologically strong enough to deal with potential ego death if that was even ego death.
So that those are there's so many dangers in this and I didn't realize this. I had this insight was in that episode or experience that Kurt Kurt Kurt something was like I was talking to myself or something was talking to me and telling me, Kurt,
you've been thinking way too much. This is you're extremely analytical and never would have thought of myself as someone who's too analytical before it was clear to me that I was too analytical.
And there's nothing wrong with being analytical. It's nothing wrong with thinking, but you've been thinking a bit too much. Feel more. Just ground yourself here. Engage in this world more.
And there is also this feeling that I don't love myself, which is a strange feeling, Carl, that I don't have that I'm a bit hard on myself. And I would have never said that before.
I would have thought I'm not hard enough. I need to study harder. I need to prepare for these podcasts harder. I need to release more. I need to learn more.
Push, push, push, push. It was only then that I felt like Kurt, that's been dangerous, man. Like, just relax and and don't worry too much.
If you keep talking about this somewhat publicly is a bit embarrassing, because I do feel like by saying this, like, there's still that part of me that feels like am I saying this to give my way out because I'm truly lazy.
And I want to say this. So I get the sympathy of, for example, you, maybe the audience to say, Kurt, no, no, no, you're doing great.
So then I can get, I can feel there's so much self analyzing that's going on right here, Carl.
Anyway, I felt like Kurt, you were thinking too much. Just relax. Perhaps don't engage as deeply as you have been with these ideas.
Don't entertain them as much. You maybe you're in a fragile state right now. You can do that later right now. Take it back.
That's what came over me. And also this lesson that I don't have enough self love or self acceptance.
Last night I looked up, I was using a rubber band for my thoughts like self administered, a verse of conditioning when you snap yourself if you're performing a bad habit.
So I thought maybe I could do that with my thoughts. So anytime that I feel like that, that would encourage my mind to not feel like that.
I looked it up and it said that works for physical habits, but not for mental habits. So stop that.
And what works is act, I believe, acceptance and commitment therapy, which is a CBT technique.
So then last night I was telling myself, you know what? Try that out. Accept these thoughts and I'm not exactly sure what it means to accept them.
I don't precisely think it means entertain them, but at least meet them, not with horror and dread and avoidance, but just say, that's okay, man.
You think like that, some people feel like that sometimes. So I started doing that.
And last night was the first time in the three weeks since I've had this, that I felt absolutely like my regular self, almost from five minutes of this quote, unquote, acceptance therapy.
And then I woke up this morning, felt like my regular self, like I'm behind my eyes. I'm in this world. That was fascinating.
Okay, so I said quite a few statements right there. I'm sure there's plenty you want to comment on.
What I'm also interested in for you to put a pin in your hat is what the heck does this self-acceptance, self-love, if that seemed the same, mean in terms of the free energy principle.
Okay, so I basically just poured myself out there. There you go.
Sorry, Carl, for you to pick up all those pieces. I know it's a huge responsibility.
I trust you. You're someone who studies this. You're extremely, extremely bright and you have such a wealth of knowledge and I do feel like what I'm going through is not something terribly unique.
I do feel like this is something that many people who are on this journey of understanding the world and consciousness in their place go through this perhaps at some point.
I think I was trying to emphasize that by saying that it is a gift that you're able to have these existential crises.
There are dangers that lurk, which you've clearly encountered, but at the end of the day, the very fact that you can entertain these counterfactuals is quite remarkable.
To my mind, it would be the highest expression of the human condition just to consider those alternative hypotheses where bits of our humanity are just not there anymore or have a different disposition or relationship to reality or indeed other people.
There are lots of things you said made a lot of sense from simple things like soliciting reassurance from others that you don't have to do any more work in terms of preparing yourself for being a good expander of ideas or interviewer or book writer or whatever.
That's exactly what you should be doing. That's exactly securing evidence for yourself models of an atherbitry sort and the more you do that, the more that model will be fit for purpose and you will have the right kind of marginal maximizing your marginal likelihood.
But you're in a difficult position because your job is actually to explore other ways of making sense of things and other ways of thinking things. You're compelled to explore alternative hypotheses.
You described the potential nihilism and I presume quite nightmarish. I can't now remember nightmares, but I imagine that all of us do go through this and we have nightmares as children.
I think you stop having true nightmares in your thirties and forties but before you've really got that grip and maintain that grip on selfhood and you in your lived world as part of that and engage with that world before you've got there, it must be absolutely awful and nihilistic to occasionally lose that and then worrying that you're never going to get it back.
It does remind me of certain drug induced states. I can imagine that you're the kind of person who would be very frightened of having a very bad trip and I think-
Very frightened of having one?
Yeah.
Yeah, so that is correct and luckily I wasn't, well what I imagined what I was going through would feels like how someone would feel on a terrible psychedelic trip.
And it's interesting you bring up psychedelics because of course there is a move in a sort of pharmacologically assisted talking therapist to use psychedelics simply not to aspire to, I don't know what ego death means but I can have a guesstate from a point of view of meditation and mindfulness.
But there's a really interesting connection between the use of psychedelics and the aspiration of many meditation like practices that would I think subsume the internal attention states of meditation and current practices of mindfulness.
Which is really to try and redirect your attention to the sensorium and usually interceptive parts. So it's like breathing for example.
So this is the exact opposite of what you've been doing. It's exactly deploying that attention, all that gain control we're talking about in terms of selecting what kind of information, sensory information, sensory states to engage
and determine your belief updating. So putting it putting all that attention out to the sensory side of your deep hierarchical models, your, your constructs.
What you've been doing is the opposite you've been actually wandering around at the deeper, the highest levels of these hierarchical models.
Sorry, so in the back of when we were initially talking and I said there's a black box the input output, and then there are two black boxes. It's as if you're saying pay attention to the sensory.
Forget about the action we haven't talked much about the action though obviously as embody creature sensory and action are tight.
It's as if what I've been doing was staying within the box and creating my little sensations and actions within there as little loops, and you're saying pay attention to the senses that come from the outside is that what you're saying or.
Yes, well, I'm not saying you should do you, you will do everything in the right way under the free energy principle.
What I'm saying is that the skilled practitioners of mindfulness and meditation, I would imagine of the kind that would lead to ego death or I'm not quite sure what that means.
I would employ exactly the same kind of internally mediated and sometimes if you're very skilled and volitionally called for mechanisms that are actually targeted by psychedelics there.
So what are you now to do all your belief updating and evidence assimilation and sense making at the much more the input level of the black box, not at the, if you like the highest level which you could think of as an output in terms of selecting the pounds and what
am I going to do next and what kind of person am I narratives that we give ourselves that contextualize the way that we behave and other things that we do.
So, you know, I think it was mechanistically really interesting connection between the notion of you ruminating, going in circles around your head, exploring every darker and darker corners of your mind and different hypotheses for which there's very little evidence available simply because you're not attending to the
you're not talking to anybody.
For example, you're not you're not focusing on your breathing. And indeed you try and supplement that with elastic band just to get yourself back to the sensory.
That's interesting.
So, and I think that you know, you might you may want to guess you probably are skilled in meditation.
But that kind, I think the objective of becoming a skilled practitioner of mindfulness or meditation is simply to get some volitional control over that sort of attention.
That is paid to these deeper machinations, versus attention that is paid to the sensorium that underwrites the psychedelic aspect of the, the, the allure of just sensory patterns and the sensations and textures that you get, you know, when taking psychedelics.
So, you know, getting control of the balance.
So it's not the fact you're attending to your breathing, which is important as a fact that you can volitionally redirect your attention away from self.
Extremely interesting.
So, but you seem to have got control by this acceptance. And it strikes me that, you know, in the absence of feelings of an emotional sort that were articulated in your description in terms of, you know, I'm an awful person.
I'm not fit for purpose. I'm not well prepared.
I, I'm not able to man up and own this ego, ego death, or personal, but quite emotional constructs, effective, valenced aspects.
There are also explanations. So the idea is, you know, anything that you can talk about has to be part of an explanation for particular ways of being that, you know, I can be a worthless person.
Because I am a worthless person. I'm not worth this person. You know, and you since I'm in the state of anxiety, I'm not in the state of anxiety.
We have to recognize when we are anxious, anxious is just a state of being, which is necessarily called for in certain situations that we balance this attention or precision waiting in computational psychology.
You know, to make your belief updating fit for purpose in this particular, in this particular context.
What I'm trying to get to is why acceptance might have worked, because I imagine that if you were suddenly found yourself ruminating and locked into those ruminations, then very much akin to someone on a bad trip who thinks,
you're locked in this forever. This is going to be my uncertain state of being for eternity, because there is no reality.
That feels very heartfelt. Yeah.
That feeling will, well, if that is true, I must be feeling anxious. You are then going to look for evidence that you're feeling anxious.
Because you are anxious, you will experience certain cardiac acceleration, certain interceptive flight or flight like responses that will supply evidence that you are anxious.
And then that becomes evidence. Yes, I am right. I am now in a state of nihilism. I do not exist. And I should be anxious by that. And yes, I am anxious.
So you get into a vicious circle. So this is a sort of good old fashioned cognitive behavioral explanation for things like panic attacks that, you know, you quite reasonably in an entirely based optimal way makes sense of interceptive bodily gut feelings
literally. You make sense of that with the hypothesis are I must be in an anxious state of being.
Conclusion hypothesis then generates autonomic actions that are realized reflexively in the way we talked about when we look at the Parkinson's idea.
And that will be reflected in terms of cardiac acceleration, neuroendocrine releases into your body and your body will change and your body will supply signals interceptive evidence. Yes, I am anxious.
It's again a self fulfilling prophecy in exactly the same way the idea motor theory means that raising my hand is just a realization of my beliefs, but I can literally raise my levels of anxiety in exactly the same way but invisibly from the outside but not when I can sense my body.
If you got yourself caught up into this joint hypothesis.
I am in a nihilistic existential state, and I should be really worried about this and anxious about this.
And it is quite understandable that you are going to use signals of anxiety and angst generated by a body as evidence. Yes, I am now divorced from reality. I'm an unperson. I am in a dark and nihilistic place.
There could be no other place that could be no reality.
That's a hypothesis. If you can just wait for the evidence that that hypothesis is incorrect, simply by letting your body calm down so there is no further evidence of any anxiety.
Then you can find secure even from your own body even about talking to somebody you can secure evidence are the hypothesis that I am in a state of internal realism and anxiety is a silly hypothesis because the evidence refutes it.
I can now feel my not possibly personally, but you will synthesize all your interceptive feelings in a way that provides evidence against the fact that now I am a deeply nihilistic anxious state.
I think that just is the motivation for the acceptance. It is pushing through to get to a state of mind and a state of body, literally, you know, realizing you're good at making sense of your gut feelings, so that you can now refute the joint hypothesis that I am in a state of nihilism, and I should be jolly frightened about this.
Because there's no evidence you're frightened anymore. So this was just a piece of hypothesis building of, you know, a very sophisticated and philosophical sort, you know, the highest level of exploring alternative ways of relating to the world.
You now have, I think, a very useful insight into what into the gift of retaining selfhood that we I think we all, we all take for granted, but it's quite a fragile thing, you know, luckily, you know, most of us get through the day if not hopefully most of our lives, you know, by retaining that grip and just, you know,
continue securing evidence that this is the right hypothesis. I'm a person I am me, I am functional. This is, you know, this is the way I meant to be and these are the kinds of things I do, and the kinds of people I talk to.
But that is such a fragile self assembled and has to be maintained hypothesis that you don't, you know, that fragility I think only is revealed. Occasionally, I know that just some people, when they have the alternative hypothesis that you know, I'm not me, or, you know, me is not quite as functional as I thought I was, or I'm several me or me.
I am only me and there is no reality out there.
Intellectually, so that you're not identifying with what you're writing down on a piece of paper. How is it that you prevent yourself as a constitutional like by predilection, by personality, you're not neurotic, you're not as neurotic as I am.
I think there's probably truth to all that. And by being neurotic, you know, that's an entirely fun, your neuroses are absolutely essential to get through life. You know, I have a particular set of neuroses, which, you know, high treasure and try to.
I'm interested in the big five model.
Yes.
But I think you're also right that some people might call this mentalizing I think what you were doing is that you
were in a raw, enthusiastic and creative way we're just exploring different hypotheses about the way that you yourself, should it exist, relates to the rest of your mind and the outside world.
For you, we got conflated with emotional states like anxiety and your self worth and those evaluative states of being.
So if you want to, in your words, be more dispassionate about this kind of mental exploration on the inside, then you have to, you have to train yourself not to conflate the two.
The way of doing that is just to be cut to mentalize. So mentalizing is usually taken as a way of, if you like, disentangling what we what we would normally quite functionally put together certain states of being of a sort of intellectual sort or
physical sort, or just a contextual sort usually come along with some emotional valence effective aspect simply because that's the way the world is so if you'll say very late at night, you're normally going to feel fatigued and
that's slightly less robust, you know, in a way in physically. Now, it doesn't have to be like that, but that's the way that normally the world works and that's the way that you've learned to model yourself.
So if you train to be a professional, say, like an airline pilot trying to land a plane at night, or like a psychiatrist who has to deal with these, has to see people going through these
emotional or valenced or effective episodes, whether it's a sort of effective in the sense of, you know, manual depression, or whether it's the, you know, the co morbidity associated with psychotic states.
What's that?
It's a mixture of abnormal mood with having psychosis of the kind you just showed with schizophrenia. So it's having an emotional aspect to say delusions and hallucinations, for example.
Oh, I thought that those those don't go hand in hand. So some people have delusions, but they're okay with it.
Yes, yes. Some people have hallucinations and would not would not even seek medical help or their family and friends would not seek medical help here.
So there are people out there. I guess my point, you know, here is that you can mentalize it and build professional defences against the emotional aspects.
And I think that's what I've done. So I think about these things as a doctor or a mathematician, not as a person.
And if you want, if you want an honest answer, the other trick is to is to not use psychedelics, but you should, you should try smoking.
So smoking is is smoking and cups of tea are smoking what?
Cigarettes, or I actually smoke a pipe but cigarettes will do in an emergency.
So there are certain neurotransmitters manipulations of neurotransmitters.
The first time a doctor has recommended smoking.
Yes.
Well, we have a select audience for this.
Well, yeah, continue because you finish up your thought. I'm sorry.
You were saying the smoking of the pipe does what because I'm not the type of I don't smoke and nor do I want to smoke, but you're saying that the smoking does.
What was the purpose of the smoking?
It's just a way of using, um, nuancing your neurotransmitters that control that synaptic gain or the gain and the weight for you for different, different parts of your belief updating.
So it has the opposite effect of psychedelics, basically.
So that's why people like tea and have a cup of tea, calm that, you know, stay calm and carry on whatever it is.
Nice cup of tea. Cigarette and cup of coffee. That'll sort you out.
And it's because all of these drugs, the caffeine, the nicotine, they all act on the same kind of receptors at different levels in your neuronal hierarchy.
They're responsible for setting that gain control and gating, doing the attentional and the attenuation aspects of the talk you know.
So it's just a way to get a physical control over your hierarchical belief updating.
A bit like you're a band.
I would have thought that the caffeine would have the opposite effect of increasing your anxiety.
Not necessarily no. You know, if, well, it clearly depends.
If you're very agitated, then that could certainly be the case.
But if you are worried that you might be anxious and in fact you're not, then just sensitizing certain interceptive sensations that register the fact that you're not terribly at your heart isn't pounding.
That'll actually calm you down a little bit.
If it goes too far, the beta blockers will be another nice example.
That's what I used actually.
Oh, right. Oh, well, there you are. So what I'm trying to say is sometimes with skillful use, the use of a tobacco pipe can have the same kind of effects as a beta blocker.
That's all I was saying.
All right. All right, Professor.
Again, thank you so much.
It's much safe to stick with beta blockers and you won't get mouth cancer or anything. So, so if you could.
I found the beta blockers work and there's also some evidence of fear extinction. Have you heard of that?
There's this professor named Meryl Kendedt, who I'm going to speak to at some point. She takes people through phobias where she gets them to be extremely frightened.
She actually makes them almost manic or panicking, at least.
And then she gives them a beta blocker and then they still feel fear that day.
It's only the next day when there's memory reconsolidation and the emotional tags are removed because of the beta blockers.
You have to have a good night's sleep.
And then the fear seems to dissipate drastically for incurable PTSD.
I was trying to do that to myself.
So when I was feeling some fear, I would take a beta blocker and then I would feel the fear less still wouldn't be zero.
But then thinking, OK, great.
Maybe this will be like my own intervention of a fear extinction technique.
Yes.
Right.
Well, that's a very clever idea, actually, to combine beta blockers with what?
Extinction or some people call flooding.
So that's exactly the kind of way I was counseling.
You would use the people who smoke you smoking to moderate in the right context.
Tea.
Oh, you love it.
OK.
That's very interesting.
Thank you so much.
We'll talk again.
And perhaps the next time we speak, there were some questions that I didn't even get to from Michael Levin from Professor Norman Wildberger, who's a mathematician.
And there's quite a few.
Carl, I kept you on for so long and this is gone.
Well, this didn't I didn't intend for it to go in this direction, but I'm extremely glad it has.
And maybe my episode can serve and your advice.
That's a plus the advice can serve as a cautionary tale and as well as some practical advice as to what to do and how to avoid situations like this when exploring topics like this.
Thank you so much, Professor.
I appreciate it.
I look forward to the next time.
The podcast is now finished.
If you'd like to support conversations like this, then do consider going to patreon.com slash C U R T J A I M U N G A L.
That is Kurt Jaimungal.
It's support from the patrons and from the sponsors that allow me to do this full time.
Every dollar helps tremendously.
Thank you.
