As always, you can click on the timestamp in the description as well as here to skip
this longish introduction.
The theories of everything channel is back with a new season starting with last week's
AMA which will be in the description.
From this point forward there will be new content approximately once a week, sometimes
even more frequently.
Today's guests are Carl Friston, Mike Eleven and Chris Field.
The former two have been on this channel and mentioned several times prior whereas Chris
Field is making his debut.
Chris Field is a researcher in topological quantum field theory as well as information
theory and publishes work on what constitutes an observer.
Carl Friston is a professor of neuroscience at the University College London and is the
inventor of the free energy principle.
Mike Eleven is a developmental and synthetic biologist at the Tufts University.
The links to all their previous podcasts on the TOE channel will be in the description.
My name is Kurt Jaimungal, I'm a Torontonian filmmaker with a background in mathematical
physics dedicated to the explication of the variegated terrain of theories of everything.
Primarily from a theoretical physics perspective but as well as trying to understand what role
does consciousness have as constitutive reality is it emergent, is it fundamental?
Now the goals of theologutions is to interject seldomly if at all, allowing each guest to
give their perspectives on one another's thoughts, essentially giving us the experience of a
fly on the wall for the sorts of academic conversations that would ordinarily occur
behind closed doors, spurring research in real time.
One of the central issues of today's podcast is the concept of babbling, which I haven't
heard discussed virtually anywhere else outside of child development or language acquisition.
Though it can be generalized metaphorically, perhaps even literally, to the vacuum fluctuations
to interpret what vacuum fluctuations are doing as an indicator of the universe's proto-consciousness.
That is the universe babbling to understand itself but I won't spoil the surprise.
If you'd like to hear more podcasts like these then do consider going to patreon.com
slash kirtjimungle as the patrons and the sponsors are the only reasons that I'm able
to do this full time.
With regard to sponsors there's one for today's episode and that is Brilliant.
During the winter break I decided to brush off on the fundamentals of information theory
which is what constructor theory is heavily based in and I'd like to do an episode on
that.
So I took Brilliant's course on knowledge and uncertainty and random variables and
after taking that course I could finally see why entropy is defined the way it is,
why the formula for it is extremely natural.
There are plenty of courses.
You can even learn group theory which is what's being referenced when you hear that the internal
symmetries of the standard model is U1 cross SU2 cross SU3.
Those are league groups.
Visit brilliant.org slash toe to get 20% off the annual subscription.
I recommend that you don't stop before four lessons.
Keep pursuing until you've accomplished at least four and I think you'll be greatly surprised
at the ease at which you can now comprehend subjects you previously had a difficult time
grokking.
And now on to today's episode which is one that I'm extremely lucky to be able to present
to you all.
You'll be able to see the mutual respect that the guests have for one another.
We start off actually by asking what is it that you respect about each other's work.
Enjoy this theologution between Carl Friston, Michael Evan and Chris Fields.
I've been extremely excited about this.
So Professor, what do you find unique about Carl's and Chris's work and what is it that
you respect about them?
Well, what a great question.
I think all discussions should start with that question.
There's a lot.
I mean, I think the most basic thing I can say is this, I'm often asked by conference
organizers and students as far as who they should follow, whose work they should keep
track of.
And so I keep lists and Carl and Chris are at the very top of two specific lists for
me.
And I'm just always amazed about this is that the first is that both of them are experts
in at least three different fields, but probably more.
So they have the ability to kind of merge really deep understanding of different fields.
I mean, there's many people that are experts in one thing, but I'm just always incredibly
impressed at how both of them can weave together really deep knowledge from diverse disciplines.
And that leads to the kind of the second thing that I'm really inspired by, which is just
the kind of the sheer density of new ideas.
It's hard enough to push things in one, just kind of one known direction and do science
and so on.
But both Chris and Carl's work consistently make me think in new ways, give me ideas I
never thought of before.
It's just amazing.
So yeah, so I'm super excited to be able to work with both of them and to have this discussion.
Great.
Chris, the same question, but toward Michael and Carl.
Well, I can say that one thing I certainly admire is that Michael and Carl are both top
level biologists who are interested in theory and deeply involved in theory and have a deep
understanding of theory.
And something that I enormously admire is that both of them have that interest and yet
are deeply engaged in practical applications of Carl and mental health and Mike and regenerative
biology.
And that's a rare combination.
Carl, what is it that you find unique about Michael's and Chris's work and what do you
particularly respect about them as people perhaps?
I deliberately haven't rehearsed an answer.
So what I say comes from the heart.
So with Mike, I first met him vicariously through a friend at Giovanni Pazzullo and didn't really
know very much about his work until I visited his website.
And then I realised how influential and important he was.
And then I recognised all the little bulletins you get on social media and emails.
I started to recognise his name and realised that he was quite a mover and shaker out there.
What I like about both of them, they both think really, really fast and they both think
out of the box.
So I think what characterises both of their thinking really is just to ask what is a thing
in and of itself without making any prior assumptions and then putting it back together
from basic principles and coming up with some sometimes counterintuitive conclusions.
But for me, almost universally, exactly the same counterintuitive conclusions I've come
to after about 10 years of thinking about a particular problem but never dare tell anybody.
But they do.
They write it down very eloquently and they're very, very productive.
This I've known for less long and I've met him via Mike and in addition to that, in the
same way that many people I meet have physics envy, I've got quantum envy about Chris.
He just seems to know so much and think about the world in a way which I don't have that
sort of fluency in but it sounds really, really useful and quite correct.
So I'm hoping if I hang around long enough, some of it will rub off on me.
I used to be able to use the words without sounding like an idiot.
What would be an example of this out of the box thinking?
You mentioned thinking about what is a thing in and of itself.
What else?
There are numerous examples.
The first thing that just came to mind was just putting together fundamental questions
about self-organization.
If you were Varela, you know, so auto-poetry says self-assembly, self-construction.
If you're a chemist, it would be self-assembly.
If you're a theoretical biologist, you will be wondering about why on earth is it that
multicellular organisms form?
Because there's a deep paradox there.
If it is a case that I have to have a surface as a little organ, then some of myself has
to stop replicating.
And yet that is in direct contradiction to the principles of natural selection.
I'm going to turn off my reproductive capacity, my adaptive fitness, so defined in a theoretical
context.
So just really grasping the nettle and thinking about, well, these things exist.
What principles could possibly explain the paradoxes when looked at from the unilateral
or the monothematic view of natural selection, for example, or the monothematic view of self-organization
in physics.
So thinking out of the box, literally in this instance, entails being able to take multiple
perspectives on a particular problem and seeing the contradictions and seeing how they can
be resolved.
Now, that would be one of many examples.
There was a paper, and I'm afraid I can't remember the specific one, perhaps Mike and
Chris will be able to enlighten me.
There was one paper written, I think about a year or two ago, where they actually listed,
I think, 15 basic conclusions about the the fundamentals and the nature of self-organization
and self as distinct from other in any system.
And this listing, 15 really interesting points and predictions, all of which either I'm sure
will be formally demonstrated to be analytically true or yield or be amenable to a mathematical
analysis or would be empirically verifiable over the next few years.
What was that?
There was a paper in Neuroscience of Consciousness arguing for an approach to consciousness that
spanned phylogeny.
And we were very interested in that paper specifically to look at bacteria and single
cells and facultative multicellular, such as microbial biofilms, and ask, what do these
systems know about the world?
How do they see the world?
How does E. coli perceive the world, for example?
And we suggested that the answer is in terms of the sorts of things that we call taste
and viscosity.
But that experiences of taste and viscosity are perfectly good kinds of experiences.
And that if we think about how these kinds of systems deal with their worlds and solve
problems within their worlds, that that would give us a more unified understanding of what
it meant to be a system that was aware.
And so you're trying to use E. coli as a means of understanding yourself or humans?
By the way, is this a project?
Do you feel like your undertaking is an attempt for you to understand yourself or you're trying
to understand humans?
Like I'm wondering, is this more philanthropic or it's selfish and then it bleeds into the
philanthropic?
Well, I actually also want to understand E. coli.
We don't have a great understanding of the lives of other organisms.
Professor Levin, what puzzle do you find most important?
What do you think about on a semi-daily basis or even perhaps multiple times a day?
And then we'll go around the table here with Chris Fields and Carl Fursten next.
And then it's essentially me taking a backseat and allowing you all to free flow just for
the audience to know.
I know you all know this template already.
Yeah.
So the thing I think about many times a day has to do with the scaling of cognition.
So I want to understand two major things.
One is how it is that some collection of competent parts comes together to form an emergent self
with preferences, goals, memories, cognitive capacities that belong to it, but not to the
individual parts.
So I want to understand how that emerges, how the goals of humble, simple kinds of systems
scale up into much more grandiose goals that we see during development, during behavior,
during culture and so on.
And I'm also very interested in the left side of that spectrum.
Where does it begin?
Is there really a zero on the spectrum?
I think that all of us here would agree that there is a spectrum for these things.
It's not a set of binary categories.
But what happens at the very left side of the spectrum?
And so one of the first questions when we get to that that I had written down to ask both
Kirsten and Carlos to sort of comment on what does the Venn diagram look like of the set
of things that are alive versus the set of things that are cognitive?
How do those two categories relate to each other?
Do they overlap as one is subset of the other?
And what really happens at the very beginning?
And can we develop a kind of, which I think both of them have been working on, a kind
of basically a kind of panpsychism that doesn't sort of paint on new cognitive mysteries on
top of a physics that works perfectly well, but instead to try and to try to view physics
from the bottom up as having already a useful cognitive lens on it.
And how does that help us to build up cognition?
So that's something that I think about every day.
Chris.
I thought every day or almost every day for a long time about why we humans see objects
embedded in space time.
So why do we see things that we treat as independent of each other and why do we see
them operate on them, interact with them, think about them as embedded in this coordinate
system that we call space and equally important?
Why do we see them as maintaining their identities as things over this other coordinate that
we call time?
Karl.
I have to confess I spend, recurrently most of my time thinking about me, but in an academic
sense, how do I work?
It's a curious mixture of introspection and trying to understand why I can introspect from
the perspective or through the lens of a physicist.
So I spend most of my time dissembling preconceptions, the gifts that our sentience has given us
to try to reassemble them in relation to physics, density dynamics that has to be articulated
in terms of the kind of maps that a physicist would use, which would be effectively differential
equations and the calculus of variations.
Having done that, there are so many, there are sufficient number of moving parts, but
not that many, but the combinatorics then lead you to the kinds of questions that Mike
was talking about.
What different ways could this physics of sentience be manifest?
What possible ways could it be manifest and how does that address the distinction between
things, particles, creatures that would show the kind of sense making and to my mind an important
aspect is planning that would disambiguate them from other natural kinds or particular kinds
that don't have that kind of facility and what underwrites that.
So that's what I spend most of my time doing.
I have to say in conversation, both with Mike and Chris and other people,
you can easily get distracted in a rightful way by thinking about that mechanics in exactly
what Chris was talking to, which is a sort of scale free way.
In my rhetoric, that scale freeness speaks more to the coupling between different scales
that Mike was alluding to.
So how does this mechanics, this physics of sentience, which I understand largely in terms
of probability theory and effectively Bayesian probability theory.
So what you have is a Bayesian mechanics.
How does that Bayesian mechanics apply at one scale and another scale?
Then, of course, the big question is how do the two scales capital to each other?
So that for me is something that I find myself increasingly pressed upon,
largely through conversations and collaborations.
But that does mean that I spend a lot of my time thinking about that and writing
demos of mathematical equations trying to try to get to the underpinnings of it.
Mike, I see you nodding.
So what is it about what Carl said?
Professor Levin, I apologize.
What is it that Professor Friston said that has you feeling like you agree with it?
Well, as usual, he said it perfectly.
I couldn't say it better myself.
I think that's exactly the kind of research agenda that I'm interested in.
That really is a very good description of what I think we're all looking for in a certain sense.
Is there a difference between cognition and consciousness?
Is one distinct?
Is there overlap?
Is someone a subset?
I actually can't conceive of cognition without consciousness, which I prefer to call awareness
not just to be perverse, but because in many cases,
consciousness is used in a way that implicitly means self-consciousness,
whereas awareness is often used in a way that does not make that implication.
And I find it difficult to conceive of cognition without any kind of awareness at all.
So I'll ask a question based on what Chris just said and what Carl has to say about it.
So what do you think about the so-called hard problem?
Is there, in fact, a hard problem at all?
I would take Andy Clark's view on this, who has worked closely with David Charmers.
I don't think so, no.
I don't think that the hard problem in and of itself is the interesting focus of inquiry.
I think the move that I see in philosophy has been to the meta-problem or the meta-hard problem,
which is, as Andy Clark puts it quite succinctly, is why do we spend so much time puzzling about
why we are aware? So just asking that question speaks to, I think, the nature of the hard problem,
which is a sort of very much a second order, a meta capability that we can make sense of
our own sense-making. And we associate that with selfhood. So one has to ask the question,
what kinds of systems, again, I think, particles or creatures would have the capacity to represent
selfhood and, furthermore, represent the counterfactuals that would enable you to ask the question,
why am I conscious? That immediately just logically presupposes that there is an alternative
hypothesis of other counterfactual that I'm not conscious. So imagine now you're talking to
a creature, you're talking to me, that has this capacity to imagine counterfactuals that cannot
exist. So that's a remarkable capacity to have, from my point of view, a sort of internal world
model originative model where counterfactuals can exist is quite remarkable. I don't imagine that a
thermostat or a virus or an E. coli will have a sufficiently sophisticated set of electrochemical
dynamics or kinetics that would enable them to physically represent counterfactuals of this sort.
And I could go on, the usual line of argument is, why do we have models? Why do we have the
capacity to represent counterfactuals? You end up with saying, yes, you have to have them,
just if you contemplate things a plan. So if things plan, they have to have
an ability to simulate the future, because they have to simulate or represent at some
elemental level the consequences of their action upon the world. And if they have now the capacity
to represent something that has not yet happened, namely in the future, then they now have the
capacity to represent counterfactual outcomes. So I think the meta hard problem inherits simply
because we have a sufficiently temporally deep generative model that can represent the consequences
of our actions. And of course, using the word hour implies some kind of elemental agency and
some kind of selfhood, because it's only me that's doing the acting. And the consequences are my
action, not your action. So in that sense, I think that the hard problem sort of pales into
insignificance in relation to the meta problem of why it is that we have philosophers.
Can I pursue that just a little bit? I think you raise an extraordinarily interesting
point here, Carl. And so I want to ask you, from a phylogenetic perspective,
do you think that organisms that can plan necessarily are able to represent multiple
counterfactuals? So let's give an example. Suppose you're a cheetah chasing a gazelle
of your planning, your moves, while looking at the gazelle's moves,
and your objective is success. Do you think that the cheetah worries about the other
counterfactual condition where the gazelle isn't caught? Or does it just represent this
one counterfactual condition that is, in a sense, the goal state?
That's an excellent question. I personally think that,
and when I answer these questions, I think, how would I simulate this? How would I put a cheetah
in silico and integrate according to the differential equations that must be present
under certain assumptions? And my guess is that the cheetah chasing the gazelle would,
as you say, just be pursuing a path of least action and would not have an explicit representation
of alternative paths. So it would be responding in the moment in a reflexive, habitual way.
So that's a really important question because if we don't have, or all of our behavior,
is just a manifestation of pursuing those paths of least resistance, or mathematically,
those paths of stationary action, then there is no counterfactual to select from,
and there is no notion of planning in the sense that I am going to do this as opposed to that.
But that doesn't mean to say biological organisms don't have the capacity to
plan multiple futures. And I'll just give you one real simple example of
our brains, and I would imagine even the brains of reptiles to a certain extent,
being able to plan multiple actions in the future. And that's in eye movements.
So if I just take one of the simplest problems in terms of planning, or perhaps not the simplest,
but one of the problems of planning that have to be resolved within
several hundred milliseconds, given that we have to choose where to look every 250 milliseconds
in order to gather the right kind of information to construct the scene in which we are situated,
coming back to your preoccupation, Chris, how on earth do we then explain these sparse
saccadic samples within some frame of reference, some space time, sort of how do we sense make
with reference to some constructs such as space and time. But the point I'm making here is that
the anatomy of many brains, many phenotypes, does have the capacity to represent the consequences
of looking everywhere at the same time at once before they have looked. So these are sometimes
referred to as salient maps, and we know that there are good candidates for these salient maps,
for example, the deep layers of the superior colliculus, and what could I argue, possibly some
anatomy of the pulvina. So if you look at the neuronal encoding of the salience of where
the salience of the next place to look, what's going to grab my attention and make that be
manifest overtly with an eye movement to go and look over there, then you can interpret, I think,
the anatomy, the ocular motor system, and especially the that which underlies the
control of the saccadic eye movements as entertaining a whole range, possibly millions
of potential plans of action and the consequences. And then the brain literally
selects the one that's most likely, which you can simulate by doing bumper tractors on these
sort of salience maps and representations of the salience or the epistemic affordance or the
expected information gain. If I looked over here, I looked over here, I looked over here, I looked
over here, you select that, your eyes jump over there, and off you go again. So I think it's a
great question and in a sense speaks, I think, to a certain extent to what Mike was alluding to
before, that there are certain setups or certain sort of neuronal electrochemical
infrastructures out there that can be read as just pursuing passive police action in a reflexive
way. And there are others that may have this richer structure, this deeper structure that could be
support the active sentience and the sort of what I am reading now as cognition.
If cognition entails planning, then I certainly think there has to be an active selection in play
here. Selection, what does that mean from something, from what? Well, multiple alternatives.
And then we come back to the central notion of this counterfactual. Mike, is that what you had in
mind in terms of breaking this sort of panpsychism, sort of trap, different kinds of
self-organization? Yeah, I mean, that's certainly related. The thing that I, and so I agree with
Chris's kind of gut feeling on this, I find it very difficult to imagine cognition without some
sort of awareness or simple consciousness. However, what strikes me as different than real
about the hard problem is that unlike all the quote-unquote easy problems and maybe unlike the
meta-hard problem, we kind of know the format or the shape of answers to those questions, right?
They're numbers of their equations or their lists of capacities. We know what a proper answer would
look like. And yet, I find it very hard to imagine if somebody claimed to have a good theory of
consciousness and I were to ask them, okay, well, what is the prediction of your theory in this
particular case? I don't know what the format of the answer looks like because numbers and the
typical things we get don't do the trick. They're sort of third-person descriptions. And so is the
answer, does the answer come in the form of a poem? Is it art? Is it something you have to literally
plug yourself into to then have that experience? I find it different because I don't know what,
if we had a correct theory, I don't know what that theory would output, unlike for all these other
theories where at least we have some idea of what the output looks like.
Well, that's a meta answer to the hard problem then. That's very good.
I'm sure the answer is quantum physics. That's what it's going to look like. If we could understand
it, the answer will be in quantum physics. Chris, do you agree?
Well, I'd like to back up a little bit. In a sense, playoff, what Carl was just saying about
alternatives and the role of alternatives in the hard problem.
Chalmers derives his arguments about the hard problem with the alternative of unconsciousness.
And this alternative makes great sense against the background of a particular
set of assumptions about physics, which is the assumption that nothing is going on
cognitively in the physical world, that there's no reason to talk about experience or awareness
or anything like that when we're talking about rocks or billiard balls or planets or electrons
or anything else. And in that case, there is this cut that is not really a cut in scale,
spatial scale or temporal scale, but is, in a sense, a cut in some measure of complexity
that suggests that below some cut point, which may be a bright line and may be a fuzzy area,
who knows, there's the possibility or below some cut point, there's no awareness at all, none,
zero. And above that cut point, there's some possibility of awareness. And in that case,
one's forced to say what could be added by complexity other than complexity
to produce awareness. And it's that intuition, I believe, that drives the hard problem.
Do you mind explaining that a bit more of what can be added by complexity? That's not complexity,
that sentence? Well, yeah, one way to put it is complexity, as complexity increases,
some magic has to happen. And you suddenly get awareness. And it's not clear quite how much
complexity one has to add. But as soon as one reaches the right amount, then out of the blue,
you've got awareness. Whereas without crossing that threshold, you had no awareness whatsoever.
So there's a zero point and the zero points somewhere on the scale of complexity. And it's
nowhere near the bottom. So I think one can view a lot of research on consciousness as a way to
escape that argument. So consider integrated information theory. In integrated information
theory, the criterion for consciousness or awareness is actually very simple. You need to have an
internal feedback loop. And if you've got an internal feedback loop, you're at least a candidate
for being aware, as long as you're not embedded in something bigger that has bigger internal
feedback loops. And if one thinks about the work of Peter Strossen, for example,
from a philosophical perspective, his arguments toward panpsychism are all arguments of the form.
There's no way to draw the line in the scale of complexity and get a place where
magic basically plausibly happens. So I think Chalmers did a real service in posing the problem
in that way because it forced us to think about this idea of magic, or you could call it emergence,
if you wanted to, of something completely new that was awareness.
Now, I do agree with Carl that quantum theory can help us dispel the problem
by being in effect a theory that's about awareness.
But we can get to that further down the road.
Do you have any reason to believe that we're embedded in something larger? You mentioned in
IIT, there's the feedback loop that is necessary for consciousness. And you said that
one is conscious as long as one is not embedded in something else of which that is conscious,
like there's a larger feedback loop there. Do you see there being some larger feedback loop?
Some people say the universe itself is conscious or that societies can act as some larger level
consciousness, like with each of us acting as neurons in some sense.
Well, I certainly wouldn't want to rule that view out priori. I mean, it's obvious that we're
embedded in much bigger systems. And I think we understand essentially nothing about the
cognitive capacities of those systems.
Yeah, I think that's a really important question. And I think a lot about the perspective of,
let's say, if you were a neural network or something like this being trained and so on,
what would the perspective of a sub component of that be? Let's say if you had the capacity as
a neuron to look around and ask yourself, do I live in a cold mechanical universe that doesn't
care what happens? Or is there some sort of agency in my environment? As a piece of that
network, am I learning from my environment or am I being trained? Because when you're being
trained, the real question is how many agents are there in that interaction? Is it just you
learning as you will, you're the boss and you're sort of learning whatever from your environment?
Or are you actually being trained because the environment is an agent with an agenda that
is training you for some particular purpose? And so this question of how would you know?
So you look around and you say to yourself, well, if you're a piece of this network and it's being
trained for some image recognition task, you would be, I think, wrong to come to the conclusion
that you live in a mechanical universe. You should come to the conclusion that it's actually,
it's clearly rewarding you and punishing you for specific things. It's not neutral with respect
to what you do. And for some reason, it really likes it when you find pictures of dog eyes or
something like this. And you have no idea that what it does is recognize dog faces out of all
the other inputs. So no doubt there's some kind of Gerdelian limit to be able to actually understand
what the larger system is doing. But I wonder if we can even have some evidence that just for the
fact that, yes, there is a greater sort of a gentle dynamic going on in which I'm caught up,
even if you're not able to sort of comprehend what that's going to be. I don't know. I don't
know what that's going to look like. But I think it's pretty important. And I think, as Chris said,
we really don't have a very good science at all of trying to predict or control
the cognitive capacities of systems made up of parts. So we can know many things about parts,
cells, robotics, whatever. And we routinely make these larger systems and then get surprised about
what it does or doesn't do or what the goals are going to be, what goals is it capable of pursuing,
what preferences does it have. This is probably an existential level job for society is to get a
good science of that going. You have done that there, haven't you? Well, we've started, anyway.
I mean, you could, I would go further than that. I think your work would represent
a substantive and established formal framework to address exactly those issues.
And you can see your embryonic versions arising in many different fields. I just
came back from a meeting of economists and financiers. They are trying to make the move from
behavioral economics to cognitive economics. And they were exactly addressing these kinds
of issues. You are understanding the notion of distributed cognition in a market.
So ultimately, they'll come knocking at your door. I can see that. I can see exactly the
sequence of people searching around for people to talk about,
illuminating that realization. It comes back to what we were talking about before,
where you started. I was picking up on the link between different scales of self-organization,
where every scale complies with the same principles. But how does that contextualize?
And I think one really interesting example of that is to think about an individual in an ensemble
or a society. Just to wrestle the argument back to pick up on something that Chris was saying about,
if there is a bright line between the kind of mechanics that would qualify as
conscious in the sense of being self-aware. And I'm distinguishing that from the kind of
consciousness that would just entail qualitative experience and a loss of phenomenal
transparencies. I'm talking about now self-awareness as one of the bright lines that may be very
blurry and vague, but certainly one which is induced by the hard problem.
Just asking a simple question, what kind of explanation for my world, whether I'm a single
neuron or a single person would enable me or justify the notion that I am a self?
And the obvious answer is when I have to disambiguate between the consequences of my
action and your action, if you are very similar to me. So if I managed to survive on an alien planet
where there are no structures like me that could cause the same sense to consequences,
then there would be no problem inferring, did I cause that or did you cause that?
So just having the existence of a population of conspecifics in some sort of formal structural
sense suddenly induces the inference problem, did you cause that or do I cause that? And of course
that naturally calls for generative models or internal dynamics representations on the inside
that entertain the hypothetical notion that that's me as opposed to not me. So you get for free
in and only in this context where you've put lots of these particles together. The license
of the motivation to have a hypothesis, a representation of selfhood that from the
statistician's point of view is exactly the justification for the increased complexity
that Chris was talking about. So I was listening to that really interesting sort of not to IIT
and all it brings to the table in terms of this sort of commitment to some threshold crossing
or traversing a cut with increasing complexity. But why? I mean one simple answer is that
if you ask a statistician what is complexity, they'll tell you well. It's basically the degrees
of freedom you're using up to explain some sensory data. You could articulate it as a KL
or relative entry between a posterior prior if you're a Bayesian but in essence it's just the
degrees of freedom you're using in order to accurately explain these data. So mathematically
the evidence is equal to the accuracy minus the complexity. So why would you need, why is that
useful? Well an increase in complexity is only licensed by an increase in the accuracy. So the
simple argument would go if I am obliged to model and predict and explain a world
that is constituted by other things like me, then the accuracy of my predictions will be
greatly enhanced if I have a representation of me as distinct from you. If that entails an increase
in the degrees of freedom, namely adding in this extra kind of hypothesis and everything that it
entails, then I'm going to have a greater complexity. But it's a complexity that is more than
paid for by the increase in the accuracy. Just coming back to my original point,
I think a lot of the work that you've done at the cellular level would be very greatly translated
to the societal level and to things like economics and to eco-niche construction
in ethology. And I know Chris has probably wanted to say this, you know, but language has one way
of facilitating that notion, that ability to efficiently, with minimum complexity in this
instance, do this distributed cognition. So I'm both being trained and learning at the same time
and we're doing it together to evince that kind of generalized synchrony.
So I'll mention language for Chris there. The font hope he wants to pick that one up.
Well, again, what I'd actually like to do is back up a little bit
and put some of what you just said into very simple active inference language.
Which if I see something happening on my Markov blanket, on my interface with the world,
then I always have the question, did I do that or did the world do that?
Where the world means everything outside me. And in a sense, the answer is always the world
did it. So the question becomes, did the world do that in response to something I did to it?
Or did it just do it? Not in consequence of any of my actions.
And so one gets immediately to this kind of babbling scenario that we've talked about many times
in which an infant or a robot or some system is trying to figure out by measuring correlations.
Whether the world's inputs to it have anything to do with its inputs to the world.
And just asking that question requires enormous representative capacity.
Because one has to represent one's actions and represent them pretty well in time.
And one has to have a good memory to represent enough actions to get any kind of statistical
support for drawing an inference about correlation. And that memory has to be represented as a memory.
Not just part of one's current input. So I think this question that you
posed is really the key question faced by any agent at all that's trying to get a model off the ground.
Which in a sense gets back to the question that Mike asked earlier on about how does this all start?
Maybe it starts with babbling in very simple systems.
You know I was thinking recently this whole issue of how many agents are there and where is the border
between the agent and the world and how do you self model that border is a fascinating topic.
And there's an amazing developmental model for this which is that we often talk about one embryo
and the embryo does this and the embryo does that. But actually what happens at the beginning,
let's say for example an amniote embryos is that there's a there's a flat blasted disc
which has just a few cell layers thick so it's kind of think of it like a like a frisbee and it
just has a few cell layers. And normally what has to happen is that one point in this in this disc
breaks symmetry and then organizes the primary axis of the first embryo and basically tells all
the other cells don't do it because because I'm doing it and that's what you end up with one embryo.
Now that process is very easily perturbed and I many people have done it I used to do it in my
graduate work and what you can do is if you perturb that process that initial blasted
disc that undifferentiated sort of pool of cells which are these sort of proto low level proto
agents that pool can break up into not one embryo but actually multiple and so you can have so I
did this in in bird embryos and you can have twins and chicken and duck and things like this
you can have in humans humans have exactly the same structure you can get them head to head you
can have to get them side by side you can get all sorts of geometries you can get triplets you
can get multiple individuals arise emerging by different partitions of this of this really kind
of medium this particular medium where where you have a bunch of cells and you don't know ahead
of time how many individuals at the level of how many larger individuals so embryos are going to
arise from this medium because the the dynamics by which and that's you know local activation and
long range inhibition and things like that the the dynamics that break up that that undifferentiated
ocean of potential cells into one two or three or more cells is actually it's very dynamic it can
it can go different ways and then you get interesting interesting things like this so for example you
might know that human conjoined twins that are you know sort of stuck together side to side one
of the twins often has left right asymmetry defects and it's because when you have two twins side by
side the cells in the middle both twins can't quite agree on who they belong to are they the right
side of this twin or are they the left side of that twin and both twins think they belong to them
but in fact they're overlapping the same cells and so one side will have correct left and right the
other guy the other side will have like two rights for example and this ends up this ends up giving
one of the twins laterality defects with respect to heart and gut pattern and so so their models
each twins as as the collective of cells tries to compute things like which which where things are
and what's left and what's right and so on their models can disagree with each other they can they
can draw the boundary between self and world in different ways and you can have these sort of
disputes over certain areas as to where who they actually belong to and and so so I'm just I'm just
incredibly interested in this in this process of of emerging of of individualization so to speak
out of this like ocean of of potentiality these cells you know 50 000 cells and some number of
individuals at the at the embryo level will be formed and each of them will have specific
goals and morpho space each of them will try to achieve very specific morphologies
and and they've and then you don't know ahead of time how many there were going to be you know
Carl what occurs to you when you hear that um ambiguity again sort of
um just thinking about the imperatives for self-organization
so when I hear that that was a fascinating story um and don't let me forget we ought to
explain to the viewers what babbling means just in this context as well because that's
quite illuminating perhaps we can I'm not sure that the cells do do motor babbling um but they
certainly resolve um the same kind of problem um so might um Chris correct me if I'm wrong but
by babbling all we mean is that when you're first born into any universe you've got to um work out
or test the hypothesis that I caused that or the world caused that um so you don't know you
don't have a self model you don't you know whether this is sort of a um a declarative model or
completely sub-personal just um hardwired into the um the synaptic efficacy and connectivity of
your brain so the first thing you have to do is just to work out what you can control and what
you can't control um and the idea is that you you um engage in um what I would call epistemic
or respond to epistemic affordances or epistemic plans that reveal knowledge they resolve uncertainty
in this instance it's the uncertainty about whether um I was the cause of this rattle rattling
so if you imagine um motor babbling um as um manifest in a little baby um you know rattling
its rattle generating both the sensations from the muscles and the skin but also the visual
and the auditory sensations all co-occur providing definitive evidence that there's something special
about this process and this event that um that provides the basis for the hypothesis
there's a unitary cause there's a unitary cause which is me shaking the rattle but of course
it may take several months if not years to actually get uh to actually realize that causes me
so what can you imagine sort of you know robots learning about the uh the manipulander that they
can articulate or the the way in which they can move around and you know um perambulate um but I
think the idea bringing it back to sort of where the selfhood come from um it would um rest upon
the testing the hypothesis which has to be physically represented with a deep more complex
generative model and sense making um but in fact it's me that's actually caused this single cause
of all these proprioceptive um motor sensations visual sensations auditory sensations um and that
will be especially prescient when you're starting to realize that some of these causes which you
thought were you of the sort associated with nurturing and suckling um were actually due to
mum and we come back to this argument to to actually have a good hypothesis which explains
why I am not in charge of mum because she is now not always responding to me when I cry
to explain that I have to now develop the hypothesis yes it was me causing all of this um
but sometimes there's something else else out there that's not me but very much like me and
that's mum and then you can see how there would be a pressure in terms of you know finding the best
explanations for your sensations to to have that so if you take that notion now think of the same
problem uh from the point of view of a cell um you know what are the imperative of a bunch of cells
that have to work together or will ultimately form a uh an embryo via this process of symmetry
breaking you know you have to ask what are the underlying imperatives how how could it be any
other way um and of course it could be or might be saying it could be lots of ways but the ways
the ways in which it goes wrong um which would be another way of saying um those rare occasions
or the the ways that it doesn't happen in in consequence of their rarity um involve this
ambiguity again you know literally in the context of some cells not knowing whether they're
or you're belonging to one twin or or another twin from from the cells perspective um so um
I was just thinking about the nature of ambiguity and of course you know it is exactly the same
one can account for the simple observation that self-organization does not tolerate ambiguity
does not tolerate uncertainty it's only manifest in the context of accurate and well evidenced
definitive uh exchanges so come back to Chris's notion of you know sense making projecting onto
my Markov blanket or my holographic screen from the point of view of the quantum formulation
that I need to resolve all the uncertainty uh as much uncertainty as I can but put that another way
as in a more slightly more deflationary way stuff which we see the way the universe seems to work
is um can be described as um realizing processes that minimize this this kind of uncertainty and
ambiguity and simply maximize the neutral predictability of what's being projected or
impressed upon my surface on my holographic screen on my Markov blanket uh so you know
that's what I was going through my mind that was a beautiful example of of you know uh when it goes
wrong there's there's uncertainty and ambiguity you're in the game and uh and that tells you
something quite fundamental about when it goes right and when it goes right it's just basically
a statement of what exists and what you know what what perseveres you know over time
Chris did you have anything to say to add to that well I would be interested to see how actually
Mike responds to that discourse with respect to the example of this embryonic sheet where
the cells are each trying to figure out what they're supposed to do
and there's there's still they still certainly believe that they should be reproducing so they
they definitely do that and they signal to each other but somehow they're the collective effect
of all of that signaling to each other is to organize different roles for the for each for
themselves so how does this imagery breaking occur yeah so so that's that's really interesting
so as I was hearing um Carl talk about this I realized a couple of things that um first of all
as as we were saying before feedback loops are absolutely central to this process because the
easiest way to prevent any of this from happening and to end up with a kind of a mono um you know
sort of uh I you know a very featureless sheet where there are no embryos is to block that is to
block the positive feedback loop that so that long that that short range inhibition long range
activation that says to one cell I'm going to now be the organizer I'm going to make this
axis everybody else don't do it you those are both feedback loops and so if you break those
feedback loops you get nothing so so the feedback loops are right at the beginning of this process
and and the other thing that that I thought was really interesting that Carl just said is about
the cells babbling so what I think uh it's a really good name for what we see when you take
a cell and you put it out into a dish what you'll see you'll and in fact in any in any new environment
you will see two things that I think are probably babbling in different spaces one is that in physical
space you will see that it's incredibly active it's constantly putting out and pulling back these
these um kind of extensions so these cytoplasmic extensions that have all kinds of sensors on
them they're not just sitting the cell is never just sitting there waiting for something to happen
it's constantly probing its environment it's incredibly active I'm sure it's taking all kinds
of energy uh it costs to do all this um there are videos of it that are just remarkable online and
you know we see them every day the other the other babbling takes place in transcriptional space
so gene expression is also never just sort of still and this is you know the these are the
genes that are expressed and I'm just going to sit here and do that all the genes are constantly
going up and down within specific ranges as it sort of wiggles in this transcriptional space
and I think both of them probably physiologically metabolically I bet this is going on in all
these other spaces and I think babbling is an excellent uh framework for for understanding
what it's actually doing it's actually taking these little actions looking for evidence of
specific things that it can then make use of to start to draw you know to draw boundaries
and and as Chris as Chris was saying I think what happens is that in this blastoderm you get
what what what will happen is that once once that that individuation starts with this specific
cell that starts to go down this road of uh being the organizer of this new larger collective
it immediately begins to distort the action space for all the nearby cells it starts putting out
all kinds of signals reward you know reward signals and and and physical forces and all
these other things that now are going to bend the the option for all the other cells and the
best example of that we have are these xenobots where these things are just made of embryonic
skin cells and if you look at a standard ol embryo you get this idea that well what do skin
cells want to do they want to be a passive two-dimensional layer on the outside of the animal
they do nothing except sit there keep out the bacteria you know nice and aboring two-dimensional
life but what you find out is that that's only true because the other cells are basically bullying
them into it left to their own devices with the in the absence of these instructive interactions
with the rest of the embryo what they what the skin cells actually want to do is get together and
do a three-dimensional uh kind of ball like architecture they are self-motile that you
know they'll run around and move and do very have various behaviors including make copies of
themselves have provided with materials and so that is completely um kind of obscured by standard
development where what you're seeing actually is is cells in a space that was really deformed by
by all their neighbors right and that's you know that kind of process that that that starts to
you know make the make those distinctions where the embryo the embryo can tell what part what
parts are inside and what parts are supposedly outside of itself and that's that gets reinforced
by all these early activities Carl or or Chris do you want to jump in on that I think I think
we've been describing psychists that says basically that it's curiosity all the way down
every system is trying to figure out what's going on I was struck with that with this image
of the little cells putting out fingers you know this is expiration you know sort of true blue
expiration and mathematically it's simply as Chris says it's um well what what artificial
intelligence um research aspires to which is artificial curiosity you know that you're going
out there getting the right kind of data um that's going to maximally resolve your uncertainty and
paint the way the way forward and of course it's intimately related to planning in the sense you have
to um realize that palpation you know whether it's a little cell palpating with its filial
odour or whether it's me palpating my visual world by with my eyes around or whether it's the
the little baby babbling and palpating its cot this this this this palpation has to be planned
it could be planned in the sense of the gazelle sorry because it's not the gazelle the cheetah
chasing the gazelle so it doesn't have to be very sophisticated cognitive conscious planning
but certainly has to has to be planned it has to have this sort of curious behavior
and it you know it this strikes me that that is such a fundamental
aspect that i think would qualify behaviors that have that aspect as cognitive in some sense
and it's so fundamental because of course it's it's just an expression of dynamics that apply
to action upon the world that underwrite everything that we do as certainly a scientist
and one could imagine as as as human beings but certainly a scientist you know that the maths
of curiosity was was actually worked out by Dennis Lindley in the 1950s in terms of expected
information gain and then reintroduced by people like David McKay in the context of active learning
so bringing this active notion that you can learn by actively acquiring the right kind of data
that optimizes that kind of learning and it became known as
the principles of optimum Bayesian experimental design so it's exactly the same kind of curiosity
that we as scientists use all the time whenever we design an experiment it's basically configuring
actively configuring some process to generate something that can be sensed or measured
that that maximally resolves our uncertainty or towards the greatest amount of information
so i'll be you know the three of us as scientists have become experts at this kind of formal
curiosity simply you know just by acquiring knowledge about in the in the particular paradigms
or setups and the fields that we find ourselves in the right way to do experiments but you could
argue that that's life you know in a sense that is the the infant bubbling it is you know that
kind of sense making and getting actively getting the right kind of data to work out your place in
the world to work out what you know what you should do next is one of the most existential
important imperatives and and you know i was struck out you know but the mechanics that
mike was talking about in terms of the you know the little skin cells left to their
own devices having a party performing balls and wandering around i mean you know one could apply
that kind of mechanics to people can't couldn't you or even even cultures and countries and
we're all trying to find our place and we're all trying to work out how to respond to those
constraints people around us at many different scales you know put on our behavior and try and
infer well how am i meant to behave in this situation so even if we all start off with the
same genetic code and the same sort of model of you know how people behave the context in which
we find ourselves now needs to be inferred in order to have to know how to behave in this context
either the child or as another as a politician or as an age worker or a first responder whatever
you want you have to make that inference and of course that inference inferring that context
requires the curious behavior that that christen picked up on in mike's example
wow could could you know what i'd love to hear is each of you talk about um
what is the simplest most basic thing so you know hopefully going down to like
physics prior to life but but wherever you like what is the most basic thing that is able to do
that because that's what i find in in talking about this stuff to other communities the thing
that people are the most resistant to is this idea that these kind of dynamics this this kind of
exploration curiosity prediction all of these things that we're talking about that you know people
think it's it's brains first and then you can do all these these these great things i i would love
to hear um you know what you think is the simplest physical system that can do that kind of thing so
that we can talk about how far down it actually goes while chris is thinking about that with a
profound answer i'll give you a not a trivial answer but a formal answer i i think it's um
you'd have to identify the um the depth of planning um that underwrote the the dynamics of the behavior
of the system um in question um and that would be basically if you were putting this in a sort of
path integral formulation it would be the sort of the the amount of time over which you are
integrating your paths and you're evaluating the best way forward once you move once you
move from very short time scales um then the depth of that planning i think eludes physical
realizations that could be written down in terms of um representations in terms of concentrations
and um um depolarizations and the like um and one has to move to a a quantal discrete time
representation so you know i guess i'm basically making the difference between the sort of um
the the the kind of dynamics you'd find in a uh in chemotaxis or a thermostat um that could be
written down as differential equations in fact my you're the kind of differential equations we
used in one of those early um pattern formation papers knowing your place approaches um where
everything could be articulated in terms of differential equations so that there is a kind of
planning but it's not of the curious kind that we talked about it's just following the most
likely paths of least action so i would say that they're not cognitive in the sense that they have
planning um so i put chemotaxis and thermostats and possibly most viruses probably at a pre-cobbletive
or protocobbletive level but as soon as you get to um um geritor models that can roll out
deep into the future and i i repeat just when you try to implement this in silico you know you're
using computer simulations you really have to move to a discrete time representation
which i think is a non-trivial thing i mean just for example remember the sort of
the eye movement example you know we sense make by getting little snapshots of the world every
250 milliseconds it's not like i've got i am a thermostat and i'm taking a continuous record of
the temperature that is a continuous i'm actually getting discrete quantal observations um and i
think once you move to that kind of generative model or biophysics that entails um the gradient
flows under that generative model um then i think you're in a position to talk about sort of planning
and cognition and curiosity of the kind that we we're talking about uh so i you know i've literally
put time constants on this i'd say about you know 300 milliseconds if you've got the ability to
represent the future 300 milliseconds in you know sorry represent the consequences of your actions
more than 300 milliseconds in the future then i put you in you know having crossed that one of those
cuts um and move from from being a sort of um yeah a virus to you know to to i don't know
perhaps an insect i'm not sure that perhaps had a good problem are you seriously putting the 300
milliseconds forward or like or is that facetious um it's it's facetious but
not as facetious as it might actually might think i do think that you know i think there's a
there's one way of celebrating the um the escapes from panpsychism that we started off with
you know when mike was saying what he spends his time talking about one of the ways is to
commit to vagueness and you know how many um how many grains of sand do i need before the
ceases all becomes a pile um and try and work out what the um what the quantity is uh that
defines that spectrum that we were talking about before uh along the switch there is vagueness
at some point consciousness of a certain kind um arises um but i also think there are natural
kinds that actually have bright lines between them um and you know what i'm saying here and i i
don't think i've said it before and i probably wouldn't say it again um um but um unless i've
simulated it but there's certainly my experience qualitatively different kinds of geratin models
that represent time in very very different ways you can get some mathematically things like
Kalman filters that can be cast or linear quadratic control and robotics and the like
that can be cast purely in terms of futures that are represented in terms of velocities
and accelerations and higher order motions that are just in the dynamics in the equations of motion
and you can realize and build these things you can simulate them and they behave
in a very plausible way you can get them to do handwriting you can get them to sort of
self-organize and do all sorts of interesting things our thermostat um but that's um that's as
far as it goes these things don't show curious behavior to do curious behavior you've really
got to roll out much further into the future um and in rolling out further into the future
it's very difficult to represent the future just using differential equations unless you move to
very very high orders of motion and at which point you start to sort of um to minimize that
complexity start to articulate things in discrete time and then the maths sorry the maths the new
the um numerics become much simpler and doable um and um but then you've got a
qualitatively different kind of generative model you move from a continuous to a discrete time
a quant a quantized generative model um so that for me is not uh does not allow a vagueness you
there is actually a natural kind that will represent things in the moment in terms of flows
and dynamics and other natural kinds that will represent things um in terms of discrete not
universal clock time but discrete iterations um and I'm saying that the you know for certainly our
scale of interactions and the way that we sense make I would have thought 300 milliseconds was not
controversial um I say that because that's the cognitive moment it's also the time interval
between the way that we sample the world not just with our eyes but when we sniff we sniff
at a frequency which means that each new sampling of that world that palpation with our
chemo receptors and our factory receptors is a game every you know every 200 milliseconds so
suggest to me there's a sort of discrete belief updating um and if it's a discrete belief updating
that is underwritten by the way we act the plans have to be in these discrete chunks of time so
that's where the 300 milliseconds come from you see it everywhere mice whisking they whisk at that
frequency so they touch the palpate every 300 milliseconds the way I'm speaking now every
phoneme is reaching your ears every 300 milliseconds or so or um you know or possibly less so wherever
you look in our biological scale that's there does seem to be this sort of characteristic
time stamp that's purely empirical so yeah I I I the facetious aspect inherits from the fact that
that's that's very egocentric it's just for things like me I don't know if it's for things like cells
quantum physics well it's interesting because in physics the number three has an interesting
role in fundamental physics because there's three generations of of matter and there's the
number three crops up and it's a mystery as to why so it sounds like the number 300 or 300 milliseconds
the unit attached to it for neuroscience maybe a a fundamental constant so chris what are some
of the deep thoughts that you were having well I I was just having a visual impression
actually when mike was talking and um of babbling and the visual impression was of our
our sort of model of the quantum vacuum and when we think of when we think of the vacuum
or at least I think of it visually as as little things popping in and out of existence all the
time and so one could think of that as a as a kind of babbling right the the field itself is
exploring what's going on outside of itself that's extremely interesting by forming a little entity
to go off and and explore and then report back so this is a this is a very different picture
from the one that that carl gave in that um but I suppose it also has a similarity or two
that when we write down a model of that activity it is discrete it is operating in
in a discrete kind by generating discrete events even though it's it's modeled in a
continuous space time which uh once one digs a little bit deeply the continuous space time
itself becomes discrete but this raises a question for me which is another of the things that I
think about a lot um which is the question of what we mean by randomness and
certainly to take a Bayesian point of view where probabilities are all subjective
it becomes very difficult to say what randomness might mean if if used in a way that's meant to
objective or to refer to something objective and we model things like fluctuations in the
vacuum as random which from a a Bayesian point of view just means it's uncertain to us it represents
information that we don't have and quite possibly can't get even in principle
but if we think of that system as an agent then of course we're expected to be exploring
its world whatever it is whatever exists that's not it and maybe we can really think of babbling
all the way down as a model of of what's happening in these phenomena that we
persist in thinking of as random uh but we also don't typically think of these sorts of systems
as agents this is this is this is incredibly interesting um what I heard what I heard Carl
saying among other things is that there there is a there is a qualitative transition when
things go from analog to digital in a certain sense right from from continuous to to phased
and based on what Chris just said of it you just remind us to think about the kind of the quantum
world where at least to my understanding a lot of things are in fact you know sort of discrete
does that mean that really could it be that that that is the sort of base state as Chris just
outlined with with with that kind of proto-cognitive exploration all the way down and that these
continuous models that we put on top of it by by by coarse-graining you know tiny events into
the kind of macroscopic things that we see here that's that's an abstraction that sort of loses
the essential uh mindfulness of it and then we have to try to rebuild it again by the time we
get to brains but actually all we've done is obscure the the fact that all the way from the
beginning it was already digital to start with and we just sort of put some put some Vaseline
on our lens here you know to make everything look you know sort of continuous which then
which then made it look like there was nothing going on at the lower levels and then then somehow
we're we're shocked that we have to recover it from from somewhere later on that that's that's
what I just heard from the combination of those two explanations. A very interesting idea and it
connects nicely to the history of mathematics or at least the history of mathematics post Descartes
and Leibniz which was all built around the idea of continuous functions and analysis and calculus
so on very very nice convenient mathematics to use but
obscure it in a certain way.
Carl did you have any thoughts to add to that?
Um yeah I I'd probably um this is why I wanted to hang out with with Mike and Chris to learn
about quantum theory because I do think there's something fundamental about this sort of your
the way that we carve up the world or the world the way the world can only be defined in a carved
way into tiles or quanta or discrete things and so I think that those observations that we just
heard I think are quite fundamental and it would be great to understand everything from the sort
of a quantal perspective or discretized perspective and how continuous constructs like you know space
and time emerge from that if necessary. Having said that I have to say that as a physicist
I would bring something else to the table so I'm quite comfortable dealing with random fluctuations
so for me random fluctuations are just variables that change very very quickly so if I want to write
down as a physicist so now I and I'm talking about a physicist that doesn't know anything about
quantum mechanics so I just want to write down a longer than equation to describe my universe
I write it as a mixture of states and random fluctuations and somebody asked me what license
is that I just saw that the random fluctuations are very very quick and the the states are very
very slow and this is just a natural consequence of some kind of renormalization group you know I
could make them even slower by going to the next states scale and throw eat some even more
fast stuff so there's nothing really if you like problematic from the point of view of that kind
of physicist in the random fluctuations it just means that all the stuff that determines flows
and dynamics of the kind that we can that we engage with and we can plan has a particular form
that particular form does actually bring a quantum aspect to the table or a discretization
aspect of the table that may or may not be if you like explained the way are absorbed into a
quantum information theory treatment but what I'm talking about here are the mathematical image of
like life cycles and by rhythms and oscillations and I mean that right from the perspective of a
dendrite in my hippocampus oscillating away at a fast gamma frequency you know sort of say 80 hertz
through to the the motion of the heavenly bodies wherever you look you get the this
solenoidal flow that is characteristic of things that hang around and don't dissipate almost
immediately and these are not part of the random fluctuations but they become more evident as you
go away from the fast random stuff into the slow the slow dynamics in the sense that you know clearly
the orbit of the moon around the orbit of the earth around the sun for example this deals
with very very massive large things where all the random fluctuations are effectively averaged to
zero whereas if you go down to the quantum scale then you know you're not licensed to do that and
these solenoidal flows become much less much less apparent but our scale if we are if life is on this
reading of physics sufficiently classical to have oscillations by rhythms things that would
you need for feedback that didn't go off to plus and minus infinity for example just saying that
you're keeping you're circulating in some state or phase space in a way that you keep yourself
to some attracting set and as you move through this you are naturally going to be oscillating
in a highly non-linear possibly chaotic way but still the essence is life cycles if that's the
case then what the Pankari section does indeed permit a description that is necessary discretized
in the sense you're going to pass through the neighborhood of various states and discrete
points in time recurrently so that's what I was thinking from the point of view of a physicist who
does not have the fluency of quantum mechanics to get back to a discrete thing but it also I think
highlights the the deep connection between things recurring discreetly or occurring discreetly
being one way of defining another characteristic of biological self-organization which is basically
bi rhythms and life cycles that have this sort of self-contained itinerancy because in that
self-containment you've got this natural resolution of ambiguity and uncertainty because you always
know you're on the same itinerant path repeatedly visiting the states that you once occupy so
that's what I would say from the point of view of physicists I may say something very different in
a few years time when I've learned more about quantum theory so let me ask Chris could you
ever describe that kind of mathematical physicist's treatment of dynamics in pure quantum information
theory at that at that kind of scale well I think if we if we try to think of scaling up from from
descriptions of things like quantum fields then this looks impossible but
I'll if we think of it informationally maybe it doesn't look impossible
I'll I'll go back to John Wheeler's notion that a bit is fundamentally the answer to a yes or no
question and information the information theory is about bits and systems that exchange bits
but
what
do you mind repeating that last part but what what Wheeler's aphorism doesn't specify
is the complexity of the question that has a yes or no answer so in in your case Carl
you have an oscillatory system that passes after a discrete time of particular boundary
so the the system may well be asking the question have I passed this boundary
and the answer is yes or no or am I passing the boundary right now well that's one bit
that's a yes or no question but it's an extremely complicated question
so it may be that we can develop a theory that leaves the complexity of the generative model
unspecified and concentrates just on the bit flow across the boundary that counts as evidence in
one direction and perturbative action in the other direction and and then I think the two pictures
fit together rather nicely because one can imagine the generative model operating it
that the generative model being the model that generates the questions
operating at many different scales
where where one could think of the scales as computational complexity
and this gets back in a sense to your question about language
oh language is a way of posing questions it's a way of babbling in the world
and this process of babbling it seems to me as far as I understand it's like poking and
prodding to test your own self model to see what's the difference between me and the world
it sounds like that never stops even though we call it babbling as if infants do it
does it ever stop are we not engaging in this right now and I like this phrase babbling all
the way down I'm going to put that on a t-shirt by the way Chris or and also by the way seems
like babbling all the way up too because we're constantly engaging in this so firstly is that
true does babbling have an end and and also does it not presume a self in order to test the self
what I mean is Carl when you were speaking about the process of babbling it's the infant
doing something on the world in order to make a model but that first part was it's it is doing
something to the world to me already presumes the external world whereas the way that I'm
understanding it is that the self is a model but it's also in your point of view it's something
objective and I believe from my readings of Chris I don't I believe Chris is more on the non-dual
end where it's it's it's that's less the case so I'm unsure anyway I just said a slew so please
respond to it as you as you wish right well I mean just to dispel the notion that the self
is objective no I didn't mean that I meant it exactly the same way that I think both Chris
and Mike have been intimating that you know from the inside of a cell or a person or the baby's skull
and your self is you know quite a sophisticated construct fantasy hypothesis that is physically
realized possibly neuronally in some lucky creatures and some lucky children you may actually find
some children never get that far you know I'm thinking here people with severe autism for
example who don't have a theory of mind simply because they never developed the notion that
I am a person and you know what comes along with that is that you know if you've got very very
severe autism or you know if you like so they're theoretically idealized or autism and that means
that personhood doesn't exist so you would be I would regard you as an animate fringe or you know
some interesting autonomous vehicle but you would never be a person because I don't I don't
have the hypothesis that you know there are people out there and that people share certain
sort of unitific characteristics and have intentions in the same sense that I have
intentions so I just I'm not aware of that because I just don't don't have that hypothesis so you know
it's a long-winded way of saying that I didn't mean to imply any objectivity here I was more
going the other way really I'm just saying that selfhood that would be one part of consciousness
and if you want to associate cognition and consciousness then possibly that kind of
minimum selfhood would you know would be necessarily part of of cognition this is a gift
that you have to get by crossing one of those bright lines and it's just a fantasy that you
bring to the table to make sense of all the impressions on your sort of sensory surface
or your holographic screen or your or your cell surface or so the receptors you are equipped with
to sense what's going on out there does that make sense yeah I know that Mike and and Chris you
may have a response to that but I just want to quickly respond to what Professor Firstain was
saying is so and this is to both of you how do you then prevent an existential crisis as you
start to study this so for example Carl before you and I were speaking and I told you about some
experiences I had where I've deeply felt what you're saying is being true that the self is a fantasy
and this oneness with all this world being generated in one's mind and I felt like that was
akin to a psychotic episode and it was extremely destabilizing and to be quite frank I'm still
recovering from that and so I'm unsure how any of you all do this work without constantly
being in a debilitating state of of existence well existence is the question here the and
it's an existential crisis which I'm inquiring about so how is it that you prevent yourself
from getting into that how could you say these words of well the self is is not objective the
self may be a fantasy quote unquote but not then be able to to not speak and and look around you
in awe and and horror at the same time okay so that's a psychological philosophical question
anyone who wants to take that up I think I think there is a good deal of existential
what uncertainty involved in
in doing what we're doing just par for the course right how do you get over it
I'm not sure when gets over it
I I think it's more
being comfortable with it
you know I I think you raise a really a really important point and it's I think this is in a
class of a number of really destabilizing ideas that one picks up as as one gets older and studies
things and there are many of these I remember as a as a child being completely freaked out by the
fact that I realized that you know we grow up and we become these adults these adults bear
some resemblance to the children but they're definitely not the same thing and so in some
sense you could sort of see it coming it's almost even even before you realize that you're gonna
you're gonna die biologically someday before long before that you realize that you're going to
undergo some transition that's going to you know turn you into a completely different sort of creature
which really you know has some continuity but maybe not you know certainly not you persisting
in the same way as you are now right so some kind of weird butterfly effect where you're just not
going to be around in that same way as you are now right so that's kind of the first thing you
realize as a child and then there's many others that sort of you know you learn about Boltzmann
brains and all the different you know humane arguments of but you know all this stuff that
you know I had to I did um I did a philosophy class with my son when he was little we were doing
homeschooling and so I kind of did this and I realized very quickly that I have to be very
careful with this stuff because if you write somebody who has the capacity to understand it
it's extremely destabilizing and I think that at this point for myself what you know I sort of go with
with Descartes a little bit in the following sense I'm not depressed by it in the sense that
whatever we discover is is a truer model of the self than we may have had it doesn't it I don't
I don't think there's any way in which it makes it less it makes us less less less valuable less
interesting less engaging all of that is still true it's just that now we've realized that a
different set of mechanisms can now implement that magic than we thought right so you may have had
sort you know some sort of idea that well there has to be some sort of different kind of unique
process that makes us permanent self and therefore I'm this individual and I have I have you know I
have true true beliefs and preferences and and I exist in some way I don't think you can ever
convince yourself that you that that isn't true and that you don't exist it's just that now you
find out that actually the way you get to be that is by these sets of mechanisms and they're very
interesting it's the sort of thing that Karl and Chris have been talking about so that's what gets
you to be this individual this kind of individual and it's kind of amazing that that works but that
doesn't to me that doesn't diminish all of the things all of the things that I thought were true
about what the individual actually is right your reality the reality of it the impermanence is there
but we knew that from the time you were a kid you knew that it wasn't going to be permanent so that
that part you know you sort of have to deal with from the start after that it's all you're learning
after that is just that you were really mistaken about what it takes to be that sort of creature
you thought maybe it had to be some magical whatever now you think that wow it's a set of
you know feedback loops and whatever else so that's surprising but that's okay we learn about you
know we learn about different underpinnings to things all the time so that's okay but I don't
I don't think any of it diminishes the the sort of just the incredible awe of of being
essentially and being that can think about these things yeah just reiterate that so I
I didn't in any way mean to demean our selfhood or your selfhood in particular
by calling it a fantasy I actually meant it and indeed have written about it in terms of something
quite fantastic so we've written papers called the fantastic organ the brain is a fantastic organ
just because it can produce these fantasies it's absolutely fantastic and of course they
you know in relation to our conversation the capacity to have these fantasies which
are have incredible exploratory power if you can attain them and you can maintain them
is the part of the complexity which allows us to cross these bright lines or these gaps
and become or cuts and become closer to you know to the kind of creatures that can
even entertain the notion of the hard problem just to so Mike I just love that meta-answer
we don't know what the answer will look like I'm going to tell Andy Clark about that he'll tell David
Charles um to come back to the point I so I didn't mean to demean that um and you know phrases that
I remember coming across and having to learn when I was a student sort of things like existential
angst and ontological security all of these things um you know rear their face if you are worried
about these things but the very fact that you are able to entertain the notion that you are not real
is quite remarkable um and I repeat is a is a gift of a fantastic sort it is the kind of fantasy
that very few um creatures have and sometimes even few people have so there are people who actually
will go out there to try and um experience that and to become and treasure the the gift of being
able to make sense of the world as me um by taking drugs or doing mindfulness um therapy
in order to actually get to a state where um so almost a Freudian oceanic state where
selfhood is dissolved so they can experience it and certainly if you've um taken um
sort of psychedelic drugs in sufficient quantity um you may have that kind of experience that's a
derealisation or dissociative experience which is the realisation that you know your construct your
fantasy of selfhood that is engaged and engaging continuously and for as long as you live um then
you know if you want to appreciate that then you have to experience that you know the alternative
hypothesis uh so you know experiencing derealisation or this is this depersonalisation
um is actually I think uh one really important step to self-understanding so I don't see it
as at all threatening nor diminishing it's it's just part of self-understanding which not everybody
gets the opportunity to develop I mean I mean in some you know in some sense the most destabilising
thing of all ought to be just the bare facts of developmental biology when you learn that you are
in fact not some sort of uh indivisible monadic whatever which I don't even I'm not even sure
what that would entail if you were but with the fact that we are all like all intelligences
are collective intelligences we are all made of parts and the idea that you used to be this quiescent
oocyte this little bag of chemical reactions that did very little and then very slowly sort of step
by step you turned into whatever you are now if that's not destabilising I don't know what is because
just knowing nothing knowing nothing else about evolution or I mean to me developmental biology
is sort of like the you know the queen of all of all the sciences because just that fact that you
go from from from chemistry and physics to mind in in nine months plus to however many years it takes
and that you are literally a collection of cells that you could see in pond water more or less
is just if you know you're a bunch of cells in the trench coat you know like the in the
cartoons like if that's not destabilising I don't know what I don't know what else is
so quickly just I know we have to get going and I'd like to wrap with a set of brief questions
but quickly Carl and perhaps well anyone who would like to answer what is it that separates those
who are depersonalized or go through certain psychotic episodes from what is it that separates
those who are fortunately like myself where it's abating and I'm able to function and I'm able to
have friends and so on versus those who go into a ward because obviously those issues can like you
mentioned it's a gift for some it's not a gift I felt like for myself it's I don't want that gift
I'll return that gift I wish there was a receipt with it but and I still actually feel like that
but for some obviously it's it's it's a horrible and persistent feeling so what is it that separates
them well I'll answer from the point of view of a psychiatrist with a with a commitment to
sort of a mechanistic or theoretical understanding I think it's the inability to resolve the the
uncertainty that is attends entertaining the dual hypothesis that I may exist or I may not exist as
me but as soon as you increase your hypothesis space you naturally induce an uncertainty an
ambivalence and a kind of ambiguity so it is exactly the same if you like
the we're talking about the same imperatives that we've been talking about all along which is to
sort of resolve uncertainty resolve ambiguity to make the most sense of things so if you've
entertained this hypothesis that you know you are not you and you are you and you can't fully resolve
that then you will find yourself in a state of chronic uncertainty that unfortunately does have
pathological consequences I'm not sure that being in a psych ward is necessary too pathological I mean
you know there are ways to live very nicely and constructively and fantastically in psych wards
and I've done that I spent two years in a therapeutic community but there will be other
sequelae of an inability to resolve uncertainty they're expressed clinically and physiologically in
terms of our static load and the like and chronic stress and the like which can be very unpleasant
and ultimately can have physical consequences and from the point of view you know the effects on
your body so the question now is why can't some people resolve that uncertainty I think it's then
a question of the the the biophysical processes that enable you to update your beliefs and
build good models of your world that again this is a very pragmatic answer from the point of view
of clinical from of a clinician probably the answers lie in the way that your brain has assembled
itself to coordinate and attend to various sources of evidence and the it looks at the mechanisms
that underwrite an ability to deploy attention rest very much upon neuromodulation neurotransmitters
of the kind you know you have heard about in the popular media and will have read about things like
dopamine serotonin and indeed oxytocin all the drugs that are either used or the targets of
psycholytics or psychedelics or psychomagnetics or drugs that are used to try and control some of
these feelings and some of these signs or symptoms you know specifically that attend
anxiety disorders and and depression so you know understanding the and this is not the
feedback loops that do self-organization in a developing embryo but the the same kinds of
mechanisms that do the feedback loops and self-organization of different structures within
the brain that can be construed as blankets within blankets or holographic screens within
holographic screens or cells within cells or complying the same principles but in the particular
instance of the brain doing this and understanding the neurochemistry and the biophysics of this
fundamental sense-making self-organization it turns out that these are certain that these
neurochemical messages are particularly important in resolving that kind of uncertainty and it may
be that you'll have either taken drugs or you have just grown up to not be able to deploy these
neurotransmitters properly again leading us to well how would you gain control of it well you
might want to mindfulness training meditation and the like just internal attention state training
basically to mentalize how you deploy your attention. Mike I know that you had a set of
questions that you're eager to ask both Carl and Chris did you already get to all of them?
That would be impossible but I get to many of them most of the important ones I learned a
massive amount today this has been just amazing but I will be pestering both of them with additional
questions in years to come. Great to end I actually I have a question that I didn't email you that
just occurred to me as you all were speaking it's something that professor Levin that you said
what are some aspects of your field maybe their theories or concepts that your peers are extremely
resistant to but you are not. Wow I don't know if we got time for all that that's a lot that's a
lot of stuff I mean the most basic there are many I mean the most basic thing is this notion of
profound symmetries between these fields you know this idea that you can basically import
concepts and strategies from cognitive neuroscience or behavioral science
and deploy them in other spaces developmental biology and metabolism that you can that it even
makes sense to talk about you know goals memories planning navigation all of these kinds of things
outside of what we're used to which is some you know rat and a maze or something like this
so that continuum this idea that it goes that something important goes all the way down or
maybe a long way down even if not all the way down that that that is in in a few circles that's
okay in most circles that that I deal with that's just a that's just complete you know a complete
heresy yeah there are many others but that's a that's kind of a basic one. Chris. Well I
think that Mike really nailed it with that answer and I would say yes it's it's not a popular idea that
physics and biology and psychology are actually all more or less the same science but I think that they are.
Professor Friston. Yeah well that would be my favorite heresy I'm just going to agree with Mike
and Chris you know that physics biology psychology they're all the same thing and I just wanted to
end by saying you know heresy I'm not so sure anymore I you know the number of times for example
I see Mike Levin cited in high-end philosophy journals and treatments suggest to me that in fact
it's going to be the minority in at least in a few years time that that don't subscribe to this more
holistic encompassing I think correct way of viewing you know some of the life sciences but
you're more generalized than the natural sciences so you know who is going to be the heretic in a
few years time I suspect it won't be any of us and I'll end with one that I see from particularly
Chris and Michael is it sounds like without using the word it sounds like what you all are doing
or trying to understand God or trying to come up with the model of God and the reason why I say that
is because with looking at a neuron and saying okay how can a neuron look around and have some
model and know that it's embedded in something higher that sounds to me like well if we applied
that to ourselves and continually do so we would reach something akin to God and then Chris with
the quantum babbling if one can think of it like that well what is babbling I know that maybe you
all don't want to use the word God but for me what I I have that many of my peers are extremely
against would be to philosophize about God or to explicate God or to take God seriously
as not an old man in the sky with a beard and so I I see you always doing something similar in him
I'm happy to be in your company I'm extremely lucky all science starts with an act of faith
with a very important act of faith which is that the world is in some way understandable
that we are not just a bubble in this you know random universe that just happens to you know as
as a total random string of coincidence looks like it's got laws and then in a tomorrow somewhere
you know while you sleep the whole thing falls apart and we go back to a random you know sort of
random distribution of events so we all there's no proof of any of it of any of that right we take
we have to take that on faith and that may be for a scientist that may be the most destabilizing
thing if you can't get yourself to believe that that the world isn't for some weird reason
understandable and amenable at least to some extent to our logic and probing then then you
can't do science you can't do any of the things that that we do so so being useful and and then
hopefully productive in in what we do starts with that act of faith that is just completely to my
knowledge it's it's it's it's an axiom it's not based on any evidence that you could possibly have
so so I do think that sort of underlies everything that we do just this idea that we can in fact
squeeze some understanding out of what's going on around this I'd also think you'd be surprised I
know that you said that it doesn't comport with the traditional definition of God but it depends
on what tradition and how far back one goes because there are mystics let's say christian
mystics and his muslim mystics or islamic mystics and so on yeah and obviously then the eastern end
is much more mystical so okay well thank you all so much for for thank you so much for coming out
to this and thank you I've learned a tremendous amount and I hope you all have too I I'm blessed
and thank you so much well thank you very much this was this was a very interesting conversation
and thank you very much for putting it together yeah absolutely this is this is great great great
idea thanks for having us on yeah just super pleased super pleased to have been part of it
yeah it went in directions that I didn't expect I didn't I don't even think I looked at my notes
my my notepad here I wrote some notes but they occurred to me in the moment okay thank you all
Mike I know you got to get going and so well thank you all all right thank you cheers yes thanks
gentlemen bye everyone bye bye take care the podcast is now finished if you'd like to support
conversations like this then do consider going to patreon.com slash c-u-r-t-j-a-i-m-u-n-g-a-l that is
Kurt Jaimungal its support from the patrons and from the sponsors that allow me to do this full
time every dollar helps tremendously thank you
