In the fifth episode of the original series of Star Trek, the show tries to pass off what
is clearly someone's dog with a horn taped to its head as an alien lifeform.
It's pretty hilarious to revisit, not just to see the actors make a heroic attempt to
stay in character while carrying this thing around, but also because this unicorn dog
doesn't seem distinct enough from life on Earth to make a believable alien.
This raises an interesting question, if there is life elsewhere in the universe, just how
alien will aliens look? It's a question many scientists and sci-fi authors have speculated on,
and is a fascinating rabbit hole to go down. So for this entry into the archive,
we'll explore relevant phenomena in evolution and physics to determine if extraterrestrials
are more likely to look like Earth animals or something far stranger.
For our first example, let's start by imagining an Earth-like planet. It's got a comfortable
amount of liquid water, a protective atmosphere, and plenty of carbon to form the building blocks
of organic compounds. If life emerges on such a world, what kinds of ecosystems will form?
One of the most important phenomena to consider when imagining extraterrestrial life is something
called convergent evolution, or the independent evolution of similar features across different
species despite being part of different evolutionary branches. It's why echidnas and hedgehogs look
almost identical, despite one being a marsupial and the other a placental mammal, or why hummingbirds
and hummingbird hawkmoths are often mistaken for each other despite their last common ancestor
predating the first land animal, or why crustaceans simply refuse to stop evolving into crabs.
A trend we'll discuss more in just a bit. With all these examples, it feels like nature is copying
its own homework and not changing things enough to get away with it. But evolution isn't a conscious
force, though we often think of it that way. It's the product of random genetic mutations
allowing certain members of a species to better survive and pass on their genes,
resulting in change over time. And a trait that benefits one species might also benefit another
in a different time or place if they face similar obstacles. One of the best examples of convergent
evolution is how sharks, a type of fish, dolphins, a type of marine mammal, and ichthyosaurs,
a type of extinct marine reptile, all evolve the same general body shape despite coming from
vastly different lineages. They all have streamlined bodies, tail flukes, and dorsal fins that are in
roughly the same place. This is particularly remarkable for dolphins and ichthyosaurs,
as neither of them started off with any fins at all. As is often the case, the main reason for this
seemingly miraculous convergence has to do with physics. Simulations have shown these body shapes
are the optimal way of moving through the dense medium of water. So natural selection encouraged
parallel attributes in each lineage, with the three animals essentially finding similar solutions to
the same problem. So on a habitable alien planet with liquid oceans, perhaps we'd find life forms
with the same general body plan swimming beneath the waves. A more extreme example of convergent
evolution is how crustaceans just won't stop evolving into crabs. I told you we'd get to it.
The number of times different lineages have independently converged on a crab-like body
plan is so high that there's even a word for it, carcinization, meaning to become crab-like.
Today, there is a staggering array of these crab mimics across the globe, from the tiny
strawberry hermit crab that feeds on seaweed, to the coconut crab that looks like it feeds
on your nightmares. I've made jokes about carcinization before on my channel, because there
is something oddly hilarious about the phenomenon. Are crabs just the pinnacle of evolution? What is
it about the crab body shape that makes so many unrelated crustaceans seemingly jealous enough
to copy their style? Well, once again, physics is our culprit. The long tales of crustaceans
like shrimp or lobsters can restrict the species' mobility. By contrast, the compact crab shape
is efficient and versatile, with few exposed parts that predators can get to without getting pinched.
So there's nothing mystical about why the crab body plan is so trendy, though it's fun to think
so. It's simply a good answer to the question of survival, and likely would be on other Earth-like
planets as well. But these are all examples of convergence in species that already have a lot
in common, like eyes, legs, and a skeletal structure. If microbial life were to emerge on an Earth-like
planet, would it really end up evolving these structures? In his book A Zoologist Guide to
the Galaxy, Cambridge zoologist Eric Kirschenbaum reflects on how certain features, like eyes and
limbs, might be more common across extraterrestrial life than we'd think. The eye might seem like
a unique feature aliens wouldn't necessarily converge upon, but on our planet, eyes are thought
to have evolved multiple times across different lineages. Eyes likely emerge from rudimentary
photoreceptive organs, which some life forms on Earth still possess, and then through natural
selection become more complex over millions of years. Yet across these variations, eyes always
serve the same essential navigational function, and on another planet, a creature's chance of
survival will also likely be higher if they can see where they're going. So if the first aliens we
encounter end up having eyes, it won't be that surprising. The same can be said for legs. On
Earth, arthropods and vertebrates evolve legs independently from one another after emerging
from the water. While the shape and number of legs might fluctuate, the mechanical advantages legs
offer are likely to be universal across Earth-like planets. Even more fundamentally, practically
all animal life on Earth exhibits cephalization, or the concentration of the mouth, sense organs,
and nerve ganglia on the front end of the organism, producing a head region. Cephalization is likely
the simple result of the advantage that having the part of the animal that goes forward be the one
fitted out with sense organs, and on most planets, it'll likely always be more important to know
where you are going than where you have been. Even plants convergently evolve. Trees, that is to say,
large photosynthetic life forms protected by a bark-like substance, have emerged many times
from many different plant lineages, and the evolution of fruits like apples happened independently
from fruits like tomatoes, with both of these shiny red fruits emerging to get the attention of
animals that disperse their seeds after chowing down. Likewise, seed dispersal by ants has evolved
more than 100 times, and is present across more than 11,000 plant species, making it one of the
most dramatic examples of convergent evolution in all biology. Yet convergent evolution doesn't
always produce organisms that look the same. Take, for example, the woodpecker, a kind of bird,
and the eye-eye, a kind of lemur. Both of these animals occupy the same basic role as predators
who feed on insects that hide within trees. Woodpeckers get to these insects using their beaks,
and eye-eyes get to these insects using their elongated, somewhat unsettling finger. In terms of
their lifestyle, these animals are quite similar, but you'd never mistake one for the other. This
means that even if an alien occupied a similar niche to an earth animal, there's not always
a guarantee they'd look alike. So, on our earth-like alien planet, we might find mobile
animal-like organisms with eyes and limbs moving around stationary, plant-like life forms,
occupying niches that are familiar to us. But they might still appear pretty distinct from earth life,
and certainly aren't likely to look like the Star Trek dog. Still a majestic creature, though.
But what about the possibility of aliens with intelligence comparable to ours?
Would they evolve a convergent form on an earth-like planet, or would they look entirely
different? The question of what intelligence even means could probably be its own video,
but for now, let's keep things simple. Returning to Star Trek, Spunk is certainly a
suspiciously humanoid extraterrestrial, with an appearance identical to humans,
with the exception of elf ears and funky eyebrows. This was more the result of budget
constraints than anything else, but it's a trend you see across a lot of science fiction.
And while it's easy to assume that an intelligent alien would look like we do,
that's not necessarily the case. Human hands might seem like a tool perfectly designed for
crafting technology, but our hands didn't originally evolve for manipulating objects.
The digits we used to work our smartphones began as a means to better grip onto the trees we used
to swing through. Aliens would probably need complex manipulatory appendages to create technology,
sure, but that could take any number of divergent forms. Likewise, our bipedal stature might seem
ideal, but ask any orthopedic doctor what they think of our spines, and you'll realize the
human body plan has some definite drawbacks extraterrestrials might want to sidestep.
Of course, some things seem likely to be universal across advanced life in the galaxy.
They'd probably need a large brain, right? Well, that might not even be the case,
as crows have relatively tiny brains, but are able to solve logical puzzles and use simple tools.
Their dense brain structure means they actually have a similar number of total neurons to that
of primates, and indicates that alien intellects really might not need to resemble the human form
after all, unless they also happen to evolve from a primate-like species that began walking upright.
With all the planets in the universe, intelligent humanoid aliens aren't impossible,
just not all that likely.
But it's time we address the fact that not all planets are the same. An Earth-like level of
gravity, for example, isn't a constant throughout the universe. Our planet's gravitational pull
is an invisible yet crucial influence across evolution on Earth, affecting the parameters
of animals' body plans, maximum size, and behavior. So on a planet where gravity is,
say, significantly weaker, evolution might take a very different path.
One of the best depictions of low-gravity alien life comes from Sam Vela's Boas' speculative
work of Planet Anu, which I've covered before on the channel. This evolutionary thought experiment
depicts extraterrestrials that take advantage of their planet's weak gravitational pull in a
variety of ways, with many having tall, spindly bodies that wouldn't be able to carry their weight
on our planet. Vela's Boas does imagine some convergence with Earth life would take place
on such a world, but there's also a variety of life forms our planet could never support.
On the other side of the spectrum, we have the possibility of alien life evolving on a world
with a stronger gravitational pull than our own. Christian Klein's speculative field guide to
alien life, the teeming universe, which I've also covered before on this channel,
gives us a look at a high-gravity world occupied by heavy, slow-moving life forms.
On the fictional exoplanet Borold, Klein imagines aliens that creep slowly across the ground like
giant terrestrial starfish, their bodies built to withstand over three times the gravitational
forces we experience here on Earth. And dissimilar gravity isn't the only variable that might make
life on exoplanets different from what we're familiar with. Remember how I mentioned alien life
might have eyes? Well, on a planet with an opaque atmosphere where energy comes not from a sun, but
say, geothermal vents, you might see a world of sightless creatures. On Earth, many deep-sea
creatures either have undeveloped eyes or no eyes at all. So, it makes sense that on an alien world
with very little light, there wouldn't be much point in having light-receptive organs,
and organisms might navigate through their sense of smell or through advanced echolocation.
And even if a planet's surface is inhospitable, maybe some organisms could thrive in a planet's
atmosphere. Returning to the teeming universe, there's a section of the book that outlines the
possibility of life emerging in the stratosphere of a planet somewhere between a terrestrial world
and a gas giant like Jupiter. The chapter depicts extraterrestrials that float on sacks of internal
hydrogen, steering themselves through the air on specialized fins. The possibility of life within
the atmosphere of a gas giant has been entertained by numerous scientists over the years, including
Carl Sagan. When considering evolution on planets different from our own, extraterrestrial life
becomes less and less familiar. And things could get weirder. Different planetary parameters
aren't the only factor when considering how alien extraterrestrial life might be.
So far, we've been assuming alien organisms would have similar fundamental chemistry to our own,
but that might not be the case. Crystalline life based on the silicon atom, instead of carbon
like life here on Earth, has been a topic of discussion among scientists since before the
20th century. Since silicon-based bonds are most stable at high temperatures, such life might
theoretically thrive on planets with high geothermal activity. Even if we visited such planets,
we might not recognize them as full of life at a glance, since such ecosystems might seem barren
to our eyes. Now, more recent studies have shown there are some potential chemical pitfalls to
silicon-based life, but it's difficult to disprove such a theoretical concept with any certainty.
Who knows, maybe somewhere out there in the universe, a silicon-based scientist is working on
an article about how carbon-based life just isn't possible. In fact, some Earth animals have been
observed using silicon in their structures. Diatoms are tiny phytoplankton that encase themselves
in a wall made of silicate. Now, these organisms aren't silicon-based,
but they do show the materials potential to be used in biological life.
And why stop at silicon? Scientists at Cornell University have modeled a theoretical,
oxygen-free cell based on methane that could be the basis for some really unusual life forms.
Protected by a cell membrane called an azotazome able to withstand extreme temperatures,
these hypothetical cells could potentially survive on exoplanets with weak atmospheres.
And going to the most extreme scenario, it's possible there are life forms that our limited
view of the universe hasn't prepared us for. When it comes to extraterrestrials,
we don't know what we don't know, and maybe our definition of life will prove too limited
in the infinite variations of the cosmos. So, where does all this leave us? Well,
the truth is, we can't definitively say what aliens do or do not look like without ever having
met any. We can make inferences based on evolution on Earth, but with the sample size of one,
it's difficult to say how much we really know about how life tends to emerge. With so many
planets, it's not a leap to imagine that some alien ecosystems would be somewhat similar to Earth
life, while others would be completely different. So, if you're a world builder or writer who's
worried their fictional creatures are too similar to Earth life, remember that nature itself isn't
always completely original. And if you're worried your fictional life is too out there,
remember that we are only just beginning to discover what's possible. Maybe one day we'll
find an ecosystem much like our own, or an ecosystem that stretches the definition of life.
Or maybe we'll just find a planet full of crabs.
As always, thanks for watching. If you enjoyed this entry, please lend your support by liking,
subscribing, and hitting the notification icon to stay up to date on all things curious.
See you in the next video.
