In the last few lectures, we've been looking at political and intellectual developments
in Britain. Now it's time to cross the Atlantic again and investigate conservatism at the
time of the American Civil War. Although we're studying two distinct societies, it's important
to remember that because of the common language, British and American observers could watch
what was happening in the other country and were constantly exchanging people and ideas
and influencing one another. In the American Civil War, Southern Conservatives, afraid
that the North would strangle the slave system, seceded from the Union after the election
of Abraham Lincoln in 1860. Northern Conservatives raised on Daniel Webster's eulogist to the
Indivisible Union, refused to acknowledge the legitimacy of secession, and declared
the South to be in rebellion. The war, in this sense, was the clash of two conservative
philosophies. Northern patrician writers like Francis Parkman and George Templeton Strong
gloried in the war at first, seeing it as an opportunity for martial virtue, in place
of what they thought of as the money-grubbing commercial life that was making America rich
but degraded. White Southerners' self-identification as chivalrous defenders of an endangered
and honorable way of life also led them to rejoice at the coming of war, at least to
begin with. Conservative aims soon had to give way to emergency wartime conditions, however,
and the political logic of the conflict became progressively more drastic. Both sides curtailed
the rights of critics, both used conscription and martial law, and at last Lincoln moved
to abolish slavery. Union victory brought the Old South to an end, but ex-Confederates
did everything they could to venerate the lost cause and to rebuild a society that looked
to the values of the past rather than to the values of the triumphant commercial north.
Well, the seceding Confederate states of 1860 and 1861 were even more reluctant than the
American revolutionaries of the 1770s to think of themselves as innovators. Southern leaders
have been anxious for 40 years ever since the Missouri Compromise of 1820 about the growing
economic power and population of the northern states. The Missouri Compromise had arranged
that each time a new slave state would enter the Union, so would a new free labor state
so that the numbers in the Senate would remain balanced, two senators from each state. After
the Compromise of 1850, a disparity began to develop in favor of the free labor north.
Southern intellectuals and southern politicians were terrified by the rise of immediate abolitionists,
people like Garrison and Frederick Douglass. In the 1850s, there was frontier fighting
in what was called Bleeding Kansas over whether the future of Kansas and Nebraska would be
free labor or slavery. John Brown's raid against Harpers Ferry in 1859 was even worse
from the Confederate point of view, the Southern point of view. At first, Brown hoped to spark
a slave rebellion, but it didn't happen. And at first, Northerners were lukewarm about
Brown's raid. But as Brown was put on trial and condemned to death and went to his execution
proudly, he gradually took on the lineaments of a martyr. And the northern veneration of
Brown in the last days of his life as he went to the gallows was taken as a sign by many
Southerners that the South would have to act. The election of Abraham Lincoln, the candidate
of the All-Northern Republican Party, led influential Southern leaders to believe that
there was no other way except secession to conserve their way of life. So it was a matter
of taking a drastic step for a conservative reason. These Southerners reiterated Calhoun's
theory of the state's sovereignty. The states existed before the Federal Union, therefore
they were sovereign entities, and they retained the right to dissociate themselves from the
Union if in their judgment the Union no longer served their interest. That was their claim
to the legitimacy of secession. They're making a legalistic argument based on precedent.
Confederates look resolutely backwards, and we can see that in much of what they did. Jefferson
Davis, when he became the President of the Confederate States of America, arranged for
his inauguration as Confederate President to take place beneath the statue of George Washington
on Washington's birthday in 1862. Powerful symbolic claims on the father of his country
to emphasize the continuity of the CSA with the past. The Confederate Constitution itself
was modeled almost exactly on the Constitution of the United States. Now some Southern conservatives
such as Alexander Stevens, who eventually was to become the Vice President of the Confederacy,
had grave misgivings about secession, but in the end he went along with his state. In
a letter to a northern friend in 1860, he wrote, revolutions are much easier started
than controlled, and the men who begin them, even for the best purposes and objects, seldom
end them. That was of course a highly prophetic statement. Similarly, Benjamin Perry of South
Carolina wrote that the secessionists were, quote, exalting over the destruction of the
best and wisest form of government ever vouched by God to man. Fools and wicked fools, they
know not what they do and may God forgive them. But both these men, despite their scruples,
their fear of secession, when it came to the point, opted for their home states and played
a prominent role in the life of the Confederacy. If it hoped to prevail in the war, the South
found that it could not be too loyal to its conservative founding principles. For example,
the Confederate army required overriding the rights of the states from which the various
soldiers came. If it was going to be an effective fighting force which would go to the different
places where it was needed, it couldn't be constrained by the demands and interests of
half a dozen different state governors. A centralized command was essential. The governor
of the state of Georgia, Joseph Brown, tried to keep control over all of Georgia's enlisted
soldiers, but that made effective deployment impossible. Economic direction was needed
in the South as well, so that more food supplies could be grown, which until that point had
been deficient, to stimulate more manufacturing, to make it possible for the South to develop
an effective munitions industry of its own. Conscriptions soon became necessary if enough
people were going to fight in the Confederate army. And as criticism of the Confederacy
grew, so did the need to suspend habeas corpus, sometimes to imprison people without trial
who were becoming so troublesome in everyday life. No wonder that by 1864, denunciations
of Jefferson Davis for tyranny were being heard from inside the Confederacy. It seemed
almost as though Davis was doing all the things which many secessionists had criticized
the Union for doing. On the northern side of this great division, Lincoln undertook
the most basic of all conservative tasks, that is, preserving the nation itself. Obviously
conservatism means different things at different times, but as an absolute minimum in political
terms, it's got to mean keeping the nation together.
Lincoln was a former Whig in the Henry Clay and Daniel Webster tradition. He was not
an abolitionist, and he certainly never imagined that he would be remembered as the great liberator.
No, he thought of himself at first as undertaking the conservative task of keeping the nation
together. He always insisted that he went to war solely to preserve the Union. He had
been in favor of the gradual abolition of slavery, but it wasn't one of the issues he
was particularly interested in. He was willing to see slavery persist for decades, perhaps
as far into the future as the year 1900, so long as it didn't continue to expand westward.
In Lincoln's view, the point was to contain slavery in the states of the Old South and
permit the rest of the United States to become a free labor area. Lincoln was also what we
would call a racist. He believed that free whites and free blacks were too different
to be able to live side by side and work together effectively. So he was a colonizationist. He
believed that once slavery, if slavery ended, the freed slaves would have to go to some
other place, a Liberia or perhaps to Panama.
Lincoln's great speeches, particularly the Gettysburg address and the second inaugural
address, argued that not only the Union, but also American democracy, were now themselves
parts of a venerable tradition. As we've seen throughout the course, Northern Federalists
and most of the Whigs had deplored democracy and they feared demagogues, hence their distaste
for Andrew Jackson. Lincoln, on the other hand, embraced democracy and he integrated
it into his idea of what was being preserved in the Union tradition. America had now been
a democracy for long enough that it itself had taken on traditional characteristics and
this, of course, is the central theme of the Gettysburg address, that four score and seven
years ago, our fathers created a nation dedicated to equality and that now men have died to
uphold the principles of the declaration, including the idea that all men have created
equal. Now that's itself an unusual thing for a Whig or a conservative to claim, democracy
and equality are becoming conservative values. A group of conservative Northern patricians,
all eloquent writers, welcomed the onset of the war, believing it would revive the martial
virtues that had been stained by commercial greed. They included Francis Parkman, the
author of The Oregon Trail and the great historian of America's Indian Wars. Charles
Elliot Norton, a Harvard professor of Romance languages. Frederick Law Olmsted, who we remember
principally as the designer of Central Park and one of the great landscape architects
of American history. Horace Bushnell, the great congregationalist minister and theologian.
George Templeton Strong, the Whig diarist of New York City, whose diaries from the 1850s
and 60s give us a wonderful day by day account of what it was like for a prosperous New Yorker
to be living in this rapidly changing city. Henry Bellows, a leading Unitarian minister
and Aristides Bronson, the Catholic convert and journalist, the editor of Bronson's Quarterly
Review. Now nearly all these men were the sons and grandsons of the old federalist elite.
They came from families that had prospered over the past 70 years but they were not themselves
involved in the daily grind for money and they looked down on men who were. All of them
were eloquent writers and outspoken on the war and the issues it raised. War, they hoped,
would break the power of the Southern slave power aristocrats. It's puzzling at first
to read their work because you gradually realize that they deplored slavery not because of
its effect on the slaves but because of its effect on the slave owners. Because they said
being a slave master gives these men too much power over other men. It makes them petty
tyrants and that's inimical to the role they should play as virtuous citizens in a republic.
They ought not to have untrammeled power over anybody. But although they disliked the slave
power, these northern conservative patricians were almost as revolted by the radical abolitionists.
They disliked them almost as much as the Southern leaders did. Francis Parkman wrote,
I would see every slave knocked on the head before I would see the union go to pieces
and would include in the sacrifice as many abolitionists as could be conveniently brought
together. In other words, the slaves, the slave owners and the abolitionists are all a problem.
Why? Because the abolitionists are moral absolutists and they threaten order and due process.
They're incendiary in their character.
Aristiv Bronson believed it was right in the 1850s to obey the fugitive slave law,
opposition to which it inflamed sectional feeling. The fugitive slave law said that,
if a slave escaped into the north, it was the duty of northern citizens to cooperate in the
recapture of that slave and his or her return to the south. Abolitionists had detested it and
had had campaigns against it. But Bronson's view was, the whole point of government is that it
imposes upon us rules that we might not want to obey. But so long as the rules are there,
we've got to obey them because that's what government depends on. It depends upon obedience.
He wrote, no civil government can exist. None is conceivable even where every individual is free
to disobey its orders when they do not happen to square with his private convictions of what is
the law of God. Bronson is a particularly interesting person. He'd grown up experimenting
with many of the different Protestant sects. But in the 1840s, he'd become a Roman Catholic
and then became one of America's leading Catholic apologists, a justifier of Catholicism.
As a Catholic, he believed that government was ordained by God and he often wrote,
there's government even in heaven. Also as a Catholic, he was very doubtful about the
reliability of private convictions. But in the context of the Civil War, the 50s and then the
Civil War, that made Bronson sympathetic to the idea that you must uphold the rules.
Now, this group of northern, protrition conservatives didn't shrink from the prospect
of a long and bloody war. And they certainly advocated absolute obedience to the commander-in-chief.
Two of them, Henry Bellows and George Templeton Strong, founded the Sanitary Commission. This was
a semi-official organization whose job was to help the government to run the army more efficiently,
help supply troops, run camps for them, run hospitals, and in every way increase efficiency
of getting supplies to the soldiers and keeping lines of communication open. Henry Bellows believed
that in circumstances like this of a great civil war, absolute obedience was the first necessary
principle. He wrote, to rally around the president without question or dispute is the first and most
sacred duty of loyal citizens. When he announces, not that the Constitution merely, but that the
national life and existence are in peril. Well, the reality of fighting and winning the war
soon compelled Lincoln to undertake increasingly radical steps. First of all, conscription,
ordering men from the many different northern states to join the army whether they wanted to or not.
That had the effect of enormously augmenting federal coercive power and it was controversial
right from the beginning. Lincoln also believed that he could take all appropriate war measures
when Congress was not in session. He said, as commander-in-chief of the army and navy in time
of war, I suppose I have a right to take any measure which may best subdue the enemy.
The suspension of habeas corpus led Lincoln's critics to accuse him of tyranny periodically
during the war, particularly at crises when the war was going particularly badly for the union side.
He imposed bans on freedom of the press and had troublemakers arrested inside the union.
Thirteen thousand five hundred arrests in all under martial law and many of these men were
imprisoned without jury trials. Obviously that's a great augmentation of the power of the federal
executive. It wasn't entirely clear that it was constitutionally justified. The most striking
act and the one for which Lincoln, the single act for which Lincoln is best remembered is
his liberation of the slaves. But in Lincoln's eyes it was a war measure rather than an act of
principle. He wouldn't have done it unless he thought it was going to help the union win the war
and he only did it when he thought that without liberating the slaves winning the war was going
to be impossible. He worked out the theory and worked out how to express it in 1862
and the emancipation proclamation went into effect on January the 1st of 1863.
But significantly slavery was only abolished in the areas beyond his reach. It was only
abolished in the confederate states and there was the only abolished slavery in places where
he didn't then have the power to abolish it. Slavery persisted in the border states that had
slavery but had not joined in the secession. Maryland, Delaware, Kentucky and Missouri were
all slave states which had not joined the confederacy and slavery persisted there.
The abolition of slavery throughout the union only became permanent by the 13th amendment
after the war had ended. But of course it was a vast and permanent significance for the American
future. Another different group of conservatives were the conservative northern Democrats who
doubted the justice of Lincoln's cause and in fact condemned his conduct of the war as itself
tyrannical. Some of them thought that secession was permissible. This is a point of view that's
easy for us to forget today that there were many people in the union who said well if those southern
states want to secede we should let them do so and many of them thought that in any case it would
be impossible to try to end secession by force. James Gordon Bennett expressed this point of
view clearly. He was the editor of the New York Herald one of the principal New York newspapers of
the time. As secession began his view was well the union must let those states go. He wrote
the people of the north will never give their consent to the raising of a standing army which
if successful in subjugating the southern states would very soon return against their own liberties.
Later on he switched to favor the war but even then he remained pro-slavery. This is another
point of view that's easy for us to forget that you could certainly believe in preserving the union
and believe in preserving slavery. Another interesting example of a northern Democrat
is that of the novelist Nathaniel Hawthorne the author of The Scarlet Letter and The House of Seven
Gables one of the very greatest of American novelists of the 19th century. In a later to an
English friend when the secession began Hawthorne's view also was well we should let the southern
states go. He wrote as to the south I never loved it we do not belong together. The union is unnatural
a scheme of man not an ordinance of God and as long as it continues no American of either section
will ever feel a genuine thrill of patriotism such as you Englishmen feel at every breath you draw.
He said he could fully understand the southerners motives. Love of one's immediate home not of some
abstract idea of the union was likely to be a much more powerful emotion and in another passage
from his writing at the time he sounds very much like Edmund Burke who also eulogized the small
scale in the immediate loyalty. Hawthorne writes it is a strange thing in human life
that the greatest errors both of men and women often spring from their sweetest and most generous
qualities and so undoubtedly thousands of warm hearted sympathetic and impulsive persons have
joined the rebels not from any real zeal for the cause but because between two conflicting loyalties
they chose that which necessarily lay nearest the heart in the vast extent of our country
too vast by far to be taken into one small human heart we inevitably limit we inevitably limit
to our own state or at furthest to our own section that sentiment of physical love for the soil
which renders an Englishman for example so intensely sensitive to the dignity and well-being
of his little island so you see in both those quotations Hawthorne is summoning up the image
of England as a place which is small enough and organically complete enough that it can it can
be loved by its own people and Hawthorne says by contrast this America is simply too big it's the
cessation ought to be permitted to happen he was appalled by the hatred of the enemy which
was becoming widespread in the north another very interesting northern democrat was Clement
Volandigum who portrayed himself as a martyr to the power of the tyrant Abraham Lincoln
Volandigum was an Ohio congressman and a constitutional strict constructionist who
said that Lincoln was exceeding his constitutional powers in the crisis of 1860 to 61 after Lincoln
had been elected and the southern states began to secede he favored conciliation of the
secessionists not war he was arrested in the middle of the night one day in 1863
for speeches against the conduct of the war and in a letter from prison to his constituents
Volandigum wrote this i'm here in a military Bastille for no other offense than my political
opinions and the defense of them and of the rights of the people and of your constitutional liberties
i am a democrat for constitution for law for union for liberty this is my only crime for no
disobedience to the constitution for no violation of the law for no words sign or gesture of sympathy
with men of the south i am here today in bonds Volandigum was powerful at summing up the the
assertion that Lincoln was becoming a tyrant and that he's exceeded his rightful bounds
the north won the civil war because it was better organized it had a larger population
it was more heavily industrialized it had more railroads which could quickly ship
armies and supplies from one place to the next and in the end it had better leadership
especially the military leadership of general grant and general Sherman when the war had ended
one of the things that southern conservatives had to do was explain their defeat how could they
how was it hadn't come about that they had lost and they created an elaborate code the lost cause
a rhetoric and a symbolism that mixed conservative and religious imagery in very very ingenious ways
they compare their suffering and defeat to that of Jesus Christ now a wonderful book has been written
on this subject by an historian called Charles Reagan Wilson the book is called baptized in blood
and he describes the way in which southerners after the civil war started to compare their
fortunes with the fortune of Jesus himself they said Jesus's earthly mission ended in failure
and death of the crucifixion and so did ours our our our failed attempt to preserve our way of life
is sanctified in the way that the life of Jesus was memorials to confederate dead and to confederate
leaders like Stonewall Jackson and Robert E. Lee very quickly took on strong religious overtones
their nostalgic evocations of the old south drained it of conflict and social tension
and ironically the unanimity that the south could never actually get during the war the southern
has finally achieved only after the war by a very very selective form of memory and by glorification
of those who suffered and died attributing to them the kinds of qualities which Jesus himself
had had and the advocates of the lost cause established a backward looking and hierarchical
society that maintained a high degree of repression against african americans think about the most
famous example of that the Ku Klux Klan to us it evokes racial terrorism but to its founders it
evoked the romantic scottish clans which had been popularized by the novels of walter scott
i mentioned in an earlier lecture that mark twain said that walter scott was one of the causes of
the american civil war this was the kind of thing he had in mind that southern gentlemen thought of
themselves as being comparable to these romantic scottish clansmen and so then the use of the
clan is no accident the clan was founded in tennessee in 1866 and it was modeled on the idea
on the memory of the scott's clansmen after the battle of collodon moore and the failure of the
1745 uprising of bonnie prince charlie from its perpetrators point of view from the clansmen's
point of view it was a perfect example of christian chivalry the burning cross represented
romantic christian militancy on behalf of a threatened civilization but of course we see it
today as the freedman saw it then as an aspect of racial terrorism
henry gradey and other advocates of the new south who just in to some extent the opposite of the
idea of the lost cause were looking for ways to reconcile the old south the memory of the old
south with practical new ways of moving forward after the war and henry gradey in particular
offered renovation but with a patina of tradition gradey was the editor of the atlanta constitution
the most important newspaper in the 1870s and 80s he'd been just too young to fight in the war
itself and and grieved at having missed the opportunity to lay down his own life for the
confederacy but once the war had ended he was eager to modernize the south and bring it into
the mainstream of american life but without surrendering southern distinctiveness or the
new southern mythology which was so powerful gradey became a popular speaker in the north
to business groups urging them to end northern meddling of the kind of which was characteristic
of reconstruction he even managed to persuade some northerners to join in the sentimental
myth making and one of the stories that gradey loved to tell was of his own father dying at the
siege of petersburg attended by the family's faithful old slave this idea that what the slaves
really wanted was to be loyal to their old masters and gradey was very effective at using that story
to maximum emotional effect by 1900 union and confederate veterans as they moved into their
60s and 70s were beginning to have joint reunions on the fields where they had fought and to look
back on the war uh sentimentally and nostalgically as a collective exercise in in a manly strengthened
spirit well to sum up the civil war came about not because powerful men wanted to change the world
they knew but because they wanted not to by 1861 conservative southerners saw a secession
as the indispensable step to conserving their world and they tried to minimize the revolutionary
character of their conduct eager to retain control of their section they fought against the northern
invaders and against the popular ferment of the south's poor whites in the hope of maintaining
the familiar old world of slavery when they failed on the battlefield they tried to compensate for
defeat by creating a backward-looking unequal hierarchical society while comparing their
experience to christ's suffering and death lincoln conversely reacted to secession by
asserting the indivisibility of the union and doing everything he could to sacralize it
by an artful invocation of the founders and of the declaration of independence
as preserver of the nation at a time of crisis when it might well have splintered
he can certainly be thought of as a conservative yet he was clearly conservative in a different way
from his wigan federalist predecessors unlike them he regarded democracy not as a vulgar threat to
the virtuous republic that had been the federalist attitude but rather as a time-honored characteristic
of american life he honored the fallen men of gettysburg for vindicating what was by then a
tradition of american democracy and he linked their sacrifice also to the defense of equality
