Winston Churchill guided Britain in alliance with the United States and the Soviet Union
to victory in World War II, but was at once repudiated by the electorate as the war came
to an end. To much of Britain he represented the wrong kind of conservatism, backward looking
elitist, dedicated to class distinctions and to the Empire. His successor as Prime Minister,
the Labour leader Clement Attlee, nationalised the major parts of the British economy and
began to dissolve the Empire. Churchill supervised the recovery of the Conservative Party from
this debacle and returned it to power in 1951. He and his successors, Anthony Eden, Harold
Macmillan and Alec Douglas Hume, found however that they would not be able to reverse most
of the Attlee revolution of the foregoing years. They too accepted the new National
Health Service, the nationalised higher educational system and the nationalised coal, steel, railways
and shipbuilding industries. Eden's inability to complete the Suez campaign in the face
of President Eisenhower's disapproval in 1956 demonstrated once and for all that Britain
was no longer a world power. Despite these chastening encounters with decline however,
the Conservatives continued to believe in capitalism and to deplore escalating rates
of taxation, over mighty trade unions and the continued erosion of Britain's competitive
position in the world. Their fortunes appeared to be at a low ebb in 1965 when they had just
lost another election and when the 91 year old Churchill died.
Well Churchill led a coalition wartime government as I mentioned in the previous lecture but
then at the end of the war he lost the general election of 1945 to the Labour Party leader
Clement Attlee. Churchill had always been a warrior and was always fascinated by every
aspect of war itself. So during the wartime years 1940 to 1945 while he was Prime Minister
he dedicated himself almost entirely to questions of foreign policy and the actual conduct of
the war. He irked his generals by constantly intervening in their decision making. This
was completely dissimilar to President Franklin Roosevelt who wasn't particularly interested
in military affairs and who left it to the Joint Chiefs of Staff and to trusted generals
like George Marshall and Dwight Eisenhower. It's possible to get a sense of what wartime
government in Britain must have been like because it's now possible to visit the cabinet
war rooms which are underneath Whitehall in the very centre of London where the government
acts. Some reinforced shelters the cabinet war rooms were established and Churchill and
the cabinet spent a lot of time down there. They're very very low. They've got concrete
roofs just about six feet off the floor so you almost have to hunch to go in there. They're
claustrophobic. Very very spartan conditions in which the wartime government was being
run and everybody smoked in those days including Churchill himself with his cigars. It must
have been an appallingly smoky and constrained atmosphere confined. Churchill's finest hour
came during the Battle of Britain in the late summer and fall of 1940 and then during the
Battle of the Atlantic in 1941 as convoys from Canada and the United States desperately
tried to cross the Atlantic in the face of very very heavy German submarine attacks.
Once the United States entered the war after December of 1941 Churchill's role and the
role of Britain overall dwindled steadily. Britain remained a vital part of the anti-Hitler
alliance but nevertheless with the passage of each successive month the American contribution
to the war effort grew greater. Churchill himself from the very moment he came to Ten
Downing Street worked tirelessly to involve the United States because he recognized as
had Chamberlain and Halifax that Britain alone would be unable to defeat Nazi Germany. The
great surprise of 1940 was just how powerful Hitler really was. If you'd asked anyone in
1939 who are the world's great powers, France would certainly have been on the list yet
when it came to the point France was defeated in six weeks. The Germans had been unable
to conquer France in four years in the First World War and now suddenly in the matter of
weeks it was swept away. That was the jarring surprise of the early years of the war.
One of Churchill's early successes in trying to involve the Americans was persuading President
Roosevelt to sign the Atlantic Charter. This was in August 1941, three months before Pearl
Harbor. The Atlantic Charter was a pledge that the Americans would cooperate in the
defeat of Nazism and in the creation of post-war collective security arrangements. Roosevelt
also agreed to Churchill's request for help by establishing the Lend-Lease system. Essentially
this was a policy whereby the Americans sent war materials to Britain even when it couldn't
afford to pay for them and the destroyers for bases deal by which the Royal Navy was
sent some old American destroyers for convoy patrol in exchange for giving the right of
the American Navy to use bases in the British colonies in the Caribbean. But the need for
American aid remained acute. Churchill was determined if possible to preserve the British
Empire but his allies in the war, Roosevelt in America and Stalin in the Soviet Union,
were equally determined not to let him. And even after the Americans had joined the war
Churchill had to suffer some terrible disappointments. Perhaps the most jarring of all coming just
after Pearl Harbor was the sinking of two British battleships in the Far East in quick
succession and then the fall of Singapore despite the fact that it had a large British
garrison which more than outnumbered the attacking Japanese force. It was a dismaying sense to
Churchill that Britain was losing the warrior virtues. Singapore ought not to have capitulated
so cheaply. This was in the stage immediately after Pearl Harbor when the Japanese briefly
seemed absolutely invincible. Churchill left the running of domestic affairs inside Britain
mainly to his deputy prime minister Clemens Attlee. Attlee had also enjoyed a privileged
upbringing like Churchill, was an idealistic socialist and was a wounded veteran of World
War I. Like Churchill and like many members of the governments of those times he was a
wounded World War I veteran. He'd become a professor at the London School of Economics
but then moved directly into politics. Churchill constantly made deprecating comments about
Clemens Attlee. He described him as a sheep in sheep's clothing. One time he says an empty
car drew up and Clemens Attlee climbed out. When somebody said that Attlee was a modest man,
Churchill retorted he's a modest man with a great deal to be modest about. One of the important
reports during the war was the Beverage Report written by an influential liberal politician,
Lord Beverage. An outlining plans for a comprehensive welfare state to be introduced when the war
was ended. And the Beverage Report created almost millennial hopes among Britons, the prospect
of better times to come. The Great Depression in Britain had been very long and bitter,
starting much earlier in Britain than in America from the early 20s in many industries,
particularly bad in the north of England in the coal mining and shipbuilding in iron and steel
districts and persisting right through the 1930s. There was a profound feeling in Britain of
justice deferred that sooner or later better times must come and that wartime sacrifices and
particularly the fact that many parts of industrial Britain were very heavily bombed by the German
Air Force made further denial or further delay intolerable. There was intense fear in Britain
of the return of high rates of unemployment and the return of what were looked at by laboring
people as uncaring conservative governments when the war ended. And the armed forces became a kind
of vast training ground in socialist ideas. My own father who was in the Royal Air Force recalls that
during the long, long waiting periods which always attend life in the military services,
the soldiers and the airmen were constantly exchanging ideas and learning about socialism
sometimes in a highly idealistic way and were resenting being pushed around by officers from
the upper social classes. As soon as the war against Hitler ended, the wartime coalition
government broke up and in the ensuing election, Attlee defeated Churchill. Churchill campaigned
in that election 1945 on preserving the empire and he declared that the prospective welfare state
outlined in the Beverage Report was simply too expensive and would lead to a kind of repressive
socialist centralization. Although it's interesting to note that even the conservative
manifesto did promise a national health service, everybody in British political life had been
shocked by the low levels of general health disclosed by the military draft. Huge numbers
of people in Britain in those days never went to a doctor at any time in their lives. Tens of
thousands had simple correctable medical problems which had never been corrected for lack of a visit
either to a doctor or an optometrist or a dentist. Well, Attlee's victory in 1945 gave the Labour
Party its first overall parliamentary majority and between 1945 and 1950 Labour set about
nationalizing the what it called the commanding heights of the economy, transport, the railroads,
medicine, the iron and steel industry, the coal industry, higher education or many other major
industries despite conservative protests about the cost of nationalization and about the viability
of doing so. These years immediately following the Second World War extremely grim in Britain.
Food rationing remained very high not just during the fighting years but far through the late 40s
and into the early 1950s. Tax rates were very high and there was increasingly very
restrained opportunities for individual initiative. The winter of 1947 was very, very severe and
Britain's who lived then still remember the feeling of misery and austerity which went with it.
The Conservatives Industrial Charter was written in 1947 by an up and coming Conservative parliamentarian
called R.A. Butler and it's said among other things this is the Conservative response to nationalization.
Man cannot live by economics alone. We are completely opposed to the imposition of a rigid
straight jacket of doctrinaire political theory either upon the individual regardless of his
individuality or upon the nation regardless of the economic facts of the moment.
Our abiding objective is to free industry from unnecessary controls and restrictions.
We wish to substitute for the present paralysis in which we are experiencing the worst of all
worlds a system of free enterprise which is on terms with authority and which reconciles the
need for central direction with the encouragement of individual effort. In other words let's free
up the economy and get back to a system of free enterprise which the socialists are now trying to
prevent. It added that the socialists the Labour Party had completely failed to come to terms with
human nature. Quoting again now a man asks himself what is the good of working harder if he is not
to receive a just reward for his extra toil or ingenuity. Here the socialists have carried their
passion for equality to lengths which have stifled man's will to do the best of which he is capable.
We are determined to restore by all reasonable means that great stimulus to personal endeavour
fair incentive. It's always been central to conservative the conservative philosophy that
people differ their interests different differ and their willingness to work hard differ and
therefore the system ought to reflect those those differences. This is all also the period
of the beginning of the breakup of the British Empire. Britain gave independence to India and
Israel much to Churchill's dismay in both cases. Lord Louis Mountbatten the Queen's cousin was sent
as the last viceroy to India. Although he was royal he was a dabbler in radical ideas. Now in the
very very volatile politics of pre-independence India he openly favoured Nehru and the Congress
party. This is the Hindu majority. He antagonised Jinnah the leader of the big Muslim minority
and made the creation of a separate Pakistan almost inevitable. The very short time span set
by the Labour government also made partition inevitable and that in turn set off the hideous
massacres of Hindus and Muslims as each population tried to cross over to the area in which their
religious group would be in a majority. Churchill meanwhile as leader of the opposition
dedicated himself to shoring up the Anglo-American alliance against the Soviet threat. As a guest
of President Truman at Fulton, Missouri he coined one of the famous phrases of the era and in a
well remembered speech he said, from shtetin in the Baltic to triest in the Adriatic an iron curtain
has descended across Europe. That was the first use of the term iron curtain but it came to symbolise
the division across Europe. Very very quickly after the end of hostilities the British and the
Americans had both had a feeling of betrayal by the Soviet Union which refused to demilitarise
Poland and Eastern Germany and Austria and Hungary the places it had liberated from the Nazi armies
and instead had imposed its own puppet regimes there. Churchill added that the experience of the
1930s had showed the falsehood of appeasement. Quote, I am convinced that there is nothing they,
the Soviets, admire so much as strength and there is nothing for which they have less respect
than for weakness especially military weakness. When they returned to power in 1951 the Conservatives
had to decide how to react to these profound changes in British life and equally profound
changes in Britain's place in the world. The Attlee government was re-elected in 1950 but
with a shrunken majority and deep splits within the Labour Party especially over why economic
recovery was so slow over the fact that there was continued rationing and over whether the welfare
state was affordable. In the end a division within the Labour Party defeated the government and forced
a 1951 election. The rejuvenated Conservative Party won having taken in most of the remaining old
Liberals. The Liberal Party had struggled on from the 1920s into the late 40s but by now it was
almost extinct as a viable political force. Here's one of Churchill's election speeches in 1951.
The British race have always abhorred arbitrary and absolute government in every form. The socialist
conception of the all-powerful state entering into the smallest detail of the life and conduct of the
individual and claiming to plan and shape his work and its rewards is odious and repellent to every
friend of freedom. These absolute powers would make the group of politicians who obtained a majority
of seats in parliament the masters not the servants of the people and centralise all government in
Whitehall. Similarly Churchill's colleague Harold McMillan recognised that Labour was campaigning
against a return to the bad old days of high unemployment. McMillan said the socialists have
fought the election very astutely not on socialism but on fear. Fear of unemployment, fear of reduced
wages, fear of reduced social benefits, fear of war. These four fears have been brilliantly if
unscrupulously exploited. If before the next election none of these fears has proved reasonable
we may be able to force the opposition to fight on socialism then we can win. In other words,
McMillan's perception is most of the British people don't actually like socialism they simply
voted for it in 1945 as a way of not returning to the bad old days of prolonged depression.
Well Churchill's government in 51 was the first purely conservative government since Stanley Baldwin
back in the 1920s 24 to 9 because during the 1930s and 40s the conditions of depression and war
there had been a succession of coalition governments. There had been vast changes in
British life and in Britain's position in the world in the meantime. What did conservatism mean
now? In particular should the Conservative party back in office roll back the transformations of
the last few years or should it try to live with them and domesticate them? Well the Conservatives
very quickly discovered that the nationalised health and the nationalised higher education
systems were too popular to discard and from that time right up to the present both parties have
always accepted that the national health service is a permanent part of British life.
But the difference between them was this in general Labour veered the welfare state as
part of a design to achieve overall equality equality of condition among the citizens.
The Conservatives by contrast even those who accepted the welfare state regarded it as a safety net
to prevent anyone from falling into absolute destitution and their their interest was in
restoring incentives and opportunities. Whether to denationalise the major industries became a
long-running source of dispute inside the Conservative party. The Conservatives understood
that denationalising the coal industry for example would effectively end it in many areas
because it was no longer profitable but ending it would in turn create universal unemployment
in many coal mining towns and the memory of the 1920s and 30s made many Conservatives dread
high unemployment which that would certainly entail. That memory along with knowledge of the
power of the coal miners trade unions discouraged denationalisation and in practice the Conservatives
who were in power continuously for the next 13 years between 1951 and 64 presided over a mixed
economy and tried to keep their ideological concerns to a minimum domesticating the nationalised
industries but not reversing the process. What was left of the Empire was clearly also in trouble
anti-colonial uprisings in Kenya and Malaya were costly and difficult to suppress.
Eventually the British were able to put down rebellions in both places
but it was costly and difficult and it further prompted the possibility that Britain now had
to abandon its imperial role completely. Churchill himself finally retired from the
premiership aged 80 in 1955 he'd had a stroke in 1953 which had been carefully concealed from the
press and the public something that's unimaginable today and cabinet meetings meanwhile had become
long wandering monologues by Churchill who'd always been garrulously talkative and now apparently
monopolised all the cabinet's time so he celebrated his 80th birthday late in 1954
and then retired as Prime Minister early in the next year. His protege and successor Anthony Eden
miscalculated the American reaction to the Suez adventure of 1956 and was also forced to resign.
Now the story of Anthony Eden is a bitter one he'd been an opponent of appeasing Hitler in the
late 1930s just like Churchill and as a politician in the 40s and 50s that was the very best badge
you could have because the anti-appeasement people had been proved to be right. He was a loyal
subordinate to Churchill for two decades but he lacked Churchill's flair and ease of leadership
he wasn't the same kind of charismatic man. Britain had been a principal owner of the Suez
Canal ever since disraeli bought the cadaives shares back in the 1870s but once India was independent
Britain began to reduce the strength of its garrisons along the routeways to India
since Britain no longer had a compelling military motive to get to India regularly
the Mediterranean and the Red Sea and Suez itself seemed relatively less important. General Nasser
the Egyptian nationalist leader reacted to this drawdown of military strength by nationalising
the canal seizing it unilaterally. Britain and France then conspired with Israel to recapture
the canal and they didn't first get the approval of the American leader President Eisenhower.
As a purely military venture the invasion was a great success but Eisenhower was furious that
the British had launched this invasion partly because he thought he ought to have been consulted
as a member of NATO and partly also because he was afraid that the invasion would provoke
wider unrest in the Middle East. Eisenhower was chiefly interested in stabilising the Cold War
and in getting as many third world client states as he could particularly in the oil
rich Middle East. He realised that Eisenhower realised he couldn't afford to appear to be
pro imperialist to Middle Eastern states so he threatened to withdraw American support
for the pound sterling in other words to induce a financial crisis in Britain.
That threat forced Anthony Eden the British Prime Minister to bring the venture to a halt
then to undertake an ignominious withdrawal. Eden was sick as well as being bitterly disappointed.
The conservative party was in disarray about what to do next and Eden himself resigned very shortly
after Suez in January 1957. At this point the Queen advised by senior conservative lords asked
Harold Macmillan to take over. Harold Macmillan succeeded to the premiership in 1957 and helped
the conservatives to repair the damage created by the Suez crisis.
Like Winston Churchill Macmillan had a British father and an American mother. His father was the
head of Macmillan Publishing which is a company still thriving right up to the present. As with
Churchill it had seemed very unlikely that he would rise to party leadership. Once again he'd
been severely wounded in World War I in the trench fighting. He walked with a shuffle and he couldn't
shake hands firmly. Severe disadvantages for a professional politician. But like Churchill and
like Anthony Eden he'd been an anti-Apesa in the 1930s. During the Great Depression he'd been
horrified by the high levels of unemployment and hopelessness in Britain and had written
an influential book during the 1930s called The Middle Way accepting many of the ideas of
John Maynard Keynes the influential economist particularly about the role of government
in stimulating recovery from depression conditions. Macmillan had been regarded as a
cranky left of center conservative by the mainstream of the party. He also had a very unhappy personal
life. He was looked down on by the conservative aristocrats because he came from a business
family and the aristocracy even in the 20th century regarded businessmen as distinctly beneath them.
He married Dorothy Cavendish the daughter of the Duke of Devonshire and that ought to have helped
a lot giving him a leg up into aristocratic circles. But then she fell in love with Robert
Boothby one of Churchill's disreputable friends another conservative MP apparently a man of
immense personal charm but also immense personal unscrupulousness. So Macmillan was a cuckold
unhappy in his personal life. His youngest daughter was almost certainly fathered by Boothby.
Boothby incidentally was one of the people who came into office with Churchill that caused a lot
of raised eyebrows among the Chamberlain loyalists in 1940. Still Macmillan's great break came during
the Second World War because he became a key figure in Anglo-American relations. He had the
job of co of establishing close links with the American Expeditionary Force in North Africa
and that meant that he got to know well and to work easily with Eisenhower. And of course by the 1950s
Eisenhower had risen from the position of general to American president. So Macmillan was the perfect
person to patch things up with the Americans after the Suez Crisis. Macmillan presided over
the final decolonization of Africa by the British Empire. He made a famous speech to the South
African Parliament in which he said a wind of change is blowing through Africa. Britain he said
would now help all its remaining colonies to achieve independence and become fledgling
democracies. He won re-election in 1959 with the slogan you've never had it so good. By then
Britain's post-war austerities were finally lifting and Britain also was beginning to
join in the great consumer and economic boom of the post-war western democracies.
And Butler's remark in 1947 was proving true. The Conservatives could appeal against the memory of
socialist austerity in the late 40s now that standards of living were rising. This was the
third Conservative victory in succession. But Macmillan's hopes of taking Britain into the
common market what's now called the European Union failed. The great question that the Conservatives
had to ask or that everyone in Britain had to ask after 1950 was where does our future lie? Does it
lie with the Empire? By 1960 the answer was clearly no. Does it lie with the special Anglo-American
relationship? Macmillan hoped that the answer to that one was yes. He liked the idea of playing
elder statesmen to the young American President John F. Kennedy. Although when it came to the point
in the Cuba Missile Crisis, Kennedy didn't even consult him. Those were two choices. The third
choice was that Britain's destiny now lay with a united Europe. Macmillan believed that it should.
The European Coal and Steel community had begun in the early 1950s when the Marshall Plan was
beginning to work to aid recovery of all the industrial democracies and to reduce the danger
that the European nations would ever again fight against each other.
Macmillan wanted to take Britain into the Union but General de Gaulle, the French leader, vetoed
British entry. He remembered with deep resentment his treatment by Britain as leader of the free
French forces in World War II and he was determined not to submit to Anglo-Saxon domination.
Well the Profumo Affair of 1963 and an election loss to labor in 1964 along with the death of
Churchill in 1965 cast heavy shadows over conservatives prospects. First of all the
Profumo Affair. He was a junior minister in the conservative war office who was revealed to have
had an affair with a cool girl named Christine Keeler but at the same time it was disclosed that
she was also sleeping with a Russian military attaché, a terrible potential security breach.
The investigation in the Profumo Affair showed no military secrets had been lost but the moral
taint on the conservative government was very severe indeed. Macmillan retired in 1963 and was
replaced as conservative leader by Alec Douglas Hume. Now that was a surprising choice because Hume
was in the house of sitting in the House of Lords but by the 1960s there was a renewed questioning
of the role of the hereditary peerage and the House of Lords which is an issue we've seen
periodically through the course. One labor politician Anthony Wedgwood-Benn who belonged to
the radical left didn't want to become a lord and he introduced legislation into parliament to make
the inheritance of titles voluntary rather than compulsory. His father was the Viscount
Stansgate and he would have become the second Viscount but he didn't want to, he didn't believe
in aristocracy and he wanted to stay in the commons. The legislation passed so he renounced his title
and so did Lord Halsham who also hoped to become the new conservative leader and so did Alec Douglas
Hume, took advantage of it and renounced his title so that he could return to the House of Commons
and become conservative leader and prime minister. He had been the 14th Earl Hume.
When the Labour Party leader Harold Wilson jibed that Tory progress had come to a halt with the
selection as leader of the 14th Earl Hume, Hume answered that his opponent was the 14th Mr Wilson
but the very fact he had to make a joke of this kind showed that by now a noble title was a
positive liability where two centuries earlier it would have been an overwhelming advantage.
In any case he was a lackluster leader and lost the election of 1964.
Churchill's death in 1965 prompted a wave of national and international tributes
but could not disguise the fact that the Conservative Party was in disarray. Churchill himself
hadn't been a Conservative prime minister until the age of 76. He hadn't been a conservative for
much of his active political life and he hadn't been the favourite son of the mainstream of the
party through the 1930s. Nevertheless he is in retrospect the greatest British Conservative of
the 20th century.
