2 events of 1917 changed the world. The first was American entry into World War I and the
second was the Russian Revolution. Anglo-American conservatives already afraid of socialism
were horrified by the militant communism of Lenin's Bolsheviks and anti-communism gradually
became the defining feature of American conservatism. Massive Soviet gains in Europe during World
War II, along with the success of the Chinese Revolution in 1949, suddenly made communism
appear like a great red tide that might flood across the rest of the world. To make matters
worse, the Truman administration in the late 1940s discovered, thanks to revelations
by Whittaker Chambers and others, that communist sympathizers in America had passed secrets
including nuclear secrets to the Soviets during the war, hastening their ability to create
their own nuclear weapons. This was the basis of the long Cold War standoff and the circumstances
that gave rise to McCarthyism inside America. McCarthyism was a populist form of conservatism
which demanded loyalty oaths, a high level of consensus and a suspicion of unconventional
ideas. Liberal anti-communists said that McCarthyism was the evil twin of communism itself. Conservatives
retorted that McCarthy, though he might be a blunt instrument, nevertheless knew where
America's greatest peril lay and knew that America was fighting for its life against
a ruthless foe.
Well, the Soviet Union rose to world power status during the Second World War. Between
1917 and 1939, the first two decades of the Soviet experiment, Lenin and then Stalin consolidated
their power inside the Soviet Union, annihilated all opposition and undertook a crash course
in industrialization. And right from the beginning, it was a source of severe anxiety
to the Western powers. The Soviet Union embarrassed the Western powers in World War One by publishing
all the secret treatise which the Russian, the Tsarist government had entered into in
the foregoing decades. Once the First World War had ended, 13,000 American troops fought
against the Bolsheviks in the Russian Civil Wars between 1918 and 1920. This was the campaign
whose British side had been actively promoted by Winston Churchill, but which was unsuccessful.
They fought on behalf of an alliance of the old Tsarists, which was itself an embarrassing
side to be fighting on because they were tyrants, and some white Russians who'd favoured more
moderate politics, but had already failed in the first months of the revolution under
Alexander Kerensky. War weariness in America eventually led to the abandonment of the campaign,
but it certainly worsened Russia-American relations right from the outset of the revolution
because the Russians correctly identified the Americans as hostile to their experiment.
Soviet five-year plans led to the rapid industrialization of the new Soviet Union. One of the great
surprises to socialists all through the world was that the first great revolution should
have happened in Russia. Marx himself had said, revolution will happen first in the most
industrialized nations. Karl Marx had anticipated revolution in England, starting in Lancashire
or Yorkshire, or possibly in New York or the Pennsylvania cold fields. Marx himself had
always denigrated Russia and certainly could not have anticipated that the first revolution
would happen there because Russia was still overwhelmingly an agricultural place. And Stalin
was trying to catch up with the theory by making Russia more industrial so that it would fit
with the theory better. One aspect of Russian crash industrialization was the five-year
plans. In other words, the Stokhanovites, astonishingly hardworking men who tried to
live up to the ambitious quotas for hard work. Alexei Stokhanov himself was a coal miner
who mined 102 tons of coal in six hours. And Soviet propaganda in the 1930s idealized
hard industrial work and also the industrial objects themselves, tractors, concrete objects,
dams, high buildings, postcards and songs and folklore about this industrial stuff was
characteristic of the Soviet 30s. Nearly all the old Bolsheviks, that is, the people
who'd actually carried out the Russian Revolution and anyone who was opposed to Stalin's will,
was killed or sent to the Gulag Archipelago, the chain of prison camps in Siberia. Even
Trotsky, the leader of the Red Army, the man whose military brilliance had made Soviet
success possible, was forced into exile and later assassinated in Mexico. Most of the
old Bolsheviks were captured, tortured, put on show trials and forced to confess to attempting
to sabotage the revolution and then executed. In almost every case, the charges were ludicrously
false. The superb work of Alexander Solzhenitsyn in the 1950s, 60s and 70s, particularly his
masterpiece, the Gulag Archipelago, has given us a brilliant evocation of the prison camps,
a lot of the history and a lot of the sensibility of the people who suffered in the camps.
One of the most jarring surprises of the 1930s was that Stalin allied with Hitler in 1939
for the conquest of Poland. Poland was taken completely unawares when German armies invaded
it from one side and Soviet armies from the other. But then, in the summer of 1941, Stalin
was taken unawares when Hitler broke that pact and invaded the Soviet Union itself. Even
though his generals had been warning him that it was coming, Stalin, surprising that he
should be credulous because he was such a suspicious-minded man, but nevertheless was
taken by surprise by the Nazi invasion. Soviet armies bore the brunt of German military power
over the next four years and the Russians suffered heavier casualties than any other
belligerent in the war. But just to give you a sense of the lethal character of the Eastern
Front, of all the Germans who died in World War II, 90% of them died on the Eastern Front.
Meanwhile, Americans who had joined the Communist Party, as many did during the Great Depression,
were expected to change their ideas in line with Soviet Party orthodoxy, which was itself
usually a mirror of Russian foreign policy. So, throughout most of the 1930s, as a communist,
you were expected to be fiercely anti-Hitler, but then suddenly, after the Hitler-style
impact, you had to be pro-Hitler. But then after the invasion of Russia, you had to be anti-Hitler
once again. Communist Party members in America, most of whom had usually joined for humanitarian
reasons and in protest against the apparent dysfunction of capitalism at the time of the
Great Depression, tried to take pride in not second-guessing the Party, but many of them
found it very difficult indeed, or downright impossible, to be suddenly pro-Hitler after
denouncing him for a decade over, for example, his help to Franco in the Spanish Civil War.
So in 1939, large numbers of American communists left the Party in dismay.
During the Second World War itself, Stalin bitterly resented Roosevelt and Churchill,
his Western allies, for not launching the D-Day invasion of Western Europe until 1944.
Stalin had hoped that in the summer of 1942, now that the Americans were involved in the
war, the British and Americans together would invade France, thereby forcing the Germans
to fight on two fronts. But in fact, the invasion didn't happen in 42 and it didn't happen
again in 43, not until D-Day in June of 1944 did the Western allies finally come to grips
with the German armies on the Western Front. So even as the Allied and Soviet armies converged
on Germany in 1945, the Americans coming from the West and the Russians from the East, the
seeds of the Cold War had already been sown. The Americans didn't trust Stalin because
they remembered that he'd been an ally of Hitler and Stalin didn't trust the Americans
because in his view, they delayed far too long in launching the Second Front.
Stalin violated the Yalta Accords of 1945 and kept an iron grip on the whole of Eastern
Europe. I mentioned in the previous lecture that when Churchill out of office came to
Fulton, Missouri, he coined the phrase an iron curtain to describe the condition of
Eastern Europe, which had been part of Hitler's empire and had now become part of the Soviet
sphere of influence in Eastern Europe, which then became the Warsaw Pact.
The Chinese Revolution of 1949 and Soviet acquisitions, acquisition of nuclear weapons
in the same year underlined American fears about the spread of communist power. Now in
the nuclear age, which began in 1945, espionage seemed more threatening than ever before.
And American anti-communists came to believe that the United States government, as it struggled
to lead the free world, was infected with spies and Soviet sympathizers.
Conservatives and liberals alike in America were concerned about this issue. Security
programs began under President Truman, the Democrat who had inherited after the death
of Franklin Roosevelt. And the government realized that Soviet spies had been operating
in the Manhattan Project, the project to develop the atom bomb. The government discovered,
for example, after cracking some Soviet codes that Klaus Fuchs, one of the theoretical physicists
working in the Manhattan Project, had passed information along to the Soviets for ideological
reasons. So had Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, whose death sentences for espionage provoked
bitter controversy that still resonates even today.
Whitaker Chambers' accusations against Alger Hiss became one of the most celebrated confrontations
over communism in the early Cold War era. Chambers, as a Soviet courier, had received
confidential documents from Alger Hiss, a New Deal bureaucrat, during the 1930s, and
then had passed them along to his contacts at the Soviet Embassy. But then Chambers,
writing about the purge of the old Bolsheviks and the show trials in the late 1930s, and
then about the massacre of the Kulaks, the wealthier peasants in Russia by the Soviet
Union and many other Soviet atrocities, had left the party and had gone in fear of his
life taking some microfilms with him that proved his case that he had in fact been receiving
information from Alger Hiss. When he presented this information to the FBI they weren't interested
in the late 30s, but after the Second World War as anti-communism ratcheted up, suddenly
the FBI seemed vitally interested in this kind of information.
Chambers testified before a congressional committee that Hiss had been his contact. Hiss denied
it and was put on trial for perjury. By then, Alger Hiss was a prominent man. He'd been
at Yalta, the 1945 meetings to decide on the disposition of Eastern Europe, and he'd served
as the temporary secretary general of the new United Nations in 1945. He'd then become
the head of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. He was a very prominent man in American
public life. The secretary of state, Dean Acheson, appeared on his behalf as a character
witness when he went on trial.
Well, Alger Hiss's first trial ended in a hung jury. He couldn't be tried for espionage
because of the statute of limitations. So instead he was tried for perjury that he'd
lied to a congressional committee about his involvement with the Communist Party, and
the second time around he was convicted of perjury and sent to prison, though to the
end of his life he always denied that he'd been a spy.
Meanwhile, Chambers, terrified that he was going to be the victim of a Soviet assassination
attempt or a robbery, had hidden the microfilms in a pumpkin on his farm in Maryland, hence
the nickname of the case, the Pumpkin Papers Case.
Hiss was jailed for perjury, but at the end of his life he was denied having been a spy.
Though the evidence that he was a spy is overwhelmingly strong. The best book on this subject is by
a historian called Alan Weinstein. The book's called Perjury. And Weinstein himself, the
historian says, when he began the book, he began with the explicit intention of exonerating
Alger Hiss. But the more deeply he got into the research and the more closely he followed
the lines of evidence, the more the evidence built up that Hiss had in fact been a spy
and was indeed guilty. Numerous conservative politicians used the anti-communist issue
in the late 1940s and early 50s to advance their careers. One of them was Congressman
Richard Nixon, a freshman in the House of Representatives who won election for the first
time in 1946. And he made his reputation on the House Committee on Un-American Activities,
which became one of the chief investigators of communist infiltration. He believed Whitaker
Chambers and he pursued the Hiss case. Nixon was also prominent in the Hollywood hearings,
alleging that movies made during the war particularly had contained Soviet propaganda. That led
to the blacklisting of what was known as the Hollywood Ten, ten prominent people in the
movie industry who were then excluded from working on films. Now many of them really
have been members of the Communist Party, though whether the films they'd worked on
actually became communist propaganda is very doubtful indeed. In 1950, Nixon, recognizing
what a resonant issue anti-communism was, campaigned for a Senate seat from California.
His opponent was Helen Gahagan Douglas, who'd been a supporter of the New Deal. And Nixon
in his campaign alleged that she was too sympathetic to communism. She wasn't a communist herself,
as she was sympathetic. The language used in those days was that she wasn't red, but
she was pink. And Nixon managed to mix smears with sexism in his remark. She's pink right
down to her underwear. Now in those days of the late 40s and the early 50s, Nixon was
much loved by conservatives and hated by liberals. He was chosen by Eisenhower to be his running
mate in 1952 when Eisenhower for the first time became a candidate as a way of securing
his right wing. Eisenhower previously had no political experience, whereas Nixon was
already by then a bruising political infighter. The most famous politician of this era and
the one who gave his name to the era was Senator Joseph McCarthy, a Republican from Wisconsin.
He used the issue to court publicity during the years of the Korean War from 1950 to 53.
He made a speech in Wheeling, West Virginia in February of 1950, in which he brandished
a sheet of paper and said, I have in my hand 57 cases of individuals who would appear to
be either card-carrying members or certainly loyal to the Communist Party, but who nevertheless
are still helping to shape our foreign policy. So in other words, the allegation that the
Democratic Party and its government are protecting known communists inside the State Department.
McCarthy was very evasive over the actual names and wouldn't give the list to any of
the journalists who asked him and in successive speeches kept changing the number of supposed
communists whom he knew about. Anyone who challenged McCarthy risked also being named
as part of the great communist conspiracy. This is one of McCarthy's standard tactics
to when he's put on the defensive to go back over onto the offensive by saying that his
accuser was himself a communist. And the fear of being named as a communist by McCarthy
was sufficient to discourage many of his critics from doing so.
McCarthy was a brilliant populist. He exploited issues of social class to depict the rich
as latently traitors and only the ordinary Americans as loyal. Conservatism throughout
much of history has been the movement of the elitists, but suddenly now populist conservatism
is making the claim that the elites are the disloyal ones. McCarthy was particularly attentive
to Dean Atchison, the Secretary of State under President Truman, who'd spoken up on
behalf of Alger Hiss. Populism is a recurrent characteristic of 20th century American conservatism.
It embodies the idea that the common people have a special wisdom and that haughty elites
have lost it and that's something that McCarthy was an expert at. Now one group who found
McCarthyism highly congenial was American Catholics. That was a way for them to reassert
their loyalty to the nation and their conservatism. The Popes had been condemning the idea of
socialism and communism ever since the 1870s and the American Catholic community had hardly
warmed up towards communism at all even during World War II when Stalin was depicted in American
propaganda as friendly Uncle Joe, our Russian friend. The Catholics had continued to keep
his arms length from anything to do with communism. Now anti-communism was a great
issue for them because it enabled them to allay the old allegation that they somehow
had dual loyalties. Anti-Catholicism, which is a powerful force in American history, the
accusation always was they're not really good Americans because they have a loyalty to an
absolute monarch abroad, the Pope in Italy. But now suddenly with the issue of anti-communism,
their faith could make them seem more like 100% Americans than anyone else because of the depth
and duration of their anti-communism. No wonder there was such a lot of Catholic support for
McCarthyism. McCarthyism is the general name given to the era's loyalty oaths, censorship,
and smear tactics against anyone who dared to challenge the orthodoxy. In the end, McCarthy's
cynicism and his overreaching discredited his program. It's not as though he was really himself
ideologically convinced. He'd simply used anti-communism as a handy issue, which he thought would
get him reelected in the election of 1952, which it did, and also make him give him popularity.
He wasn't really as ideologically convinced as many other anti-communists. Some lunatic fringe
groups such as the John Birch Society also sprang up in the 1950s, coming to believe that the
Communist had actually captured the U.S. government. There was a period during which the John Birch
Society said Eisenhower himself is a communist. Now, whether feverish conspiracy theorists like
that should even be thought of as conservatives is highly doubtful. Still, mainstream conservative
writers argued that communism was a kind of horrible parody religion. In other words, it
worked on the mind in the way that fervent faith did, but it was a grotesque earthly parody of a
true religion. And, said conservatives, repressive measures against communism are appropriate.
It was through his role in anti-communism that William F. Buckley Jr., one of the biggest figures
of the conservative movement after World War II, started to become famous. Buckley and his
brother-in-law, Al Brent Bazelle, published McCarthy and His Enemies in 1954. A book which
argued that the senator, though sometimes injudicious and heavy-handed, was justified. They
said he may be wrong on the details, and sometimes there's no question he does exaggerate, but he's
right on the big question. We're at war with international communism, and it's never never
been more vital to detect traitors. They argued that the old national elite, particularly the
Democrats, the liberals, had now disintegrated into a pusillanimous form of liberalism and
lacked the courage of their convictions. They always cried freedom of speech, even if it was
speech designed to destroy them. This was a self-destroying posture. Ironically, said Buckley
and Bazelle, McCarthy takes ideas more seriously than the liberal intellectuals. He believes that
people who became communists really did want to overthrow capitalism, and believing that they
were serious, McCarthy also believed that they must be stopped. Here's a quote from their book.
Traitors have played critical parts in the past, but many factors, primarily the indecisiveness of
any single weapon, have mitigated the consequences of treason. The great traitors of the past have
swung battles, but not wars. The situation is different today, and Algiers, critically situated,
can conceivably determine the destiny of the West. A class of folks can deliver what may well be
the key to world conquest. They also pointed out in the book that it was difficult to identify
communists because they made a point in many cases of hiding that Hiss himself had never openly
declared himself to be a communist. He'd always been a secret agent on behalf of the Soviet Union.
So the book goes on like this. If we have learned anything about the scope and techniques of the
communist conspiracy, it is that only a small percentage of the communist faithful take out
membership cards, and that, what is more, many communists are not identifiable on the basis
of their overt political activities. Whitaker Chambers has a great deal to say on the subject,
as do a dozen equally authentic witnesses to the conspiracy.
Well, the 1950s were often criticized at the time, and were certainly criticized later for
being a decade of excessive conformity. That's one of the words which often goes with telling the
history of the 50s. But Buckley and Bazelle here in this book, McCarthy and his enemies,
made an argument in favor of conformity, arguing that America must decide on its true principles,
its deepest beliefs, and then rally round them while rejecting poisonous threats to those principles.
They denied the liberal allegation at the time that there was a witch hunt in progress,
and they ended their book like this. It is only communist ideas that are beyond the pale,
and the evidence is convincing that the function of Senator McCarthy and his colleagues is not
that of defining or creating a new orthodoxy, with which individuals are being called upon to
conform. The American community affirmed anti-communism long before McCarthy started in. McCarthy's
function has been to harden the existing conformity. I think it's very interesting this use of
conformity as a positive notion. It reminds me of the way in which Edmund Burke in his
Reflections on the Revolution in France had used the idea of prejudice as a positive concept. In
other words, a term which is often thought to be pejorative can be reexamined from a different
vantage point and seen in a much more positive light. So conformity is a good thing, claimed
Buckley and Bazelle. The book ended like this. As long as McCarthyism fixes its goal with its
present precision, it is a movement around which men of goodwill and stern morality can close ranks.
Well, it wasn't long after that that McCarthy fell from favor. When he began to accuse the U.S.
Army itself of being riddled with communists and traitors, there was a sufficient protest against
him that he rapidly fell from favor and from plausibility, and soon after that drank himself
to death. One of the best books or the best anti-communist books of the 1950s is Whittaker
Chambers' own autobiography, Witness, published in 1952. It rapidly achieved classic status
among anti-communist conservatives because it depicted both the lure and the catastrophic dangers
of communism. Early in the book, Chambers gives a brilliant description of the way in which he
joined the Communist Party during the 1920s because he thought it would rescue Western
civilization from collapse. He describes the way in which he'd been close to suicide and how
learning about communism, this thrilling ideology which promised a genuine transformation of the
world, had brought him back to life. It's still one of the very best bits of why I became a communist
writing, even though it's written by a passionate anti-communist. The book then goes on to describe
his horrified realization that there was no limit to Stalin's cynicism and Stalin's willingness to
destroy everything and everyone who stood in his path in the name of the revolution.
In becoming an anti-communist, said Chambers, he felt that he joined the losing side in the
Great Battle for History, but that it's still right to go down fighting. He rewrote in a tone
of a man who's preparing himself for martyrdom, and the book has a very, very distinctive tone of
gloom and foreboding throughout. It begins with a famous preface called A Letter to My Children,
and in it he shows a grim respect for his adversary, communism in general,
but as personified in Alger Hiss. And of the great case in which the two men had been brought
together, he says this. It was more than human tragedy. Much more than Alger Hiss or Whitaker
Chambers was on trial in the trials of Alger Hiss. Two faiths were on trial. Human societies,
like human beings, live by faith and die when faith dies. At issue in the Hiss case was the
question whether this sick society, which we call Western civilization, could in its extremity
still cast up a man whose faith in it was so great that he would voluntarily abandon those
things which men hold good, including his life, to defend it. At issue was the question whether
this man's faith could prevail against a man whose equal faith it was, that this society is sick
beyond saving, and that mercy itself pleads for its swift extinction and replacement by another.
At issue was the question whether, in the desperately divided society, there still remained
the will to recognize the issues in time to offset the immense rally of public power to distort
and pervert the facts. At heart, the great case was this critical conflict of faiths.
That is why it was a great case. On a scale personal enough to be felt by all, but big enough to be
symbolic, the two irreconcilable faiths of our time, communism and freedom, came to grips in the
persons of two conscious and resolute men. Indeed, it would have been hard in a world
still only dimly aware of what the conflict is about to find two other men who knew so clearly.
Both had been schooled in the same view of history, the Marxist view. Both were trained
by the same party in the same selfless, semi-soldierly discipline. Neither would nor could yield
without betraying not himself, but his faith, and the different character of these faiths
was shown by the different conduct of the two men toward each other throughout the struggle,
for with dark certitude, both knew, almost from the beginning, that the great case could end only
in the destruction of one or both of the contending figures. Just as the history of our times,
both men had been taught, can end only in the destruction of one or both of the contending
forces. Well, it's vivid and evocative writing in which Chambers puts himself in the position
of standing in for a civilization under threat and uses hiss as a metaphor for the great force
which is trying to roll over this civilization and destroy it. Many other influential ex-communists
writers turned to conservatism in the anxious years of the early 1950s so that the American
conservative movement of the 50s took on a vividly ex-communist flavor. One of them was James
Burnham. He became a leading strategic intellectual with very, very strong government connections
and was one of the architects of America's Cold War foreign policy. He was a professor of philosophy
at New York University, had been there throughout the 1930s, and in that decade had been a Trotskyist.
The Trotskyist regarded Stalin as a betrayer of the real Marxist principles of the revolution,
and Trotsky to them had been the man who'd fully embodied the humane version of communism,
which ought to have been permitted to thrive, but of course he'd been expelled and then killed
by Stalin's agents. Throughout the history of communism there's always fierce internecine
strife within the left, especially among its intellectuals. Other ex-communists who now
became conservatives included the old Greenwich village writer and editor Max Eastman, the sociologist
Will Herberg, and the novelist John Dos Passos, one by one each of them after an experience in
communism had become revolted by it and then dedicated the later years of their lives to
opposing it as ardently as they could. All of them shared the view that communism was a terrifying
messianic force, the antithesis of the Christian West, and that it would move inexorably to destroy
the West, often going slowly but never ceasing. Therefore they said to conciliate it was a mistake,
that was to connive at self-destruction. They were absolutely opposed to President Eisenhower's
foreign policy of mutual coexistence. To them that was just a delayed form of surrender.
