Among the earliest and sharpest critics of the new conservatives in the 1950s had been
a group of liberal social scientists centered at Berkeley, Harvard and Columbia Universities,
including Daniel Bell, Nathan Glazer, Samuel Huntington and Daniel Patrick Moynihan.
In the 1960s, however, many of them, reacting to the decades' social turbulence, began
to fear for the stability and governability of their society, and began to criticize the
far-reaching government programs of President Johnson's Great Society.
In 1965, Bell and Irving Crystal published a new journal, The Public Interest, dedicated
to such practical policy questions as urban renewal, law and order, education and racial
politics.
Before long, they and their contributors noticed a strong moral element in their ostensibly
neutral analysis, and admitted that they were implicitly arguing for the traditional virtues.
However many of them had grown up on the political left, they gradually became known
as the neoconservatives, and for the most part accepted the label.
Less tradition-oriented than most of the national review group, and more confident that government
programs can sometimes be benign, they nevertheless found themselves converging with their former
antagonists, often to their own astonishment.
Irving Crystal gave a catchphrase to the movement with his declaration, a neoconservative is
a liberal who has been mugged by reality.
While some early history, Daniel Bell's anthology, The New American Right, had been published
in 1955, and it was the most concentrated attack on the new conservatives in the 1950s.
It appeared in the same year as national review.
They used models from social psychology to explain the conservatives' conduct, rather
than engaging in an analysis of their ideas.
In other words, it treated them as though they represented a kind of pathology to be
diagnosed, rather than an intellectual and political movement to be debated.
One of the principal ideas of this anthology was the idea of status anxiety.
The idea was that, when a group's status declines, members of the group look for scapegoats
and demonize them.
Hence, said these liberal intellectuals, the conservatives' passion at anti-communism.
It isn't that they really hate communism that much, it's a displaced way of expressing
their anxiety over their declining status in society.
These liberal intellectuals were also anti-communists, but they thought that their version of it
was much more rational and intellectual, and was in fact the exact antithesis of McCarthyism.
They hated McCarthy because they thought he was a reckless anti-communist who was undermining
an essentially necessary job.
As it's worst, or at its bluntest, the work of these social scientists insinuated a continuity
between European fascism and American conservatism.
This generation of sociologists was heavily influenced by Theodore Adorno's book, The
Authoritarian Personality.
Adorno, himself an emigre from the Frankfurt School, argued that people who were left rootless
and isolated by the rise of modern civilization longed for strong leadership, and that it
was these deracinated people, these uprooted men, who had been ready recruits to Italian
fascism and German Nazism in the 1930s.
Now the allegation was that the American right of the 1950s was working in the same way.
One of the contributors to Daniel Bell's anthology was Richard Hofstadter.
He described the conservatives' approach to politics as part of the paranoid style, and
he dismissed them as pseudo-conservatives, alleging that there was nothing truly conservative
about them at all.
Now Richard Hofstadter was the preeminent historian of his generation, a professor at
Columbia University and a very brilliant man.
But this was much the worst of his scholarship, a thinly veiled attack in which he placed
the new conservatives in the lineage of the great lunatics of American history.
Now the new conservatives gave as good as they got, Russell Kirk and William Buckley,
as they encountered criticism like this, answered that these liberal critics had made no attempt
to assess conservative ideas.
They said, if anyone needs to be subjected to clinical psychology, it was the liberals
for their failure to take the threat of communism and government gigantism seriously enough.
So this is a period of mutual mudslinging, a very unpromising beginning to what was
later going to develop into a friendly relationship.
The liberal social scientists were unnerved by the social upheavals of the 1960s, and
they began to fear that America was becoming ungovernable.
They were proud of the fact that in the 1950s they had resisted McCarthyism, and they were
not accustomed to being attacked from the left.
In their view, their finest hour had been standing up to McCarthy, a demagogue of the
right, and bravely holding on to a sort of middle left position.
But suddenly in the 1960s, they found that they were being attacked from the left, which
to them was an unfamiliar experience.
The new left, that is the student movement, regarded liberal professors as antagonists.
After all, the students said, these professors are cooperating with a system that is alienating
and is irrelevant to the lives we now live.
The liberal cult of expertise in the Kennedy and Johnson administrations, which the liberal
professors were very proud of, is exactly what the new left was against.
The student movement claimed that these professors were unwittingly supporting the military-industrial
complex and that it was they that were dragging America into Vietnam and causing society to
deteriorate rather than rescuing it.
By the mid-1960s, many of them had risen to senior academic positions, and they often
suffered the brunt of student criticism in the campus uprisings.
Samuel Huntington, who was a professor of politics at Harvard University, speculated
about the destabilizing character of too much political involvement.
This was in direct contradiction to the idea which has long been familiar in American society
that all citizens should take an interest in politics.
Every citizenship class of the 20th century had said, of course you should exercise your
right to vote and take an interest in politics.
Now Huntington started to raise the opposite possibility.
We've got too much politicization now in the 60s.
In fact, the new left openly favored what it called participatory democracy.
Let's get more people involved in politics.
Huntington raised the opposite possibility.
What we need is fewer people interested in politics.
He developed arguments for the benefits of political passivity.
He said, if everybody votes and if the election is close, suppose that the candidate who wins
wins with 51% of the vote and the loser gets 49.
That means that 49% of the people actually voted against what they now have to live with.
They're likely to be more agitated and more resentful than if they haven't bothered voting
at all.
Huntington said, if we have low vote to turn out of 35 or 40%, that doesn't particularly
matter because what it demonstrates isn't that the people are indifferent but that by
and large they're moderately content and are happy to live with whoever might win the election.
Now of course, this is looking at politics from the point of view of the government and
from the point of view of law and order.
Like all the developing neo-conservatives, he was emphasizing that government is for
the specialists.
That's the absolute antithesis of populism.
Daniel Bell, who I've already mentioned and Irving Crystal, launched a new journal called
The Public Interest in 1965 and it was ostensibly a non-ideological policy journal.
Both men were part of a group which is now remembered as the New York Intellectuals, a
group about which many great books have been written.
Most of them were Jewish, most of them came from the New York area and most of them were
leftists.
Usually they were the sons or grandsons of Jewish immigrants from Eastern Europe.
They also included a smattering of other very interesting people such as the literary critic
Edmund Wilson, perhaps the most famous American critic of the 20th century, and the novelist
Mary McCarthy.
Irving Crystal had been a trotskiist at the City College of New York in the 1930s before
World War II, and in those days he'd been an avid reader of the partisan review, the
era's premier intellectual journal of the intellectual left.
Now, partisan review had been a trotskiist journal and Irving Crystal himself had identified
with the trotskiists.
That is to say, people of the far left, but passionate adversaries of Stalinism, the
orthodoxy of the Soviet Union.
And in fact, oddly, being a trotskiist was in some ways very good preparation for being
a Cold War anti-communist, because it meant that over years of polemical infighting, you'd
learned about the mendacity of Soviet communism as represented by Stalin up close.
After the Second World War, after his phase of military service, Irving Crystal had become
the editor of Encounter magazine, the Anglo-American journal of the Congress for Cultural Freedom.
This was a journal published by Liberals on both sides of the Atlantic expressing the
ideas of cultural freedom over against the cultural repressiveness of the Soviet Union.
Later on it turned out that the journal, like most journals made a loss, but had been funded
by the CIA.
In other words, it was actually a propaganda wing of the American government.
Crystal's partner, Daniel Bell, was a brilliant journalist who'd been leered into academic
life in 1959 by Columbia University and then was poached from Columbia to Harvard in 1969,
even though Bell had never written a doctoral dissertation or been to a conventional graduate
school.
He was regarded as too good to need to go through that credentialing process.
He was the author of a very influential book, The End of Ideology, published in 1960, which
carried the idea that pragmatism should now replace the destructive ideological passions
of the early 20th century.
His idea was, it's now time for us to get beyond the communist and anti-communist polemics
and instead to start looking as social scientists very practically in a down to earth way at
what's actually going on, to measure it statistically and to draw conclusions about urban policy,
for example, on the basis of these findings, leaving out as much ideology as they possibly
could.
Public interest, their new journal, was not so scintillating or so dazzling as the great
polemics of partisan review, and it was meant to be more useful and less dangerous.
In the inaugural editorial, Bell and Crystal even said that theirs was a middle-aged magazine
for middle-aged readers.
These contributors emphasized accurate, statistically-informed studies of urban and social problems, and they
tried to offer practical solutions.
Now two other very influential sociologists of the period, Daniel Patrick Moynihan and
Nathan Glazer, had shown in their book Beyond the Melting Part, published in 1963, that
ethnic groups do not disappear in America.
From the time of the early 20th century, a period of high immigration, the theory, the
hope had been that America represented a great melting pot, this was actually the name of
a play by Israel Zangwill, written in the first decade of the 20th century.
People come in from all over the world, but they and their children and their grandchildren
learn English, become striving, good, hard-working, upright American citizens, and leave behind
the material they brought with them from the old world.
But in Beyond the Melting Part, published in 1963, Moynihan and Glazer said there was
a close study of the ethnic districts of New York City, and they said these ethnic groups
don't disappear in America.
It's true that they learn to speak English, it's true that they adapt to the American
ethos and the possibility of upward social mobility, but in fact neighborhoods are very
tight.
New York still has Irish neighborhoods and Italian ones and Puerto Rican ones and Polish
ones and so on.
The jobs are often passed down through the family from father to son, there's still
a high level of marriage within the ethnic group and so on.
This discovery had implications for American racial policy after the civil rights movement.
After all, the idea of Martin Luther King and the early days of the civil rights movement
had been to create a colorblind society, but sociologists like Moynihan and Glazer said
that's delusional.
We can't possibly get rid of awareness of ethnic or racial difference.
Ethnic groups don't melt and neither do racial groups.
A fully desegregated society, the aim of new programs like busing, which also began in
the 1960s, ignores the evidence of the persistence of group behavior.
Moynihan then got a job in the federal government working for the Johnson administration and
the report he wrote on African American families in 1965 caused a great fury and contributed
to Moynihan's alienation from the mainstream of American liberalism.
He had the job of assistant secretary of labor in the Johnson administration and he wrote
an internal memorandum called The Negro Family, The Case for National Action.
In it he wrote that the Negro family in American cities was quote, a tangle of pathologies.
In particular he pointed to the fact that many African American men, young men had poor
male role models.
Very often father was absent.
Very often they were brought up by mothers or grandmothers in matriarchal families.
Moynihan wrote that a great deal of remedial legislation was needed in addition to the
removal of discrimination laws.
Well the report was widely admired within the administration, but then it was leaked
and it proved to be highly abrasive to black pride the new movement of the mid 1960s which
was rising to displace the harmonious rhetoric of King's generation.
Black and white liberal reviewers said that Moynihan was blaming the victim and understating
the impact of racism and segregation by blaming the black family instead.
Moynihan himself wrote a devastating rebuttal to these criticisms but the incident soured
him on great society liberalism.
As I mentioned in the previous lecture there were terrible urban riots in 1966 and 67 particularly
in the black district of inner cities like Detroit.
Moynihan said that liberals should stop quote should stop defending and explaining away
anything however outrageous which Negroes individually and collectively might do.
He added that they should also realize that their concern for preserving order now made
them logical allies with conservatives.
In a speech of 1967 Moynihan said liberals must see more clearly that their essential
interest is in the stability of the social order and given the present threats to stability
they must seek out and make much more effective alliances with political conservatives who
share their interest.
No wonder that conservatives like Buckley and Frank Meyer were beginning to regard Moynihan
as a potential convert to their own point of view.
Buckley wrote in October 1967 that Moynihan quote is saying some of the most interesting
things being said these days in public life most strikingly that liberals have a good
deal to learn from conservatives.
Anything we conservatives can do to help just holler now the beginnings of a reconciliation.
Nathan Glazer and other contributors to the public interest began to criticize affirmative
action programs which will be introduced by the great society.
They said that the problem with affirmative action is that it substitutes group rights
for individual rights in no longer matter so much who you are as what group you belong
to affirmative action imposes quotas and timetables which makes the actual hiring of
the most suitable people for the job unlikely.
And besides enforcing affirmative action creates a costly and often inflexible bureaucracy
which once it's in place is going to be very very difficult indeed ever to get rid of it's
going to strengthen government and strengthen the number of bureaucrats who have to be supported
by taxation.
And said Glazer affirmative action doesn't actually benefit the inner city poor rather
it most benefits minorities who are upwardly mobile anyway African Americans living in
the suburbs who are much more likely to get these kinds of jobs and would have had them
anyway.
But now affirmative action was creating permanent bureaucratic categories into which everybody
had to be squeezed.
He could even foresee that there would be African American opponents of affirmative action
who would say affirmative action casts doubt on the legitimate achievements of people who
benefit from them.
In other words if you're a very talented African American and you get a job and do it well
nevertheless you're going to be vulnerable to the insinuation that you only got the job
because of your race is going to be abrasive to your pride to be a beneficiary of it.
And of course affirmative action creates bitter resentment and backlash among excluded whites
are going to feel that they would have had these jobs had it not been for affirmative
action.
In fact Glazer and some of his other associates at public interest built up an indictment
of affirmative action.
One of the most distinctive books of the new neo-conservatism was Edward Banfield's book
The Unheavenly City published in 1970.
It won widespread praise from conservatives for its harsh summary of inner city problems.
The key idea in Banfield's book was the idea of the underclass.
He said there are only about 5 percent of the urban population but these are the ones
who cause nearly all urban problems.
Why?
Because they lack an orientation towards the future.
They can't think ahead they're unable to hold down steady jobs they're sexually promiscuous
and they exhibit what he called a pre-conventional morality.
The riots of the 60s Banfield after studying them said that they were not political rebellions
Some people on the left had theorized that the riots were lately political rebellions.
Banfield says no it was rioting for fun and profit that's the name of one of his chapters.
He said when you see that the rioters are carrying away televisions from store windows
that they've smashed there's nothing political about it they simply want to have TVs and
they've got the opportunity now to get them.
One of Banfield's proposals which seemed outrageous to many of his critics was we should discuss
the urban situation less because the more we discuss it the more we raise expectations
and hopes that can't possibly be met.
We're raising false hopes.
Most of these urban problems are never going to disappear.
On the other hand urban life over the last century has become steadily better over the
decades.
People are healthier they live longer the water supply is better the medical help is better
the education is better and so on but that doesn't mean that we're going to ever have
a utopia.
We're not we're going to continue to have problems.
Well this kind of resigned attitude was itself a shock to liberals of the 60s the activists
and optimists who believed that these problems could be made to go away by benevolent government
work and of course it's a it's a book and a remark resonant with conservative wisdom.
Banfield like many other conservative writers such as Whitaker Chambers was convinced that
his ideas were not going to be listened to and that he was actually joining the losing
side of history.
Another very important recruit to this new neoconservatism this new outlook was Norman
Pod Horitz the editor of commentary magazine.
He'd been a precocious student of literature he'd studied with Lionel Trilling at Columbia
the first Jewish professor of English literature at Columbia and then he'd gone to Cambridge
in England and studied with F. R. Leavis one of the giants of literary criticism in the
20th century as a young man he became the editor of commentary magazine the Journal
of the American Jewish Committee.
In the 50s he promoted radical new literature at the work of Norman Mailer but he became
disenchanted in the 1960s and his disenchantment began with a famous essay called My Negro
Problem and Hours from 1963.
There was a denunciation of liberal pieties about race and it described the racial bitterness
he'd felt in his childhood as a Jewish kid in a neighborhood half of which was black.
He said he'd envied the black kids but he'd hated them too and he ended the essay by saying
that he continued to feel that way to fear them and to envy them and to hate them still
but now because he was a liberal he was also made to feel guilty about it.
He said the civil rights movement has gravely underestimated the power of racial feeling
in this country and that racial feeling was going to persist unless miscegenation could
over the long run make the races themselves disappear.
Pod Horitz's next controversial step was the writing of an autobiography when he was still
a very young man called Making It published in 1967 he was still in his 30s.
This autobiography was written in the same kind of relentlessly honest tone as his essay
about his Negro problem as he called it.
It rejected the counterculture and it also rejected the high brow cult of literary alienation.
Many of Pod Horitz's friends were writers who liked the idea that they were alienated
from mainstream society and that they didn't have the same success goals as most of their
contemporaries.
But Pod Horitz defiantly declared it's better to be rich than poor, it's better to be respected
than ignored, it's better to be successful than a failure.
He said he was determined to enjoy his success and he wasn't going to feel ashamed of it
and he said most intellectuals are hypocrites because they want to be successful but they
pretend they don't.
Now the tone of voice of Making It which is in fact a very entertaining book to read
sounded relentlessly boastful to many of its readers.
In fact friends of his who'd read it before publication warned him not to publish it, warned
him that he was going to destroy or damage his reputation.
Sure enough when he ignored them and brought it out, merciless reviews ensued, estranging
him from many friends, particularly on the left.
And perhaps partly in reaction to this stinging rejection.
From about 1970 onwards commentary magazine began to assault all aspects of the left and
the counterculture.
Pod Horitz had a strong tendency to find sinister analogies between the new left, the new student
left and the old communists.
He made ruthless criticisms of the black panthers, of the new feminists, of student activism,
of the George McGovern movement, George McGovern was the democratic candidate in 1972.
And he regarded liberalism as having betrayed the best in its own tradition, especially
its tough-minded anti-communism.
Now he said, revulsion against the Vietnam, the Vietnam War had gone too far and led to
a repudiation of anti-communism itself, whereas in fact communism remained a severe threat.
Among the near conservative's most distinctive ideas was the concept of the new class, the
law of unintended consequences and the theory of mediating institutions.
The new class, according to this theory, thrives in a bureaucracy and is sentimentally attached
to the adversary culture rather than to the values of the bourgeois middle class.
Now the new class, as the near conservatives describe it, is not a class in the Marxist
sense, in other words it's not derived from a group's relationship to the means of production.
It's rather derived from their relationship to government.
The new class are the people who administer the massive new government programs of the
great society and the vast new professoriate.
They're skeptical of the market economy and they hold a direct interest in the expansion
of big government.
In other words, even though they claim to be objective and disinterested, they're not
because as the bureaucracy thrives, so do they.
The near conservatives said, the new class has got one set of interests and the business
class which at a glance might seem to be similar to them has got a different set.
The law of unintended consequences was a second of these new ideas.
It codified the idea that the most ambitious government programs will have the most unexpected
consequences, many of them malignant.
They often quoted the example of the aid to families with dependent children, another
of the new of the great society programs.
They said, the intention of AFDC was clearly benign.
The idea was to prevent the suffering of children whose mothers weren't married to
make sure that they didn't suffer from malnutrition or neglect.
But they said, look at the look at the unintended effect of this program.
It's now created an incentive to young women to have babies and to not marry.
Because if they marry, they don't get the money from the government.
And if they don't have the baby, they don't get the money.
What they need is to have the baby and to be not married.
Then they become pensioners of the government.
So family breakdown actually becomes a worse problem rather than a diminishing one.
It's an unforeseen consequence and one which perhaps was impossible to foresee before the
program was introduced.
But the fact that every social problem, every social program always has unforeseen consequences
ought to make us very cautious in introducing such programs.
Peter Berger, Richard Newhouse and Michael Novak and some other neo-conservatives developed
also the idea of mediating structures.
This is another distinctive contribution to sociological theory from the neo-conservatives
or the popularizing of these ideas.
The idea of mediating structures is that there are valuable institutions which stand halfway
between the individual and the state, generating healthy individuals and a healthy society.
They were catching onto an idea which had first been raised by Alexis de Tocqueville
more than a hundred years previously.
Berger and Newhouse, in their book To Empower People, the role of mediating structures in
public policy, published in 1977, said the most important of all these structures is
the family, but also the church or the synagogue, the social club, the social gathering, the
local committee, the great array of cooperating organizations at every level of society, through
membership of which individuals learn how to relate to the wider world bit by bit as
they grow.
They should realize that these mediating institutions create a strong society and government should
do everything it can to let them thrive, not undermine them.
Now this was all part of the argument against busing and against affirmative action and
in favor of things like school vouchers because all these policies will strengthen families'
sense of control over their destiny and the integrity of their neighborhoods.
The idea of what was so dismaying about busing to many neoconservatives was, it shatters
the neighborhood because it's redistributing the kids and taking the sense of neighborhood
identity away from education.
Michael Novak wrote a book called The Rise of the Unmeltable Ethnics in 1972 on themes
similar to those voiced a decade earlier in Beyond the Melting Part.
Novak says, it's good to have these layers of identity in the mediating institutions
from which we learn how to act responsibly and develop loyalties.
Nobody wants to be just an individual, we all need denser forms of self-identification
and he goes on to say that the residual ethnic group is one of those forms.
This is a book full of swipes at the white Anglo-Saxon Protestant way of life, the wasps,
and the way in which says Novak, the wasp culture universalizes its claims.
It's a characteristic book of the neoconservatives, many of whom were Jews and Catholics.
On behalf of his Slavic ancestors, Novak took offence against the wasps.
He says, immigrants from southern and eastern Europe had to learn order, discipline, neatness,
cleanliness, reserve.
They had to learn to modulate emotion, to control passion, to hold their hands still,
to hold the muscles of their face placid, to find food and body odors offensive, to quiet
in their voices, to present themselves as coolly reasonable.
In other words, the implication there is that living in a wasp society has had a terrible
psychological, it's been an ordeal for ethnic people.
Now, Novak, like Berger and Newhouse, was emphasizing that the opponents of busing weren't
necessarily racists, but rather that they were defenders of the neighborhood tradition
and that then the neighborhood tradition was very much deserving of defense.
Ironically, all these movements, the new ethnic pride movement of the early 70s, was itself
an outgrowth of the black pride movement of the 1960s, but Novak gave them a sharply
conservative flavor and insisted that each group deserve the same kind of respect.
Well, perhaps the most crucial breakthrough for the ex-radical neo-conservatives was to
recognize that capitalism itself might be the best available economic system for promoting
the virtues they favored.
Irving Kristol wrote a book called Two Cheers for Capitalism in 1978.
He says, capitalism self-interested, but it gets the job of economic growth done better
than any other system.
He was echoing a remark by E. M. Forster, Two Cheers for Democracy.
Democracy is not all that great, but it works.
Capitalism distributes power rather than letting a group of new class bureaucrats concentrate
it.
Small businesses are themselves family and community oriented and require the virtues
necessary for social stability.
Well, by the early 1980s, as we'll see in a future lecture, other neo-conservative writers
in the next stage of the movement were going to be giving not just two cheers for capitalism,
but three.
