Reagan was to American conservatism, what Thatcher was to British conservatism. Coming
to power a year after her, by winning the election of 1980, he agreed with her on all
the big questions. Like her, he believed that capitalism was morally defensible, that
Soviet communism was evil and should be combated as fiercely as possible, that excessive government
spending was a drag on the economy, and worse, that it was a moral affront to the citizens.
Reagan had risen to prominence in the Hollywood of the 1930s and 40s, had made a successful
jump to television in its pioneer days of the 50s, and then had become a Republican
activist in the Goldwater campaign of 1964. Elected governor of California in 1966 and
again in 1970, as we saw in an earlier lecture, he positioned himself as the enemy of campus
activists and black militants, finding both issues popular among the electorate.
Coming to Washington in 1981, he alarmed parts of the electorate and policy establishment
by denouncing the Soviet Union as an evil empire, and by declaring his intention to
hasten its demise. The checks and balances of the Constitution prevented Reagan from
sweeping away federal programs with quite the relish he had intended, but he promoted
a new attitude in favor of unregulated business and economic growth.
Embodying the conservative movement of the foregoing decades, he also embodied some
of its contradictions. Pro-family social conservatives, especially the moral majority, felt disappointed
that in practice he would give little support to their agenda. They remained loyal to him
anyway, not least because of his ability to make conservatism seem normal, friendly,
relaxed and all-American, qualities it had certainly not exhibited in the strenuous
days of the 1950s and early 60s.
Well Reagan, after two successful terms as governor of California, made a successful
bid for the Republican presidential nomination in 1980, and then won the election over the
incumbent Jimmy Carter. Carter had faced a combination of slow economic growth, the 1979
fuel shortage, during which time prices rose very, very sharply, the Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan and the Iran hostage crisis. Edward Kennedy's challenge to Carter in the
1980 Democratic primaries violated the usual consensus for a sitting president. Already
by the beginning of 1980, Carter was dreadfully unpopular, certainly among Republicans, but
also among many Democrats, who felt that he'd failed in his economic policy and in his
foreign policy. And Ted Kennedy gambled that. The memory of Chappaquiddick was now far enough
away that he'd once more become a viable candidate for the presidency, just as he'd
remained viable in running again and again for his seat as Massachusetts senator. A proof
to be a miscalculation on Ted Kennedy's part, but certainly the effect of having two prominent
Democrats running against each other, one of them an incumbent president, could only
help the Republican. The failed hostage rescue mission intensified the sense of America as
a floundering giant, having immense power but being unable to use it effectively.
Reagan with his victory brought a new mood of optimism and self assurance to the White
House. His rhetoric included phrases like, it's morning in America. That was the theme
of his reelection campaign in 1984, which was an easy victory over Walter Mondale.
And Reagan demonstrated better than any recent conservative predecessor, the capacity for
good cheer, enjoyment and relaxation. His detractors said that he was lazy and stupid.
Even some of his friends were sometimes alarmed at what he didn't know. His speech writer
Peggy Noonan described his mind as barren terrain. And the journalist David Broder spoke
of the desert between Ronald Reagan's ears. But Reagan himself shrewdly played on the
idea of himself as a simple ordinary man. He was actually quite hard working, with a
good grasp, at least on the issues that interested him. He once joked that a hard day's work
never killed anybody, but he said, why risk it? That was a characteristic remark of Reagan's,
in which he gently denigrate himself to give the appearance that he was just one of the
ordinary people. Recently, publication of his handwritten radio speech notes has further
elevated his reputation for actually having been quite thoughtful on the principal issues,
particularly those that concerned him. He was very good at delegating responsibility,
and there's no question that he didn't work as many hours in the day as his predecessor
Jimmy Carter had done. But of course, it's important to be able to delegate and keeping
all affairs in your own hands isn't necessarily a virtue. Although, because Reagan left a
lot of issues in the hands of his subordinates, that did encourage a certain amount of strife
and rivalry among his cabinet appointees, who often differed very, very conspicuously.
Reagan's sympathy for the libertarian side of conservatism prevented him from acting
on the New Christian Right's agenda. Promoting pro-family legislation of the kind which the
moral majority had hoped for would have entailed constant interference in citizens' lives. Gender
difference legislation that would have been very hard to enforce, and complex tax incentives
when the moral majority and its political advocates actually came to propose legislation
for restructuring the economy in a pro-family way. It proved terrifyingly intrusive and
complicated and difficult to enforce, and so many of his staff had backed away from
it altogether. And as I mentioned earlier, the abortion question, which also meant a
lot to the moral majority, didn't line up on party political lines. Reagan and his staff
were aware that many Republicans were pro-choice. So despite his own ardent pro-life rhetoric,
and even a book that was published under his name, Abortion and the Conscience of a Nation,
there was no actual substantive change, and he didn't devote a lot of energy to trying
to get pro-life legislation through Congress. His first nomination to the Supreme Court was
of Sandra Day O'Connor from Arizona, who was herself pro-choice.
Reagan was ideologically zealous, but this was a zeal always checked by a sense of what
would be politically popular, and he never pushed unpopular policies too hard. That in
turn vexed the conservative intellectuals for them getting the ideas right was all important,
but of course for people in power, it's getting the power and holding onto it, which tends
to matter most. So the sheer fact that the conservative movement was now in power actually
diluted rather than concentrated many of its energies.
Emmett Tyrell, who was the editor of the American Spectator, one of the conservative
journals of the 70s and 80s, noted that the conservative intellectuals had very little
in common with the country club Republicans, who now swept into Washington, and the high-fashion
tone that was set by the first lady, Nancy Reagan. This was a world very different from
the world of national review and the world of the public interest or commentary.
Reagan luckily survived an assassination attempt very early in his first term of office, and
that won him renewed popular sympathy and support. This was in his first year of office.
He was shot by a deranged young man named John Hinckley Jr. Not because Hinckley opposed
Reagan, but because he was obsessed by the movie star Jodie Foster, and this was Hinckley's
bid for her attention. Reagan himself was cheerful during his recovery. He was lucky
not to be more seriously wounded, and that gave the lie to earlier allegations that he
was too old and too weak to be president. The fact that he was so perky and cheerful
and was soon back at his desk in the White House projected a sense of strength and resolution.
His economic policies were controversial right from the beginning. The general name given to
them was Reaganomics. He gave the promise of strong economic growth, lower taxes, and
higher revenues coming into the government. Now the stagflation of the 1970s, this nasty
combination of stagnation and inflation, had discredited the Keynesian orthodoxy, which
to some extent both parties had shared for the past few decades, which asserted that
you either have inflation or stagnation. Suddenly there seemed to be both, and the theory couldn't
adequately account for it. Reaganomics, which the older George Bush, who had been Reagan's
rival in the Republican primaries of 1980, called Voodoo Economics, moved attention away
from questions of demand, which had preoccupied the Keynesians, towards stimulating increased
supplies. And this got the general name of supply-side economics. The point man in Congress
for this new approach was Congressman Jack Kemp, who'd formerly been a football player,
the Buffalo Bills Quarterback. He was a self-taught enthusiast for conservative plans to stimulate
economic growth. Now one very interesting element of Reaganomics was the Laffer Curve,
named after Arthur Laffer, the economist who invented it, which demonstrated a paradoxical
relationship between tax rates and the amount of revenue that the government actually gets
from taxation. Laffer pointed out the following facts, or the following theory. If the tax
rate is zero percent, obviously no revenue comes into the government, because it's not
charging anything. But, said Laffer, imagine if the tax rate was 100 percent, then still
the government would get nothing, because nobody would have any incentive to work at
all. On the other hand, if you have a low rate of taxation, suppose you tax people 5%
of their incomes, then you are going to get quite a lot of revenue, because people have
got an incentive to work hard, because they're going to hold on to 95% of it, and the government
will get plenty of what's left over. If you make the tax rate 10%, it may be that you'll
get even more, because people still have the incentive to work hard to get the residual
90%. But, said Laffer, beyond a certain rate, the actual revenue the government gets doesn't
keep on rising, it begins to decline, until by the time you reach the 100% point, it's
back to zero again. Why? Because citizens have got declining work incentives, and because
they've got a stimulus to cheat. Now, I mentioned last time that in the socialist days, Britain
had very, very high tax rates, and that led wealthy Britons to leave the country altogether,
taking as much of their wealth with them as they could possibly get out of the country.
Clearly, lowering tax rates, as the Conservative governments in Britain eventually did, meant
that more people stayed, and more people had an incentive to work harder. So, the Laffer
curve embodies a paradox, which is that lower tax rates can mean more revenue. Raising the
rate doesn't necessarily mean you'll get more, it can mean you'll get less. Lowering
the rate means more revenue, and it means more economic growth. Well, the promise of lower
taxes and higher revenue is politically irresistible, and this is one of the attractive options
laid out by Reagan and his transition team. This was also the period in which a group
of neoconservative economists were writing enthusiastic defences of capitalism.
Jude Wyniski, George Gilder, and Michael Novak made the moral and spiritual case for
the free market, while demonstrating the new influence of Washington think tanks to which
many of them were attached. I mentioned in the earlier lecture on the neoconservatives
that Urban Crystal had written the book Two Cheers for Capitalism, which came out in 1978.
It was his paraphrase of E. M. Forster, and carried the idea, well, capitalism, at least
it works. But this next generation of the defenders of capitalism gave three cheers
for capitalism. They thought it was lovely, wonderful. Milton Friedman himself had written
an influential book called Free to Choose. It was first a book and then a TV show from
the late 1970s. It made a very, very powerful case for capitalism as optimal, both in generating
wealth and in protecting freedom. And by now, Friedman spoke with special authority
because he'd won the Nobel Prize in 1976. Jude Wyniski's book, The Way the World Works,
published in 1979, was the book that popularized the Laffer Curve. And in one interesting
digression, Wyniski even argued that babies themselves are born with an instinctive grasp
of the mechanics of the Laffer Curve. He said, think of the way in which babies cry.
The baby knows that if it never cries at all, it won't draw its mother's attention.
That's like the zero taxation point. But babies quickly learn that if they cry all the time,
they also won't get mom's attention. That's the 100% tax rate point. No. What do babies
actually do? They learn to calibrate it just right. They cry sometimes and learn how to
cry just enough to get the maximum amount of their mother's attention. So if mom's attention
is revenue and baby crying is the tax rate, look at the way in which the Laffer Curve is
embedded in children right from the outset. And a clever little analogy.
Another of these new enthusiastic books about capitalism was Wealth and Poverty by George
Gilder, published in 1981. And it's a book bursting with enthusiasm for the capitalist
system. At least three cheers, if not more. Gilder saw entrepreneurs as generous people.
After all, he said, entrepreneurs are constantly offering ingenious new things to the world,
new devices, new inventions that will benefit people. They hope, but they never know, that
they'll be able to sell them. In fact, Gilder even cast a little bit of doubt on Adam Smith's
old metaphor of the invisible hand. In his view, entrepreneurs are particular people
with visible hands, assessing opportunities at particular times and places, and moving
consciously in response to their insights. Gilder also emphasized the extreme complexity
of the world, which planned economies, like the Soviet economy, had always failed to appreciate.
Here's what Gilder says. Socialism presumes that we already know most
of what we need to know to accomplish our national goals. Capitalism is based on the
idea that we live in a world of unfathomable complexity, ignorance and peril, and that
we cannot possibly prevail over our difficulties without constant efforts of initiative, sympathy,
discovery and love. The ultimate strength and crucial weakness of both capitalism and
democracy are their reliance on individual creativity and courage, leadership and morality,
intuition and faith, but there is no alternative except mediocrity and stagnation.
Michael Novak, who I introduced earlier in the course as the author of the Rise of the
Unmeltable Ethnics, one of the neoconservative classics, added a theological element to the
defense of capitalism in a book called The Spirit of Democratic Capitalism from 1982.
The Catholic Church, which Michael Novak had always been a member, had been hard on capitalism
over the last century, but he said it ought to reconsider, especially so long as capitalism
was linked with democracy. The two go together beautifully, and Novak introduced the idea
of a great and delightful paradox between capitalism and Christianity. Here's what Novak
said.
Capitalist ideology follows the paradox of Isaiah and Christ, that redemption should
come in the most unlikely spot through the weakest and poorest of persons, as in the
carpenter from a very poor and undeveloped part of the Roman Empire. In a related way,
capitalist thinkers discovered the dynamic energy to change the face of history, not
where it might be expected in human nobility, grandeur and moral consciousness, but in human
self-interest. In the pettiest and narrowest and meanest part of human behavior lies the
source of creative energy.
Well, it's a lovely paradox, isn't it, that the Saviour wasn't a king, he was a carpenter
who died the disgraceful death of a criminal, and yet he was the Saviour of the world. Novak
suggests capitalism is something like that. The source of wisdom comes from an unexpected
place.
He went on to say that capitalism, besides stimulates not only selfishness, but also
family feeling. Very often people work hard for the sake of giving protection and welfare
to their families, and people who subscribe to capitalism have the vision of a future
which is superior to the present. He said, capitalism is based on self-interest, only
if you accept an extremely broad definition of self-interest, which includes religious
and moral interests, artistic and scientific interests, and the interest in justice and
peace. It's part of the function of a free economy to provide the abundance which breaks
the chains of the mere struggle for subsistence, and to permit individual persons to find
themselves, indeed to define themselves through the interests they choose to make central
to their lives.
So you can see that in all these ways an array of new conservative intellectuals was making
the case for capitalism as entirely morally defensible. They no longer were content to
say, well, it's adequate, we'll put up with it in a defensive way. Now they've gone over
onto the offensive.
One of President Reagan's early miscalculations, one of his few missteps in his first administration,
was in his failure to understand the new popular mood in connection with environmental questions.
He appointed a secretary of the interior, James Watt, but soon realized that doing so
had been a mistake. It wasn't long before Watt had become an embarrassment. The Environmental
Protection Agency had come into existence at the beginning of the 1970s during the Nixon
administration, and its first administrator, William Ruckelshaus, had been a moderate
Republican who was intensely interested in environmental questions. Some conservatives
in the 1970s, including Barry Goldwater, who was still an Arizona senator, and Reagan
himself, saw environmental impact reports and clean air legislation as brakes on economic
growth. They're afraid that too much squeamishness and too much scrupulosity about the environment
might make America weaker in its confrontation with the Soviet Union. Goldwater said, we're
going to be freezing to death in the dark while we fiddle about with the environment
instead of making ourselves more powerful still. But the environment was like the abortion
question. It didn't fit along party lines. Large numbers of Republicans were very, very
serious about it. And it wasn't long before there was bitter criticism from inside the
Republican Party of James Watt, the secretary of the interior, and of Ann Gorsuch, the
Environmental Protection Agency administrator, for their negligence of their proper role
and for making sweetheart deals with corporations, permitting them to pollute. Both of them
even refused to meet with the leaders of the big environmentalist organizations, which
had become powerful lobbies inside Washington, D.C. And it wasn't long before both of them
had to depart under a cloud. And in fact, Reagan actually brought back Ruckelshaus, the first
administrator, as a way of trying to revitalize the EPA and begin to say that, yes, he too
was serious about the environment. It's an interesting question. How close is the connection
between conservative and conservationist? Obviously, linguistically, they come from
the same route. They're both favor of looking after something which is in danger, civilization
and the environment. It's reasonable to see the two as intimately connected. On the other
hand, the libertarian element of American conservatism rejects concerns that tend to
put a break on economic growth or to value intangibles. And of course, the environmental
movement also carried to many conservatives the mood of the counterculture of the 1960s
and the early 70s, which they emphatically rejected. It sounded like the enthusiastic
project of the hippies. Well, now in foreign policy, President Reagan rejected the concept
of detente and he denounced the Soviet Union as the evil empire. He authorized an immense
military buildup which contributed to severe budget overruns. This is one of the great
paradoxes of the Reagan era. He favored smaller government in theory, but he found bureaucratic
and popular resistance to dismantling departments immense. And it wasn't long before he gave
up trying his promise to dismantle government departments never amounted to anything. And
at the same time, he built up the defense department with massive budget increases, making big
government bigger than it had ever been before and putting the government further into debt
than it had ever been before. Supply side economics to the extent that it worked didn't
work well enough to make up the difference. It certainly isn't the case that tax cuts
were causing an abundance of revenue to flow in and helping to diminish the national debt,
just the opposite.
Baldest of all Reagan's foreign policy initiatives was the SDI, the Strategic Defense Initiative,
which was so nicknamed Star Wars after the vastly popular film which had come out in 1977.
The idea of SDI was to put anti-ballistic missiles into orbit to shoot down Soviet strikes
before they could even enter the atmosphere, so that in the event that the Soviet Union
launched its nuclear missiles, American orbiting weapons would counter-strike against them
and nullify the threat very early on.
It was an extremely expensive project. Research and development stages took place during the
Reagan administration and it was widely doubted whether the project was in fact actually going
to work.
On the other hand, Reagan was very serious about trying to rid the world of nuclear weapons,
much to the consternation of neoconservative intellectuals. The Soviet Union was in ferment
in the 1980s. Mikhail Gorbachev, who came to power in 1985, was clearly a very different
kind of Soviet leader from his predecessors, Brezhnev and Andropov, and it was Gorbachev
who announced the policies of Perestroika and Glasnost opening up the Soviet Union to
a less repressive regime. Reagan was convinced he could deal with Gorbachev and he took
very daring steps towards laying the groundwork for the abolition of nuclear weapons at the
Reykjavik Summit in Iceland in 1986. He believed that both sides could benefit from the abolition
of ballistic missiles so long as it was mutually enforceable. In other words, he was reviving
some of the hopes of the détente negotiators of the 70s, which Team B had so emphatically
denied in the late 1970s.
Reagan also laid the groundwork for start, the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaties, actual
arms reduction agreements, which were in fact signed the next year, 1987. So in this respect,
Reagan demonstrated a great flexibility once he saw signs of genuine shifts in the Soviet
position. It was much more willing to adapt than, for example, Norman Pod Horitz and many
of the other foreign policy neoconservatives, who were terrified at what Reagan was doing
in fear that he was exposing America naively and credulously to potential Soviet attack.
But still, Reagan was a Cold Warrior. His Cold War attitudes led to an ideologically
based set of interventions in Latin America. And raised again the question of whether America
should ally itself with tyrannical regimes. Earlier I mentioned the distinction which
Gene Kirkpatrick had made between authoritarian and totalitarian regimes. And that Kirkpatrick
had said, we can align ourselves with authoritarian regimes, but not with totalitarians. Kirkpatrick
became influential because Reagan had selected her to become his ambassador to the United
Nations.
Reagan's support for the Nicaraguan Contras and for the regime in El Salvador both involved
harrowing human rights problems. There was strong evidence that the Salvadoran government
used death squads to intimidate and kill regime opponents. And the fact that President Reagan's
government was supporting that government was a sort of bitter unpopularity and controversy
throughout the 1980s.
Much more harmonious was Reagan's good working relationship with Margaret Thatcher, the British
Prime Minister. Although she too remarked off the record that he just didn't work hard
enough and didn't try hard enough to learn the details of the policies in which they
commonly shared a belief.
The conservative intellectuals who had spent the previous generations struggling for influence
found that they still had little access to power.
Conservative politicians were more preoccupied with re-election and with questions of power
than with getting the ideas exactly right. Nevertheless, Reagan was aware that the conservative
movement from the 50s through the 70s had contributed to his winning the presidency
in the first place. He was on close personal terms with William Buckley, who was a regular
adviser to him, so national review in a way had become the kind of house organ of the
Reagan presidency. But still, the policy people and the intellectuals were a little
bit at odds.
Here's a speech that Reagan made in 1985, asserting the compatibility of ideas and power.
He argued that the tide of history is moving irresistibly in our direction, that liberalism
was virtually bankrupt of ideas. It has nothing more to say, nothing to add to the debate.
It has spent its intellectual capital, such as it was, and it has done its deeds. We in
this room are not simply profiting from their bankruptcy. We are where we are because we're
winning the contest of ideas. In fact, in the past decade all of a sudden, quietly, mysteriously,
the Republican Party has become the party of ideas. All of a sudden, Republicans are
not defenders of the status quo, but creators of the future.
Well, that was a partially, if not an entirely convincing claim. The long-promised assault
on federal gigantism soon fizzled, and government spent more money than ever before.
Reagan also had a disappointment in his attempt to nominate to the Supreme Court Robert Bork
in 1987. This is another area in which he was thwarted. It demonstrated the intensity
of liberal opposition to his point of view. Robert Bork himself was a former Yale Law School
professor and was a judge on the District of Columbia Appeals Court. He was a member
of the Federalist Society, opposed to recent trends in judicial activism, and in favour
of original intent, that is, that judges ought to try to work out what the founders had intended
and to do the same thing, that clearly the intent of the people who wrote the Constitution
remained vitally important. There was an extremely energetic campaign to discredit him
by the American Civil Liberties Union and by other liberal activists, who allege that
he would destroy the Roe versus Wade precedent, and even that he might undermine the progress
of the civil rights movement itself. Then to Bork's dismay, and to Reagan's disappointment,
the nomination failed. They couldn't get Senate confirmation of Bork's appointment.
Bork wrote a book about it afterwards called The Tempting of America. In it, he explained
the importance of originalism to the rule of law. He said, judges must leave their personal
opinions behind when they adjudicate the law. If the law offends current sensibilities,
the legislature must change it, not the judges. His role is solely to specify the law's congruence
with the Constitution and with precedent. In particular, Bork lamented the rise of radical
legal scholars. He wrote, there is a remarkable consistency about these theorists. No matter
the base from which they start, they all wind up in the same place, prescribing a new constitutional
law that is much more egalitarian and socially permissive than either the actual Constitution
or the legislative opinion of the American public. He said, legislators who voted for
the kind of findings that the judges were coming up with would have lost their seats.
In other words, judicial activism was a form of usurpation of popular power. This was exactly
the point that Brent Berzel had made in his book of 1966, The Warren Revolution, in protesting
against Earl Warren's activist Supreme Court.
Well, President Reagan never forgot the importance of compromising his principles when his popularity
was at stake. In this sense, he was the consummate politician who, while willing to go a certain
distance on behalf of ideas, would never in the end jeopardize his position because of
them. I'd like to finish this lecture with the judgment of the historian Robert Collins,
who seems to me a very accurate one. He writes, the tension between the administration's hard-shell
conservatives and its pragmatic moderates constituted a fundamental theme and helped
give the administration's policy its unique center-right orientation.
Over the course of two presidential terms, Reagan came under fire from the right for
not being ideological enough in his appointments, for not expending more of his considerable
political capital on behalf of the administration's declared social and cultural agenda, and
for negotiating arms reduction with the Soviets. With equal vigor, the left assailed him for
being too ideological in his appointments, for opposing women's choice in the matter
of abortion, and being the tool of the religious right on cultural and social issues, and for
his hard-line anti-communism.
Well, that's evidence that you can't possibly please all the people all the time, and a
reminder that, depending on how you looked at him, Reagan was either the epitome of a
good conservative president, or a severe falling short of the ideal conservative president
whom the intellectuals might have looked for beforehand.
