Thank you so much for that introduction and thank you for the opportunity to share some thoughts with you.
Today I will give a talk on bioelectricity with a specific focus, although we don't generally focus on microbiology or immunology in our group.
We've done a little bit of work in those areas and so I think this may be of special interest to this audience.
Here are the main points that I'm going to transmit today. We're going to talk about the fact that numerous issues in biomedicine depend on two critical things.
One is the ability to communicate anatomical and physiological target states, a.k.a. goals to cellular collectives, to groups of cells.
And also the correct setting of the boundary between self and world and this is very important and I'll show you what I mean by this.
I'm going to tell you that biology uses natural bioelectrical networks to establish emergent agents that have pattern memories, they have problem solving competencies, and they maintain a border between themselves and the outside environment.
And I'm going to argue that cell groups are literally a collective intelligence that navigates some very interesting spaces, including the space of gene expression, the space of physiological states, and of course the space of anatomical structures.
And failure modes of that process result in things like birth defects, they limit regeneration after injury, they result in cancer, possibly immune disorders, possibly aging, this is a cutting edge work, we don't really know that yet.
But we're going to be able to find out soon because tools are now available to read and write the content of the proto-cognitive medium of which we are all made, these bioelectrical networks among cells.
And that offers a roadmap for a new kind of regenerative medicine approach that targets the software of life and compliments all of the work in today's molecular medicine on the hardware of cells.
So the talk is going to come in three parts, an introduction where I set up some of the unusual perspectives that we use on all of this and then we'll talk about bioelectricity as a kind of cognitive glue that keeps all of these cells working together.
And then at the end, we will talk about this notion of hacking as a fundamental concept in biology.
So let's start with the simple observation that all of us were a single cell once. So each of us made this amazing journey from something that people call just chemistry and physics.
And I really don't like that term at all. But when you look at a single unfertilized oversight, what you see is a little chemical system and you say, okay, that's generally well described by chemistry and physics.
And eventually we become something like this, which is a system that has its own inner perspective, it has all kinds of intelligence, intelligent competencies that it has a man ability to techniques of behavioral science and maybe psychoanalysis and things like that.
And so this this remarkable process of embryonic development takes us from physics and chemistry into the science of the mind and we all made that journey slowly step by step.
There is no magical lightning flash at some point within that process that converts purely physical system into a truly cognitive system.
Okay, there's no special point at which that happens. This is a slow and gradual journey.
And all of us are kind of collective intelligence because we're all made of things like this. This is a single cell.
This happens to be a free living organism. This is called the lack of area.
It has no brain. It has no nervous system. But you can see that it's quite competent and all kinds of tiny little cell level agendas and so maintaining its metabolic goals, it's physiological goals, it's anatomical goals and so on.
And the interesting thing about biology is that each of us is made of this multi scale competency architecture.
That is not just structurally, you know, where sort of nested dolls where groups of us are made of organisms which are made of organs and tissues and cells and subcellular components.
But each of these layers is actually solving problems in its own space.
These are not merely passive subcomponents. They are all competent in solving various kinds of problems.
Now, as humans, we're reasonably good, not great actually, but reasonably good at recognizing intelligent behavior of medium sized objects moving at medium speeds in three dimensional space.
So primates, maybe birds, maybe an octopus, maybe a whale, we have some ability to understand and detect intelligence when we see it.
But there are all these other problem spaces in which various agents live and navigate. There's the space of possible gene expressions, very high dimensional space.
There's the space of anatomical, anatomical, different configurations of shape of the body, and then of course physiological space.
We're going to spend most of our time talking about anatomical morpho space, but just imagine if we had evolved with a built in sense of our own blood chemistry.
So if you had some sort of a sensor, like almost like a tongue, but let's say 20 different metrics that you could take of your blood chemistry at any given time,
and you were able to feel, you had a sense organ that was able to report that.
I think we would have no trouble perceiving that we live in a 23 dimensional space and that our liver and our kidneys and our various organs are actually intelligent agents,
navigating that space to solve all sorts of new stressors and problems that come at us every day.
And so this idea that we have to get better at navigating these different spaces and understanding how other systems navigate these spaces and recognizing exactly what competencies do they have to make decisions to move through these other spaces.
I think is going to be a critical part of the medicine to come.
And this is what long before you get to brains or anything like that, we find out that even subcellular components, right, that even individual cells are already a collective intelligence themselves, because they have molecular pathways and gene regulatory networks.
And as you can see here, each of these, these molecular networks are themselves a kind of learning agent, they have six different kinds of memory that they can muster, including pavlovian conditioning.
And that's, and that's before you even get to the level of a single cell. So it's sort of this, this, this, this multi scale architecture of agents with really interesting properties that that we want to take advantage of.
And for our focus on navigation of anatomical morpho space. Let's ask this, this question. Here's a cross section through a normal human body.
You can see the amazing complexity and order here, everything is in the right place right next to the right thing the right size and so on.
And one might ask the question, where does this pattern come from. In other words, where is it encoded it's very specific pattern that's the same and most individuals what where is it encoded.
And we, we know that that we have to get there from from this kind of starting position so we're all sort of, we all start as a ball of embryonic blasters and blastomers and eventually you get something like this so where is it stored.
Well, initially people will say well it's in the DNA of course it's in the it's in the genome we know we know where where it is it's in the human genome, but we can read genomes now.
We know what's in the genome not nothing like this is directly encoded in the genome, but the genome does specify is protein sequences which are the tiny hardware that every cell gets to have.
But beyond that there's this process of physiology where using that hardware these cells have to know what to build, they have to know when to stop.
As workers in regenerative medicine if a part of this is missing, we would like to know how to convince the cells to regrow it.
I don't think I won't have a time to talk about today but as engineers, we asked the further question which is, and what else can we get these exact same cells to build same DNA same cells what what else can we make them build other than this what else are they willing to build.
So these are these are some of the big big questions that were that we're asking, and you know this this comes up a lot the structure of the termite nest and the structure of the spider web are not directly in their genomes either and so all of this is a working out of a kind of
process that is running on top of the hardware that's genetically encoded. And so as we think about the future of the field the end game.
Here's how here's how we think about it someday.
You will be able to sit down in front of a device, a system called the anatomical compiler.
And the idea is that you will be able to draw like this, any animal plant organ biological robot anything you like, you'll be able to draw it. And if we knew what we were doing.
The system would compile down this anatomical goals description into a set of stimuli that would have to be given to cells to build exactly what you want it to build and get this case this nice three headed flower.
So the remember the understand the idea this is this is complete control over growth and form you should be able to say what you want and know what are the signals that you have to give to cells to produce it.
Now, this is not only fascinating from the perspective of evolution and cell biology but but it's critically important for biomedicine because if we had something like this, all of these things would go away.
So birth defects, traumatic injuries, cancer aging, maybe degenerative disease, all of this could be handled. If we could communicate to a group of cells what it is that they should be building.
And so the key is that this this anatomical compiler is not a 3d printer it's not about putting cells where you want them and micromanaging their, their properties.
It's really a communications device it's a translator of your anatomical goals to the set points that the cells are going to try to build.
And now I'll point out we don't have anything remotely like this we're very far from this and you might wonder why I mean genetics and molecular biology and genomics and so on have been operating for decades why don't we have something like this.
I just want to show you a very, very simple example of what's what what I think is missing here.
So this is the axolotl larvae. It's a it's a it's a kind of aquatic amphibian and the axolotl baby axolotl has little four legs.
This is a tadpole of a frog let's say Zen and Peslevis they do not have legs at this stage.
In my group we make something known as a frog a lot of the frog a lot of is a chimeric embryo it has some tissues from here and some tissues from there and they're perfectly viable.
And now I ask a simple question, we have the frog genome, we have the axolotl genome so we've sequenced both of these animals have been sequenced.
Could you tell me whether frog a lot of us are going to have legs or not.
And the answer is no at this point we have absolutely no models that will tell us, allow us to predict from from the genetic data whether this frog a lot of us going to have legs or not.
And that's because, while we are very good at as a community of getting this kind of information so hardware, you really nano level hardware information about what genes talk to what other genes what proteins associate with each other and so on.
While we're very good at this kind of information, we're really quite still quite a long way from having any kind of control over the large scale decision making that cells have in order to reach anatomical set points in in that morpho space.
You know how do individual cells agree on what they're going to build.
And so I think that the something that's very instructive is the journey that information technology took so this is what computer programming look like in the 40s and 50s, you literally had to interact with the hardware that was the way you were going to program this machine.
But the reason that nowadays, when you want to on your laptop switch from Photoshop to PowerPoint, you don't get out your soldering iron and start rewiring.
It's because what computer science realizes the power of a reprogrammable medium, the idea that if your software is good enough, if your hardware is good enough, and I'm going to argue that biological hardware is definitely good enough.
Then you have access to some really interesting competencies of your machine that don't require you to be doing everything at the, at the hardware level.
And modern molecular medicine is basically pretty much focused on this level now so CRISPR genomic editing pathway rewiring protein engineering all of these things all the excitement there is all about the hardware it's all about the, the molecules.
And I think we're really leaving on the table something very important, which is the ability of different levels of biology to process information in a, in a way that we can correctly call intelligence.
Now what do I mean by intelligence. I'm using William James's definition. There are many of course definitions I like this one.
What James said was that intelligence is the ability to reach the same goal by different means. So it's the it's it's a nice cybernetic definition that doesn't talk about having a brain or what scale you are temporarily or spatially or what what space you're operating in.
And this idea that that as a as an agent you have goals, and you have some degree of competency to get those goals met despite various things that are going to happen.
And he talks about a spectrum of, of systems from from two magnets trying to get together. And this is incredibly kind of low down on that on that spectrum of competencies, because for example if you separate them by a piece of wood.
The magnets will never go around and and and join each other because that would require them to temporarily get further away from their goal, and they simply don't have the capacity for that kind of delayed gratification.
Romeo and Juliet on the other hand do they have planning and they have all kinds of other things they can bring to bear on their problem. And in between you have autonomous vehicles and and and various kinds of animals and cells and tissues.
And so so this is a this is the kind of a spectrum of intelligence and various competencies to solve problems in a kind of space. So let's ask what kind of collective intelligence do cellular swarms deploy so cells in the body, what can they actually do.
Well, the first thing to think about is that development while it's very reliable so most of the time this egg develops into exactly what it's supposed to be.
It actually isn't hardwired because you can cut early embryos into into pieces.
And each half so let's say let's say you divide it in half here each half, you don't get a half a body you get too perfectly normal monosagotic twins. And so you've got this I this ability to navigate to the right ensemble of states, this target morphology that we call a normal human
variation. You can navigate there from different starting positions as a complete embryo as a half embryo and so on. And you can even go around some some local local minima along the way.
So, so that's, that's one one example. That kind of thing is not just for embryo some like here's here's that axolotl again. These guys regenerate their limbs, their eyes, their jaws, their tails, including spinal cord portions of their brain and heart.
What you can see here is that you have this you have this salamander limb, they do this natural experiment where they bite off each other's legs, if you house them together and so, no matter where it's it's it's been it's been amputated, it will do exactly what's needed to grow and then
it stops. That's the most amazing thing about regeneration is that it stops. How does it know when to stop. Well, all of these cells stop their activity when a correct salamander limb has appeared.
So what you're seeing here is a kind of error minimization scheme you're seeing this the system, no matter where it starts from here or here, it will do what it needs to do when it gets to the correct position in anatomical morpho space that's when it stops.
So you can think about this as a kind of anatomical homeostasis salamanders aren't the only ones to do this.
Humans regenerate their livers human children regenerate their fingertips and deer large adult mammal regenerates its antlers every year so up to a centimeter and a half of new bone per day, including vasculature
blood vessels and so on up to a very large structure, and, and they can do this so this is, we can we can talk later about the why it is that humans seem to have less capacity than some some amphibians but what what what I've just shown you is this idea that that this
multi scale architecture that we are made of so cells and tissues and organs are able to navigate their anatomical state space so get where they're going despite various injuries and perturbations and so on.
And so what we're going to do now is talk about how that happens how do the cells know what to make right how do they know what a correct salamander limb is for example, and how do they communicate with each other to to make that happen.
And for that, we're going to talk about something called bio electricity. So let's just remind ourselves of what the problem is that that we're facing here. Here is a normal tadpole. So here are the eyes here are the nostrils the mouth is here the brain gut.
And so these tadpoles are supposed to become frogs in in order for a tadpole to become a frog, it has to rearrange its face. So the eyes have to move the jaws have to move everything has to move around.
So it was thought that this was a hired wired, I very mechanical and simple process, whereby, well, every tadpole looks the same every frog looks the same so all you have to do is somehow encode the right direction and amount of movement for all these organs and then
they'll end up in the right place. So we decided to test that and this is very important for us, all of these estimates of intelligence, you have to do perturbative experiments you can't just guess and you can't have philosophical pre commitments to it.
And you can't just assume from observational data you have to do experiments. And so what we did was, in line with with James's idea that that you look to see how the system reacts to barriers and perturbations.
We made so called Picasso tadpoles. So everything is in the wrong place the it's all scramb the whole face is scrambled the eyes on the back of the head the jaws are off to the side.
It's a complete mess. And if if this was a hardware process, everything would end up in incorrect locations as the systems moved their normal amount in their normal direction.
But that isn't what happens at all. These animals give rise to very normal looking fraud.
And so what happens is that genetics doesn't specify a set of hardware rearrangements. What it actually gives you is hardware that executes an error minimization scheme at error. It executes a problem of reducing error from a particular set point.
And so this is the story that you see in textbooks which is very much focused on emergence and complexity. This idea that there are local rules so genes interact and gene regulars your networks they make some proteins proteins interact via physics and so on.
And eventually, out of lots of simple rules comes something very complex like this. And this is all true. Of course, this is this absolutely does occur.
This is definitely part of the story that feed forward emergence, right the idea that complexity will will emerge from from the execution of local rules is is is only part of it because when you deviate this system from that target morphology and this could be with injury.
It could be with teratogens mutations, whatever.
Then some very interesting new activities will kick in both at the level of physics and genetics that are basically error reduction loops, and you end up with a process of a kind of anatomical homeostasis where they will try to reduce that error and get back to where they're supposed to be.
Now on the one hand, this is this is familiar by biologists know all about feedback loops, of course, but there's a couple of interesting and novel things here one is that typically homeostatic loops and biology have are a scalar.
In other words, a single number it's a hunger or pH level or temperature or something like that's a single number.
Here that's not the case, you really have to know something about the complex shape of this organism to be able to correct after different kinds of damage.
So, so that's interesting. So the set point of this homeostatic process is some kind of a complex data structure.
But also, we're not encouraged, especially in molecular biology and cell biology, we're not encouraged to think about systems trying to do things we're not encouraged to think in a goal directed way we're told to think about chemistry and different ways that the subsystems interact with each
and what emerges right science of complexity. We're not we're not thought we're not taught to think about models in which the systems actually trying to achieve some sort of goal in a problem space.
So this this weird way of thinking about it makes a very strong prediction. It says that if this is true, we ought to be able to find the biophysical encoding of that set point.
We should know what the right pattern is well it has to be encoded somewhere.
And if we were able to find it, we could do the same thing that you do with thermostats or with any other kind of cybernetic kind of system which is, if you understand where the set point is encoded, you can learn to decode it, and you can rewrite it.
And let this let the system do what the pattern says in other words, we wouldn't have to intervene back here, which is what most of the current molecular medicine approaches are.
So you want changes up here at the system level, but all your tools are down here right molecular pathways and things like that, and working this backwards is incredibly hard if not impossible.
That's a big advantage if we could leave all this in place and simply reset the set point the way you do on your thermostat you don't rewire the system you just change the change the what what the system thinks of as the correct set point.
That would that would be of high advantage and so this is what we've been doing for for some time now is testing that hypothesis can we find decode and rewrite the set point of this homeostatic system.
Now, in thinking about what what might it even be you know how would you encode a complex anatomical or geometric shape and living tissue.
And one immediately thinks of the one example where that's not controversial so in the brain, we know that in the brain.
There's this hardware made up of cells in the network which have these little ion channels in them so they pass ions back and forth and they get a voltage that they can then share with their neighbors through these kind of gap junctions of these
processes. And that hardware drives a very interesting kind of software and here you can actually watch this group did this amazing video of electrical activity in the zebrafish brain.
What what happens in the brain of course is storage of complex patterns as goal states, and then control of the body to try to reach those goals state so we know it's possible and biological tissue to store set points and to work hard to try to get to them.
And there's this process of neural decoding this this program that research program that that seeks to read information like this, and extract from that all of the memories, the, the preferences the goal states of the animal.
Now, the remarkable thing is that that trick that that that incredible trick of having an electrical network store and work towards specific goal states is not unique to the brain.
Evolution discovered it about the time of bacterial biofilms, and every cell in your body does this every cell has ion channels, just about every cell has gap junctions that it can form with its neighbors.
And so, one can ask, what did your body think about long before it had a brain and muscle to move through three dimensional space what was this computational medium used for, and we can try to decode it right that's the that's you know very parallel kind of idea to what neuroscientists
except outside of the nervous system. So we developed some of the first tools to read and write this information outside the nervous system.
So the first is a set of voltage sensitive fluorescent dye approaches that you basically soak your, your samples in and they tell you where all the voltage gradients are so this is a video of an early frog embryo made by my colleague Danny Adams.
And when she was a postdoc in my group she worked out a protocol by which we could use these voltage dies to to see all the electrical conversations that these cells are having with each other.
Then, there's a lot of computer modeling that we do and simulation to try to understand how does the expression of ion channels in the cells, give rise to specific patterns.
And then what happens to these patterns when the tissue is altered and so on. I want to show you an example of two of these patterns.
One is we call this the electric face. So, here's a time lapse again this is a voltage imaging die it's a grayscale instead of a pseudo color.
And what what you see here is that at one frame of this of this movie. This is what the bioelectric pattern looks like I'm showing it to you because this is one of the easiest most obvious patterns to understand it literally looks like a face.
Here's where the eyes going to go here the placos here's where the mouth is going to be this we're literally looking at the pattern memory of the cells that are telling us what it's going to build shortly thereafter.
And we know this pattern is absolutely required to have a normal face, because as I'm going to show you in a minute when we perturb that pattern, the gene expression shifts and thus the anatomy shifts.
Now that's a normal pattern now there's also a pathological pattern where if we inject a human oncogene into this tackle, then these cells will eventually form a tumor eventually it metastasizes.
But long before that you can actually see using this voltage die you can actually see these cells have disconnected from the electrical network here, they're going off on their own.
And as far as they're concerned their amoebas in the big wide world they're just treating the rest of this body as outside environment, and you can track this so so this is where we're of course working on this is a kind of cancer diagnostic tool, much like this is a birth defect monitoring tool.
Now now tracking all of these things is important but even more important is the ability to rewrite them. So, it's not just about reading these biological patterns we need to alter them.
And I want to be very clear that when we alter these things we are not using electrodes, there are no magnets there are no waves no frequencies no radiation no electromagnetic fields.
What we are doing is exploiting the natural interface that these cells are using to control each other, and that is the ion channels on their surface.
All of these, all of these cells expose this amazing interface to each other and to us, which are ion channels, the end gap junctions, and we now have all the tools of molecular physiology from neuroscience to control them.
We can open them we can close them you can do this with drugs, you can use this with light as an optogenetics, you can do it with genetic modification of the channels themselves.
There are many ways many ways to do it, but it's quite specific the idea is, can we induce a can we open and close these channels to induce a very specific pattern.
And, and the answer is yes you can.
And I'm going to show you a few things that happen when you do that. First of all, here's an early frog embryo and what we've done here is to inject some RNA and coding potassium channels.
What that RNA will do is set up a, a voltage a local spot of voltage that looks just like that I spot that I just showed you a minute ago on the electric face.
And if we do that in some cells that would otherwise have been gut, then what these gut cells will do is change the what they're working on and instead build an eye.
So, if you section through these eyes they can have all the right lens at all the right components lens right in the optic nerve all that stuff.
And from this you see a couple of interesting, interesting features. One is that the bioelectric pattern is instructive. It's not about generalized damage, it's about telling cells what to do.
If you move that I spot to, for example, where the guts should go then these are the cells that will make an eye. So, so the bioelectric memory pattern is in fact instructive for anatomy. That's the first thing.
The second thing is the modularity. We didn't tell these cells how to make an eye we didn't tell all the stem cells what to do where to put the optic nerve where to put the retina and so on.
All we did was, was give a very simple signal that basically just says make an eye here. Everything downstream is the competency of the responding medium.
It's the responding cells that know what to do when they get that signal so it's a very high level subroutine call if you do any coding it's basically a subroutine call.
And the next and the last thing that I find really interesting here is that if you look at your developmental biology textbook what it will say is that only these cells up here in the anterior norectoderm are competent to become eye.
And the reason they say that that that's their estimate of the competency of the tissue. The reason people say that is because they've probed it with a master I gene called pack six.
And if you miss express pack six, indeed, you can only get eyes up here and nowhere else. And so, so using that tool, it reveals to you a competency, a lack of competency in the rest of the body.
But in, but that's not the right tool. If you use by electric signals in fact you can get eyes anywhere we've gotten them on the tail and the gut and anywhere you want.
So that teaches is an important thing to be humble about the competencies of the material we're dealing with because it's only as good as as as we are in giving it the right prompt.
If you do if you do this kind of thing you can make ectopic inner ear so odysseists here, you can make ectopic hearts, you can make ectopic for brains new legs so here's our nice six legged frog and ectopic fins now that's kind of weird tadpoles aren't supposed to have fins we'll talk about that in a minute
So we've been using this kind of idea to to to give high level anatomical signals to redirect where cells are going in that space. And one obvious application is in regenerative medicine.
So here are some frogs when you amputate their legs at this stage normally nothing happens 45 days later there's basically nothing.
So this is a model of ion channel modifying drugs that immediately induces an msx one positive blastima. It induces.
You got some by 45 days you've already got some toes you've got a toenail the most distal part, and eventually a perfectly respectable leg, and it's touch sensitive, and it's motile so it's functional.
Again, the way this works is that we only intervene in the system for 24 hours so for that that first initial period and then we don't touch it again the record, our longest experiment is 18 months.
So during those 18 months the full on adult frog regrows their leg in the one treated with a particular cocktail.
And we don't touch it during that time at all. This is not about micromanagement this is not about telling stem cells what to do or bore bore scaffolds or any of that.
It's about convincing the cells on day one that they're going towards the leg building region of more for space, not the scarring region of more for space.
And here I have to do a disclosure which is that Dave Kaplan and I have this company called more for pseudocals, where we are trying to move that approach now from amphibians to to mammals and we are doing work to try to get in eventually
to get in the clinic with a mammalian limb regeneration application delivered by this wearable bioreactor which is what David's lab does.
Okay, so I want to shift gears to really nail this idea of these bioelectric patterns as kinds of memory. And to do that, I want to talk about a different organism this is called planaria.
And so these guys are these very cute little worms, they have, they have a true brain, they have a central nervous system they have lots of different organs and tissues, same neurotransmitters as you and I.
And they have this amazing property that if you cut them into pieces, and the record I think is like 276 pieces or something like that, you cut them into pieces every piece regrows into a perfect little worm.
So, so that's amazing so so every every piece gives rise to a to a complete correct anatomy. And by the way, not only are they cancer resistant, but they are actually immortal. So there's no such thing as an old asexual planarion.
And they, they also have an extremely messy genome, which is also another interesting thing that we can talk about, but but they have this amazing anatomical fidelity.
And so what happens is that if you if you amputate let's say the head and the tail and you leave this, this middle fragment here, you might ask, how does this fragment know how many heads it's supposed to have and that's the question that we asked how does it actually know how many heads it's
supposed to have. And it turns out that there's an electrical circuit that we characterize. And this electrical circuit is what tells it how many heads it's supposed to have and so this is what the voltage looks like in that fragment.
You can see that it says one head.
Now, what we're able to do is take that animal and rewrite this electrical circuit to say two heads. This is kind of messy still a technology is very much still being worked out, but we can say no you you should have two heads.
And what will happen is that if you then cut this animal it will in fact have two heads. So this isn't Photoshop these are real real animals. Now, the amazing thing of is that this voltage map is not a map of this animal.
That's really critical. This is not a map of this two headed guy. This is a voltage map of this perfectly anatomically and molecularly normal animal, only if you cut him, does he then make two heads in the absence of that injury.
He just stays how it is. And so a single planarian body a normal one headed planarian body can store two different representations of what to do if you get injured in the future to different ideas of what a correct planarian looks like.
So, so the couple of interesting things here first of all this is basically a counterfactual right this idea of brains being able to do this amazing time travel where you're able to think about things that are not true right now.
So you're able to have memories of the past anticipation of the future right so that's mental time travel. So, so a very basic primitive version of that counterfactual is this ability to store a pattern of what you will do if you happen to get injured in the future.
And so this is why I'm saying that this is this is that that that ability to rewrite that set point, we literally have rewritten the representation of how the pieces know what the correct anatomy is and once you've rewritten it.
Well, that's the only thing they have to go on there's nothing else for them to compare to and so then this is their new normal.
Now, I call this a memory, because it has all the properties of being memory in that if you take one of these two headed worms, and you cut off the primary head and you cut off this ectopic secondary head, and you just leave you know in plain water just let them regenerate.
What they will do is they will continue being two headed, even though they have a normal genome we haven't touched the genome there's no genomic editing here no CRISPR no trans genes no, nothing like that.
So the memory is in the bio electrical circuit they literally remember how many heads, and like any good memory if you rewrite it, it keeps. And so, so you can keep cutting them as far as we can tell forever, and they will stay two headed here here are these animals you can see, you can see them hanging out.
And so, so so this has all the properties of memory and again, think about the role of the genome here if you if if I were to ask you where is the number of heads in the planarian encoded and you said it was in the genome.
You'd be wrong what what the genome doesn't code is hardware that by default starts out encoding this the set the state that says one head.
But, but it's not determined it's not nailed down by the hardware because you can change it you can change it in C to without actually changing any of the genetics, and that's that's just the tip of the iceberg of information here that's generated physiologically in that hardware.
We are not the only ones that can hijack this electrical system.
Bacteria can do it too. And this is this is a study that we did in collaboration with with Ben Wolf, and Catherine Williams, Kate's and under was an undergrad and in our lab.
And what she found was that there are bacteria that live natively they're part of the microbiome they live natively on these planaria. And when we interfere with the relative proportions of the different types of bacteria.
They can they can exert a strong influence on their host, for example, to make their host to headed, or to make radical changes in their visual system. So this is the normal here the icepots here the optic nerves.
Radical changes in that visual system, all driven by again no genetic change but all driven by signaling from the bacteria that are able to interface to the native controller that sets things like head number head shape and and so on.
So what we're doing now is we're trying to unify two very different approaches that people take the problems like this on the one hand, the, the state space of the biophysical circuit that that shows you all the different, all the different ways that that it could that it could be,
and some ideas from connection is machine learning and dynamical systems theory that tries to understand how do networks store information how do they recover from partial input, and so on and so these were trying to unify and some of that is is described here.
Now, interestingly, it's not just about head number it's it's it's more general than that it's about head shape as well. So if we take this nice triangular headed planarian amputate the head, and then confuse the bio electrical circuit about what it should be doing.
Then you sometimes get flat heads like this people Lena, or you get round heads like this as Mediterranean. These, these creatures are between 100 and 150 million years distance from this guy again remember no genetic change here.
Not only the head shape, but actually the shape of the brain, and the distribution of the stem cells changes to be just like these guys.
So this hardware this perfectly normal genetic hardware is happy to visit other attractors in that morpho space that belong normally to some other species but that that hardware can go there no no no problem.
So you starting to see this idea of reprogrammability this is what I, what I said at the beginning we the biological tissue has the ability for you to call large, large scale sub routines with very simple triggers very simple signals.
And then and then everything else gets handled underneath. It has the ability to remember and to store new patterns that you write into it using this physiological physiological interface.
And it has the ability to, to visit different different attractors other than what the default of the hardware normally is. Now, you can even visit some attractors that you wouldn't say belong to Plain area at all so you can go further.
And we've, we've, we've made these spiky forms like this, these cylindrical things that are not even flat. And then of course the hybrid kind of these kind of hybrid shapes. And so you can think about exploring and this is something that Darcy Thompson wrote about as early as
1917, explore the latent space around any particular form to see what else it's actually capable of.
And I think this this this space is if we were doing a bioengineering talk I would show you that the space is actually quite quite enormous and fascinating.
The last story I want to tell you on the bioelectric front has to do with repair of birth defects.
So, and, and a new, a new way to, to address the repair of very complex structures. So, so here's a frog brain. You've got the forebrain midbrain and hindbrain you can see it comes in two halves left and right.
And if you expose these embryos to various kinds of teratogens, and that might be nicotine alcohol various mutations, you can get characteristic defects, like, like, like this for example.
So, we sought to ask a question.
How could we repair something complex like this and to do that, we created a model a computational model of the bioelectric pattern that normally tells this brain, what shape and what size, it should be.
And the thing about this bioelectric pattern actually is that it has this very characteristic bell curve shape, and, and make it flattening it out either up here or down here, both has the same effect it gives you terrible brain defects.
It's very important that this particular shape in the electrical pattern be there. And so we simply asked the model then. Okay, but if the pattern is wrong, what channels could we open and close to get back to that pattern right so it's the ideas is using a predictive
computational model of the bioelectrics to say how do we fix that memory the pattern memory of what you're supposed to be.
And amazingly, the, the models made a suggestion about some a very interesting channel called hcn two. And when we tried it to test the predictions of the model so we basically up regulated hcn two in these in these creatures.
Here is a normal brain. Here is, and I'm showing you the actually the what I consider to be the most impressive or the or the worst kind of teratogen this is a genetic mutation.
And the gene called notch notch is a very important neuro genesis gene. So with that overactive notch mutant. There is no forebrain, the hindbrain and midbrain or a bubble these animals have no behavior these lay there.
And so this is a very severe defect. And so we asked could we possibly fix this could we, could we repair the state, and it turns out that if you up regulate hcn two channel activity just like the model said, either by injecting new hcn two RNA, or by using
drug openers of existing hcn twos and these are human approved anti epileptics that if you do that, you get back to the correct brain. In fact, these animals have not only the right brain shape, but they have the right gene expression in the brain and they have
and they have their and they have their IQs back because we can do behavioral testing, and they learn in a way that's indistinguishable from controls.
Now, I find this remarkable because it turns out that using using bio like the bioelectric interface guided by a computational model, you can sometimes fix certain hardware defects in software.
I'm not claiming that will always be possible but in this case, a hardware defect a broken notch signaling pathway can be overridden by giving these cells a reinforced memory of what they should be doing.
Right. So this is one of many examples where where the physiological state trumps the genetic state.
So more more more generally, what we're doing now is setting up a system system like this, where you could go from the initial issue of okay I have an incorrect pattern that might be a birth defect it might be a tumor whatever.
You know what the correct pattern is because we're working on the physiomic data sets, and you know which channels are in your tissue of interest because though that already exists because all this stuff has been profiled and online.
And so, so if you integrate the simulator, you can ask which of those channels can be used to get the pattern back to normal and so this is just the beginnings you can you actually play with this it's online.
This is the beginning of the interface where you can you could pick different different tissues either normal or transformed and then see all the channels that are your potential targets.
So called electroseuticals, because there's a there's a huge database of drugs that target all of these channels, many of them are human approved.
So, so this is what we're looking for looking at in the future is the use of computational platform guided electroseuticals for birth defects for regenerative medicine and for cancer.
And I will mention just for this audience I will mention that there's there's a the bioelectric system also affects immune function. So we in particular studied the innate immune system, and we found that survival of embryos when they were challenged
with genic bacteria is much, much improved if you hyperpolarize these the tissues with with with specific specific drugs, or in fact RNAs, and some of that some of that functionality is mediated by serotonin.
You can put a serotonin transporter dominant negative in you can you can abrogate the activity. And when we looked at using next gen sequencing so or so RNA seek.
We found that that changes in bioelectrics, alter many different targets that belong to the inflammation infection, and other kinds of immune relevant endpoints.
We also found this is kind of interesting we found that the presence of the brain is an important component of that loop. So, in the absence of the brain and the nice thing about these this this model systems as you can remove the brain the body
continues to develop it's, it's, it's okay that they're completely viable, but what they do have is decreased ability to fight off infections.
There's this really interesting interplay and I don't have time to go into all the details but you can you can catch that here, and even some information about macrophages and the adaptive immune system.
But but there's this there's this really important interplay between the brain and the non neural bioelectricity of other cells, and the immune response that leads to either tolerance or susceptibility or to clearance of bacterial infection.
One of the things that we found this is a cross section through a frog embryo is that if you inject fluorescent bacteria so this is pathogenic E coli made fluorescent by expressing GFP.
This pattern is very familiar to developmental biologists this is exactly where neural crest cells travel in the body to make various organs. So the bacteria are following these the same paths that native cells follow during morphogenesis.
There's much more to learn about this we're just beginning to scratch the surface.
So, for the last, the last few minutes, I want to kind of bring it back and think about what this means for questions of of biomedicine but but specifically about infection and, and things like that and I want to focus on this notion of of hacking as a fundamental
What we've seen up until now is that collect cellular collective so groups of cells use bioelectricity to keep collective memories of what they should be doing specifically in anatomical space.
And they have the ability to respond to various cues, for example, novel by electric signals, and take journeys in that more for space and build various organs and repair organs and things like that.
And so the idea is that we really have a collective intelligence here, it's held together by bioelectricity very much like your collective intelligence of your individual neurons is held together by the bioelectricity of your of your brain and nervous system.
So, so let's think about how that how that looks in in in other spaces.
So, these are some some examples, and I'm sure I'm sure you all know more about this than I do, but but there are many examples in which parasites actually hack behavior.
So this is toxic plasma that is known to to to affect the behavior of the animal hosts that it's in and the human so it does things like a lower risk aversion and things like that.
And then then of course there's this zombie and fungus which again controls the body of the ant and then forces it to take various behaviors to that facilitate the fungus lifecycle and so on.
So the idea is that creatures hack each other's policies for navigating three dimensional space there are lots of parasites that do host altered behavior.
And that's not all because these parasites can also hack the behavior of of life in anatomical and physiological spaces. And what do I mean by that.
Well, here's, here's development and we really did developments amazing but it really allows us into a false sense of understanding because we look at this the reliability of this process here's an acorn.
And we tend to think that we know what the oak genome does it takes you from for it takes you on a particular path and morpho space from here to here. This is what happens 100% of the time this is what happens.
So so that's what we think that that the hardware encoded by the genetics we think that that's what it knows how to do.
One thing we would never have guessed is that these exact same cells are also capable of forming this, or this, or who knows what else, because there's a little, there's a little hacker.
In this case it's a it's a wasp that lays down an embryo, and that embryo signals to the plant cells. It doesn't it doesn't build this thing they have these are not wasp cells these are plant cells.
It puts out some signals that convinces the cells of the leaf to build this kind of crazy structure. And from looking at that leaf, or from looking at the oak genome we would have absolutely no idea that these cells are even capable of doing something like this taking this journey in morpho space.
Until it was we found that it was prompted by this. So, so this idea of we call it, we call it bio prompting this idea that that if you're dealing with a reprogrammable competent material.
It's not all you don't have to micromanage it you can find some some very high level signals that are going to exploit the competencies of that material to build specific things and to take other other journeys.
And so, the key questions here are something like this, that has a multi scale biological system. How do you know when you are being hacked. How do you know when, where the border is between you and the outside world.
What what is, which signals are yours which signals are coming at you from from outside what and when you're born what what are you what what sensors do you have what effectors do you have you really don't know.
And there are many examples in psychology as well as physiology of disorders in the ability to set a border between you and the outside world right there are lots of lots of patients who have trouble figuring out whether various impulses they have are coming from them or from from the outside.
And there's this there's this idea think about the difference between learning versus being trained. Yeah, when when you're learning.
The implication is that you're the boss and you're functioning in this sort of dumb environment and it's up to you what you're going to learn from that environment.
If you're trained, the situation is similar on one hand but on the other hand there's another agenda on the other side of that, that that environment is no longer zero agency right there's another agent there that's serving their agenda by training you in a particular way.
And so, being able to tell which signals are yours, which signals are coming from your own body parts and which signals are coming from a parasite means that it's really important to know the boundary computationally not just physically this, you know, skin or whatever
but the computational boundary between you and the outside world. And for biomedicine, the other thing that's really important is really to get the buy in from cells on whatever signal you're trying to send, because oftentimes if you if you if you trigger this kind of resistance,
then what you're going to get are things like drug drug habituation and failure of the ability to reset permit you to affect any kind of permanent cures, you can manage symptoms during the while you're giving a drug but as soon as you take the drug away goes right
back or in fact sometimes it gets worse with most of our drugs have that property. So, so the idea to avoid resistance is to change the set points, not to micromanage the symptoms or the current state, but to actually change what it is that the collective of the cells is trying to do.
And so, let's just, let's just think about this.
How do you set the boundaries between self and world. This is, this is a schematic of an embryonic blaster term, let's say 50,000 cells we were all something like this one's flat sheet.
When you look at this and you say, Oh, there's an embryo. What, what are you really counting when you say there's one embryo. What is there one of I mean it's 50,000 cells what is there one of.
Well, what there's one of is alignment both physical be in the sense of planar cell polarity, but also in anatomical alignment of all of these cells towards a specific goal, all of these cells are working together to build one specific thing meaning they all are going to take the same journey in that anatomical
space from a single cell to a particular complex anatomy.
And, and this is actually quite similar to a problem that you might have when looking at a brain if you didn't already know what a human was, and somebody showed you a three and a half pound or whatever it is of brain tissue and said, How many individuals do you think fit in there, how many
cognitive cells do you think it fit in there. We have absolutely no idea you know we don't know what the density of a, of a typical of a neural medium is for a typical human type of cognition we really don't know how many you can fit in there there's all kinds of interesting clinical work on that.
So, the same thing is true of the embryonic blaster term on when I was a grad student I used to do this experiment.
Take a little needle and scratch of this is a duck duck embryo scratch a little, a little put a little scratch in that blaster term, and for the for about four hours until they heal back up.
Each of these little islands doesn't feel the rest, and it decides that it's the embryo and it and you get a con joint twins like this or triplets.
And this means this is this is really interesting it means that when you look at one embryo.
The question of how many cells or how many individuals are in there is not fixed by the genetics.
It might be zero it might be one it's usually one but it might be actually maybe up to half a dozen, depending on what these cells decide to do and how how did how the collectivity works.
Because every cell is every other cells neighbor, right every cell is somebody else's neighbor, then in this kind of joined lacerum you see that that each, each individual has to sort of decide, where do I end and where does the other guy begin that that idea is right there from from embryogenesis
setting up that that border between you and the outside world has to be calculated in the beginning, and some cells are actually confused they're not quite sure, and that gives rise to actually laterality defects and conjuring twins this is something
that we worked out back in 96 or so why it is that conjuring twins have laterality defects, it's because some of these cells don't know am I the right side of this one or am I the left side of that one.
So, what happens is that, and this is just the last couple of a couple of ideas here, what happens is that when cells get together, they are able to inflate or enlarge their cognitive like on in space and time they're able to perceive more signals they're able to have larger
computational capacities. And this is what evolution has given us based on the ability for using this by electrical and other interfaces to scale up our goals from the tiny little goals of the cells so metabolic and so on, they scale up to these very grandiose goals of keep
retaining a limb and repairing it if anything happens to it, but that has a failure mode and that failure mode is cancer. And when these cells disconnect from the electrical network, they can no longer support these complex representations of things they should be
doing they go back to a single cell amoeba lifestyle basically proliferate and migrate to wherever life is good and this is glioblastoma. And so, on this kind of weird idea that cancer cells are not more selfish than other cell types, right
in theory, model cells is being less cooperative or more selfish, but not more selfish, I think it's just their selves are smaller, whereas the self here is quite large and it maintains this whole thing.
These have a little tiny amoeba size self. And so using that using that crazy idea, we've actually developed a therapeutic around inflating the, the boundary between self and world for these transform cells not killing them.
These are the co injecting ion channels that force them to remain in electrical connection to the rest of the tissue. And here this is these and nasty oncogenes like KRAS mutations and so on.
But, but if you if you manage the bioelectrics appropriately, even though the oncoprotein is blazingly expressed look look at that in fact it's all over the place. There's no tumor, this is the same animal there's no tumor, and that's because it's not the genetics
it's not the oncogene that drives the phenotype it's the physiology. It's the decision of the cells in a collective that they're not going to be more acting as amoebas they're going to be making nice skin nice muscle and so on.
And so, remarkably that process actually involves bacteria it involves butyrate made by bacteria. So here's yet another and we study that in this paper.
It works at a distance from where the oncogenes actually are because there's this there's the signaling used by you, depending on a butyrate transporter, that's part of this part of this whole process so once again the microbiome is key here.
And so, I'll just end here by pointing out that this idea of cells hacking each other is ubiquitous we're only able to do these things because that is what the cells expect anyway they have an interface that allows them to hack each other.
So when, you know, come back to this example when when we inject an ion channel to force the cells to build an eye. If we only hit a few of them so this is a cross section of a lens sitting in the tail of a temple.
The blue ones are the ones we injected. What do they do well they hack all their neighbors to cause them to participate with them because there's not not enough of them.
They know there's not enough of them to make a proper lens so they recruit their neighbors. And that of course is seen in other kinds of collective intelligence is like ants and termites where a few of them will take on a project is not enough of them so they will recruit their their
So the cells are constantly hacking each other and trying to convince each other to do new things. Sometimes they cooperate sometimes they compete. This is all discussed here actually competition between your body parts is quite important.
And so all of this focuses on not a bottom up approach where we talk about micromanaging specific pathways, but a top down approach where we ask, what does the collective remember what are the goals that it's trying to reach what where are the set points encoded, and how could we hack them by
rewriting the set points and talking to them at a very high level. So this is this is kind of my layout of biomedicine where most of what's going on is here these kind of bottom up interventions that are trying to micromanage certain things.
And all of this is what I think of as future medicine, this idea that it's going to look a lot more like a kind of somatic psychiatry and a lot less like chemistry, because all the key models in this field are going to be around information.
They're going to be around what to what do the collective agents at different scales. What do they believe what are their, what's their calculus of decision making and so on, and you can you can read more about that here.
So, lots more lots more papers if if anybody wants to dig down and some of the philosophical aspects about what machines are and what cognition is and so on.
And I'll just stop here and I want to thank the people who did all the work. So, JF Par who did the immune, the native immune system by electrics and Celia Herrera-Rincon who did the brain and immune system work.
Py, VipeHivePy did all the the ectopic eye work and the planaria work was done by Johanna Bischoff and Fallon Durand.
Danny Adams did the the voltage dies and Juanita's work and Brooke are working on the bioelectrics of cancer. So I'll thank our various technical support that we have in the lab, our many amazing collaborators, our funders here that have supported the work that I told you about.
Two disclosures, so more facuticals and astonishing labs, which are two companies that support some of our work and most of all the model systems because the animals really do all the hard work. So thank you very much and that's it. I'll take questions.
