Thank you so much, and thank you all for having me here to share some ideas with you.
After the fact, if you would like to find any of the reprints, the software, the data sets, everything is at these websites here.
So I'm of course not a clinician. My background is computer science, and then since then I've been leading a group on very basic research into biological organization.
But I think what I'm going to do is take you through some points that really start out in a fairly philosophical place and then eventually we'll get through some mechanisms and I think real implications for medicine going forward.
So the main points I would like to transmit today are these.
I'm going to talk about this notion of a multi-scale competency architecture and the way that many layers of the organism solve problems in different problem spaces.
And I'm going to talk about this notion that cells, tissues, organs, and so on, literally quite literally have a kind of collective intelligence, meaning problem solving in different spaces.
And I'm going to argue that definitive regenerative medicine will require us to exploit that collective intelligence and communicate our anatomical goals to this to this collective.
I'm going to show you some mechanisms specifically how endogenous by electrical networks in all tissues, not just nerve and muscle are a really tractable interface for exerting that kind of control.
If you want to communicate to that intelligence, you need to understand how that collective is held together and this is bioelectricity.
Not surprising. It's the same thing that happens in the brain.
And we have tools now. We've created some tools to read and write that information. I'll describe that.
And I'll show you some applications in birth defects, regenerative medicine, and cancer. We work in various model systems, but all of this is now heading towards preclinical applications.
One of the key things that I'm interested in is this spectrum of perspectives on living bodies that is kind of emphasized by these two competing metaphors, that of machines and that of organisms.
And so, you know, this kind of thing, I don't need to tell you that there are many examples like this where a kind of a machine metaphor for repair of the body is relevant.
But then, of course, after you've done what you need to do, then we have this process of healing and adjustment where the body has a lot of endogenous competencies to reset various set points and to do things that we do not need to micromanage.
And what I'm interested in is the spectrum, what happens in between these two and how they connect to each other.
And I really like this comment from Fabrizio Benedetti, who studies placebo effects and things like that. And he says that words and drugs have the same mechanism of action underneath.
And we're going to talk about this link between cognition and intelligence and really the practicalities of repairing bodies.
The first thing I want to do is I want to show you some unusual capabilities of biological systems, because I think in focusing on health and disease in human patients, we often lose sight of some of the amazing biology that's out there.
And that is really telling us some generic and profound things.
This is a tappel of the frogs and the slavus, one of our models, here is the brain, here is the gut, here are the nostrils and here's the mouth.
And what you'll notice is that there are no eyes where they're supposed to be. So the primary eyes have been prevented, but what we did do is induce an eye to form on its tail.
And I'll show you in a few minutes how we do that. These eyes make us make an optic nerve, the optic nerve comes out here, it does not reach to the brain, it synapses onto the spinal cord, or sometimes other places, but it does not go to the brain.
And the amazing thing is that we've made this machine that tests these animals for visual learning, and these animals can see quite well.
It does not require generations of evolutionary adaptation to use your behavioral repertoire with a different sensory motor architecture.
There are no eyes connected to the brain, the eye is now on the tail.
And within that animal, so no multi-generational selection pressure within that animal, this architecture is able to figure out that what's coming in from this weird patch of tissue back here is in fact visual data.
And this has massive implication that that kind of plasticity has massive implications for evolution and so on.
And this, of course, in humans, this is related to sensory augmentation and sensory substitution and prosthetics and things like that, that kind of plasticity.
There's another kind which has to do with metamorphosis.
And so this is a caterpillar. Caterpillars live are a kind of soft-bodied creature with a very particular controller that runs a body that has no hard elements, meaning you can't push on anything.
What you can do is sort of change target and things like that.
And it lives in a two-dimensional world, eating leaves, but it has to turn into this. This is a butterfly that is a hard-bodied creature.
It flies through a three-dimensional world. It drinks nectar. And so during this metamorphosis process, the brain is basically completely dissolved.
Many of the cells die, most of the connections are broken, and a new brain suitable for running this kind of body is rebuilt.
Well, that's already amazing, but the next amazing thing about this is that memories that are formed in the caterpillar persist in the butterfly.
So if you train the caterpillar, the butterfly will show evidence of recall despite the fact that its brain has been taken apart and basically refactored.
Not only that, when you train it to feed, when you train the caterpillars to feed on a particular color substrate, the butterflies will remember and go to that color to feed.
But in fact, they don't eat the same thing. So what's food to the caterpillar is not at all food to the butterfly.
And so not only is there a persistence of memory, there's also a generalization of the notion of the category of food.
It's not just that you remember, this is where I find leaves. This is where I find food.
And when the definition of food changes, because your whole body is different, all the memories carry over.
So there's this, there's this amazing ability to remap cognitive content on to a changing architecture and this has this has many, many implications for let's say therapeutics for degenerative brain disease in humans and persistence of personal identity as your brain gets replaced by some someday by new stem cells and so on.
So, so, so that that's another kind of piece of biology. And then the third one is this which is even more sort of impressive these planaria. These are flat words that regenerate every part of their body.
We'll talk about more, more about that. But if you train them to recognize this particular bumpy architecture as as as food as as where they get fed, you can cut off their heads with their brain.
The tail will sit there doing nothing for about eight days they have they regrow a new brain. And when the brain shows up they resume behavior and they show that they remember the original information.
And they do have a true centralized brain, same nor transmitters that you and I have.
And in this case, it's it's clear that that information is somehow distributed it is imprinted on to the new brain as it forms so.
So this is information moving through the body and so I show these examples to kind of stress the commonalities between the things that we see in terms of memory and learning, and the transformation of bodies under under metamorphosis under development and so on that these
are highly linked. So, in order to think about what this means ultimately for for kind of definitive regenerative medicine, I'm going to start thinking about this idea of scaling up control systems.
So here we have a rat, and this rat has learned to press the lever it gets a it gets a tasty reward. Now, the thing is that this, there is no that that associate of memory does not belong to any cell in the rat because no individual cell had that experience.
So the lever was interacted with by the cells at the palms. The sugar is is is obtained by by these intestinal cells, no individual cell had this experience and so in order to understand who it is that owns that associate of memory between these events, you have to, you have to
realize that there's this higher level emergent organism there's a kind of cognitive glue here that binds the individual cells into an emergent system that can store and process and act on these kinds of associate of memories that do not belong to any of the parts.
And there's a kind of credit assignment problem here is you know all this this organism needs to figure out what happened that that caused that actual reward, and so on so these are very interesting issues.
And this this scale up this idea of forming emergent control systems from from lower level components is really fundamental to our architecture. So if I told you that just by sheer of force of will alone just just by by thinking about it.
I can depolarize a large number of cells in my body so so change their electrical polarization which means move ions from from here to there.
You would think either that I was making up stories or maybe it's some sort of really exotic biofeedback yoga some kind of, you know, rare mind, you know, kind of mind body control thing.
And the thing to realize is that this of course is is not rare at all this is 24 seven how voluntary action works. So in the morning when you have the high level cognitive intent of going into your office to work.
That intent has to filter down to the actual muscles that are going to be depolarized to move your body to get it done.
So, so this is this ability of crossing levels all the way from from high high level metacognitive goal seeking mechanisms down to the actual molecular biology of your muscle cells.
That is what our body architecture does 24 seven, it allows information to span levels from from high level cognition down to the to a control of molecular mechanisms.
And so there we have in in engineering we have a whole spectrum, and I call this the axis of persuadability which is just basically a spectrum of diverse agents, all the way from very simple mechanical devices, all the way up through cybernetic homeostats and
various learning systems and eventually, you know, complex metacognition. And the thing is that different toolkits are used at all of these levels and it's important to get it right.
So so treating treating complex biological agents as simple machines is leaves a lot on the table and then runs into all kinds of ethics issues, and conversely, trying to communicate various complex reasons to something like this is a waste of time.
And so, so for any given system you want to get the right, you want to guess at the correct level not too low not too high the correct level, in order to have techniques that are actually going to be effective.
And so, now this and so the thing is that this this is that you can't decide this on a philosophical basis for any system it's empirically have to do experiments.
And so the question is where do cellular collectives fit in here are they simple mechanical machines are they cybernetic homeostats I can they learn that you know where do where do they fit.
So we will talk about that. And so, each of us makes this amazing journey from being a little blob of chemicals that is well described by physics and chemistry we're an unfertilized.
And through this amazing process of embryonic development, we become something like this or even something like this. And so, of course, there is no developmental biology offers no magical lightning bolt moment at which physics becomes mind.
And so we really need to understand the origins both evolutionarily but also developmentally the origins of the various intelligence and other cognitive capacities that that we enjoy by the time we are we get here.
And people feel that well okay so so there is this there is this strange progression from from a blob of chemistry into into an actual cognitive human, but at least but at least we're true unified intelligences we're not like ants and be be hives and things
like that which people speak of them as collective intelligence but but who knows you know they're not like us at least we are centralized intelligences, and especially, for example, Renee Descartes really like the pineal gland in the brain because he said
our unified experience as humans there should be one structure and unpaired structure in the brain that would correspond to that, but he didn't have good microscopy available to him and if he did.
He would realize that within that pineal gland there are tons of cells, there isn't one of anything that it's a composite of these tons of cells, and each side inside each of these cells is all this stuff.
In fact, we are we are not as unified as people think we are, we are collectives at multiple scales.
All intelligences are basically collective intelligence is made of parts, and this is the sort of thing we're made of this is a this is a single cell this is called the lacrimaria.
This is a free living organism of course.
But but ourselves were once free living organisms to it has no brain, it has no nervous system but it handles all of its local goals it's physiological needs it's metabolic needs, behaviorally and so on.
All of that is handled within one cell, and you can see it's sort of feeding on the on the various bacteria and so on and so and so what we are made of is a kind of a gentle material we're not made of passive matter.
We are made of a material with agendas with various competencies, and you can see here with Jamie Davies and I talked about this how what what this means for for biomedicine and bioengineering.
In fact, not even this, it's not even just the cells that have these various capacities, even within the cells, we now know that something as simple as a molecular pathway or a gene regulatory network can do at least six different kinds of learning.
And so you can take these various nodes and these are, these are various, let's say transcription factors or whatever, whatever the targets are going to be.
And if you treat them if you stimulate and read from them as you would for example in a Pavlovian conditioning task, you can demonstrate that biological networks can store multiple memories of different kinds and you find all of this habituation sensitization,
it's all it's all here. So even from the lowest level so this is an amazing material that that evolution and we as bioengineers are dealing with it requires a different kind of engineering.
And so this this architecture of which we are made is what we call this a multi scale competency architecture, because every level is not just structurally smaller but it but it but every level solves problems in a different space.
And all of these, all of these agents cooperate and compete to get various goals accomplished, the higher level deforms the energy landscape for the lower level so that when they do what they do the end result percolates up as as as navigating a different space.
Now, we as humans are pretty good, we're not great at it but we're pretty good at noticing intelligence in three dimensional space. So when we see medium sized objects moving at medium speeds, we can recognize intelligence in in in primates and birds and maybe an octopus whale things like that.
But what we're not good at at all is recognizing intelligence in at different scales so things that are very small or very large or happen at different timescales, and in particular in different spaces.
So there are other spaces in which intelligence can solve problems so for example the space of the space of possible gene expression so transcriptional space, the space of physiological states of course these are high dimensional spaces I just sort of boil it down to two dimensions on a flat slide.
And what we're going to talk about today is this this notion of an anatomical morpho space it's the it's the space of all possible geometric configurations of a particular structure.
And one of the one of the amazing things is that is that cells and cellular collective solve problems in all of these spaces. I don't have time today to talk about all these remarkable examples there are many, and I can send some send out some papers of people are interested
to show you an example. What we're talking about an example of problem solving in a novel situation. So this is a this here is a cross this was discovered in 1945 this is a cross section of a kidney tubule in a newt.
And normally there's about eight to 10 cells that work together to build this this kind of tubule with a lumen in the middle.
One thing you can do to these early embryos is make sure that the early cell has has has multiple copies of the genome. So you can have instead of two and you can have four and five and six and and so on newts.
When you do that the cells get bigger to accommodate the increased amount of genetic material and the first amazing thing is that you still get a normal new. So you can have multiple copies of your entire genome and still have a normal animal.
And the second amazing thing is that these larger cells, fewer of them will get together to still form the exact same lumen. So they scale the proportional number of cells to their new size.
And so that that's that's very impressive, but the most impressive thing is that if you make these cells absolutely gigantic and this I believe is six and chromosome compliment.
Each cell will bend around itself to form the same lumen. Now, why this is why this is of note is that this is a different molecular mechanism.
This is cell to cell communication and tubular genesis. This is cytoskeletal bending to bend one cell around itself.
So this is a kind of top down causation in the service of a large scale anatomical goal having this tubule different molecular mechanisms can be called up.
And so if you think about this as a as a as a new embryo new coming into the world, you have to not really take prior expectations very seriously you can't depend on how many copies of your genome you're going to have.
You can't count on having cells of the right size you can't count on having cells of the right number. You have to be able to create the correct pattern being take that journey through anatomical morphospace.
Not only through with external unpredictabilities in the environment but you can't even trust your own parts, you don't even know ahead of time what you're going to be made of.
And so that remarkable plasticity turns out to be really important and it's not just it's not just newt's this is ubiquitous throughout the tree of life.
That turns out to be very important for medicine. So let's, let's just think about this.
This is an issue of morphospace. So we all start life like this embryonic blastomers. Eventually, we acquire this this incredibly complex structure all the organs, typically are in the right place relative to the right thing next to each other and so on.
And so you might ask a simple question where does this pattern come from. Actually, where is this encoded. And a lot of people are tempted to say well it's in the DNA of course it's in the genome.
The thing with the thing with that is that we can read genomes now, we can read genomes, and we know what's in the genome and it isn't directly anything like this what's in the genome are the descriptions of the micro level hardware the proteins that every cell gets to have.
We don't need to understand how do using using that hardware.
How does this collective know what to build, when to stop, how do we convince it to regenerate, and as engineers, could we get the set could we get these exact same cells to build something completely different.
I won't have time to talk to you about that but we do make some synthetic organisms from genetically wild type cells be and in fact yeah cells are willing to make all kinds of stuff with you.
If you do the right things. So, so so this is what we're really interested in is, is, is where does this pattern come from.
Now, as I think about the end game of our sort of branch of biomedicine. I think about the fact that so many things would go away so so birth defects traumatic injury cancer aging degenerative disease, all of these things would be a non issue.
We had the ability to communicate anatomical goals to a group of cells, if you could tell a group of cells what to build, all of those things would be basically solved.
So, what I think about is this notion of an anatomical compiler, this idea that someday you will be able to sit down in front of a computer draw the plant or animal or organ or biological robot or whatever you want.
And the structure that you want, and the system if we knew what we were doing the system would compile that description down into a set of stimuli that would have to be given two cells to make them build whatever you just drew.
So complete control over anatomical growth and form that that is what I see as the end game here.
Now this now we don't have anything remotely like this.
I might ask why because genetics and molecular biology have been advancing very rapidly and cell biology and so on what why don't we have something like this.
And so I want to I want to point out just a very simple example.
This is a baby axolotl and baby axolotl self little legs. This is a tadpole of the frog they do not have legs at this stage.
In my group, we make something known as a frog a lot which is basically a chimeric embryo consisting of some frog and some axolotl cells.
I pose the following question, you've got the axolotl genome, it's been sequenced, you've got the frog genome, that's been sequenced.
Can anybody tell me whether a frog a lot is going to have legs or not.
And the answer is no, we have, we have absolutely no, no models in the field that would answer that question, despite having perfect genetic information.
And that's because, while we are very good at this kind of thing, meaning, meaning understanding the molecular details of the hardware, we are actually not good yet at all at understanding the the collective decision making
of groups of cells in anatomical morpho space. We do not understand how they solve problems in these various spaces.
And this is something that is is basically what I see as the as the future front, then the next frontier of the field, because the thing about what happened in computer science this is this is what programming look like in the 40s and 50s you to control a computer you had to interact with the hardware.
And this is where molecular medicine is today, all of the most exciting advances so so CRISPR genome editing protein engineering pathway rewiring.
All of these things are down at the hardware level single molecule approaches, you know everybody's very interested in the hardware, we've barely begun to understand the software of life which is really the the problem solving competencies of our material.
Now, I keep using this word intelligence what do I mean by that well.
I mean, William James is definition, which is, which is quite interesting he said intelligence is the ability to reach the same goal by different means.
So what he's focusing on is problem solving it's quite agnostic about the problem space he doesn't say what kind of brain you have or whether you are evolved or engineered.
He's trying to pull out what is what is central to all intelligence systems no matter what their composition or their province. So let's talk about this notion of the collective intelligence of cells what what can they do what what what are the collective kinds of problem solving capacities.
Well the first thing is that while embryo genesis is reliable and so so so most of the time you get this actually isn't hardwired. So we all know that if you cut early embryos into pieces you don't get half bodies you get normal mono zygotic twins or triple
or whatever. And so there's this ability to reach this goal state which is the the ensemble of states in anatomical space that correspond to normal human variation you know that that's where the normal human target morphology is, and you can get there from different starting points avoiding various local local
this is this is not just for embryos, some animals do this throughout their lifespan. So this salamander here can regenerate their eyes their jaws their tails, their limbs and so on.
And so if you amputate anywhere along here, this system will do exactly what's needed in other words grow and undergo morphogenesis, and then they stop that that's the most amazing part of regeneration is that it knows when to stop.
It stops when a correct salamander limb has formed. So this is a kind of anatomical homeostasis it's a, it's a system that that that can tell where it is an anatomical morphospace this is correct this is incorrect, and go roughly in the right direction, and when it gets there to the right region, then it stops.
And so, so this is a this is a critical capacity that we need to understand. Now, it's not just for worms and salamanders I mean humans, their, their liver is highly regenerative.
Even the ancient Greeks knew that I have no idea how they knew that but but they did human children will regenerate their fingertips up to a certain age, and deer are a large adult mammal that, while it's regenerating its antlers will regrow up to a centimeter and a half of new bone per day.
So this is remarkable growth bone vasculature innovation, all of that, every year. So, so I want to focus on one very simple example of what I mean by navigating this this morphospace.
This is, again, that the tadpole of the frogs or here the eyes the face is here and so on.
Tadpoles need to become frogs and in order to do that they have to rearrange their face. So the jaws have to come out the nostrils have to move the eyes have to move closer and so on.
In order to do that, it was thought that this was just a hardwired set of movements and so every organ moved in the right direction to the right amount and you get from a normal tadpole to a normal frog.
So now that was the assumption we decided to test the hypothesis how much intelligence does the system actually have for navigating this problem space. And so what we did was we create these so called Picasso tadpoles.
The idea is that everything is in the wrong place the eyes on the back of the head the jaws are off to the side we just scrambled the whole head.
One of the reasons is that these animals make largely very normal frogs, because all of these body organs will move in novel paths. In fact, if they go too far they actually double back, and everything will sort of rearrange relative to each other, until you get to a correct frog face.
And so what the genetics actually gives you is an amazing system that executes a problem of error minimization it's able to take novel actions to to correct towards a particular outcome this is William James's definition the ability to reach your same goal.
By different means you saw that in the kidney to view example where the cells call up different molecular mechanisms. You saw you see it here when it from different starting positions and gets where it's going.
So of course, so so we can look at this and we can understand the idea of navigation and we can understand homeostasis but it all brings up one big question is, how does it know what the correct frog face looks like right then and how does it know where it's going.
So this is the standard story of developmental biology that you get from from textbooks which is the gene regulatory activity leads through the process of feed forward emergence and emergent complexity to this kind of outcome and and that's all true I mean it does there is of course a lot of
emergent complexity going on simple rules give rise to complex complex anatomical structures, but that is far from the end of the story the the really critical part here is that it is a homeostatic process that where where if you if you deviate a system from where it
needs to be in terms of injury of course but also mutations to radogens or whatever you deviate the system, then these loops kick in that try to make changes that will try to get you back to where it needs to be.
And so this is not simple feed forward emergence this is actually goal directed activity. On the one hand, of course, biologists know all about homeostasis that's obvious, but there are a couple of things here that are unique for and different and the kind of counter
that first of all, typical homeostatic loops use a scalar as the set point you know it might be pH or temperature or hunger level or something it's typically a single single variable.
This is not like that this is the set point here is a complex anatomical structure may be not to the level of individual cells it doesn't have to be high resolution, but this is a system that clearly knows what the correct pattern is.
That's that's that's first. And then second, you know, we're not encouraged in biology and especially in molecular genetics and things like that to formulate models in terms of goals models are supposed to be in terms of chemistry and local rules and then whatever emerges emerges,
but you're not encouraged at all in fact you're actively discouraged from looking for goals purpose intelligence things like that in the systems.
Now, luckily, since the 1940s we've had a science this is cybernetics control theory computer science and so on, that allows us to think about these things without magic so it is no it should no longer be scary to think about physical systems including living
systems that there are not brains, having goals, being able to solve problems and so on, we have the tools to understand this now.
And what this kind of with this this this weird way of thinking about the system as a goal seeking system makes a very strong prediction it suggests that in order to make changes down here and those might be repair or it might be actually augmentation
of let's say human potential whatever in order to make changes down here.
It's no longer true that the only game in town is to try to change down here. That's actually extremely difficult because this process is not reversible. We generally have no idea what genes or or proteins you might want to tweak to make specific system
level changes that is going to actually establish a kind of ceiling for things like CRISPR and genome editing you know they'll solve a lot of low hanging fruit single cell, a single gene diseases and things like that but after that.
There's a real problem, which is the same problem that holds back Lamarckian inheritance which is that it's it's it's in general impossible to figure out in this kind of scheme, what you need to change down here to make changes up here.
But if it is true that this is a goal seeking system that in some way remembers the actual set point, then we've got a new a new way and this is.
This is a strategy that that everybody from from cyber netizens to the to the repair person that shows up to fix your thermostat at home understands that in a system like this, you don't need to make changes to the structure you might just be able to reset the set point.
So, and so what we've been doing is following this last 20 years we've been following the predictions of this idea where we should be able to find the recorded set point in the body somewhere, we should be able to decode it, and the homie aesthetic set point should be readable it
should be decodable, and then we're going to rewrite it and let the system do what it does that what it does best which is built to that spec, we don't you know you don't go.
You go rewiring your thermostat when you want it to go to a different temperature, and you don't use a soldering iron on your laptop when you go from Photoshop to to zoom.
You exploit the the the the reprogrammability of your material. So in trying to understand okay where is this set point going to be stored how can this how can all of this work.
We took a cue from the brain in the brain, we know we know that brains are goal seeking systems.
This network where the hardware is formed from ion channels that set voltage gradients, these voltage gradients communicate or not information to their neighbors through these electrical synapses known as gap junctions.
And so that's the hardware the software is is here so this group made this amazing video of a zebrafish brain, while the zebrafish is thinking about whatever it is that fish think about.
The commitment of neuroscience is this idea that all of the memories the preferences the behavioral repertoires the goals all of that is stored in the electrophysiology.
And the idea is that having read the electrophysiology if we now knew how to decoded and so this is the project of neural decoding.
We would be able to read all of the cognitive content we would know what the fish wants what it's trying to achieve and so on.
The remarkable thing is that those kind of tricks that the brain uses are not new. They were discovered by evolution at the time of bacterial biofilms.
So they're extremely ancient every cell in your body has ion channels, most cells have gap junction connections to their neighbors.
And so all of your tissues from the moment of the first cell division in embryogenesis form these kinds of electrical networks.
And you could make this this leap which is what we've done which is to say, could we port all of the techniques of behavioral neuroscience and computational neuroscience away from neurons.
If this system is more general what if neuroscience isn't really about neurons at all it's about information processing and networks and problem solving.
And then then you could take all these tools and the amazing thing that we found is that these tools actually don't distinguish. So we distinguish by different journals different courses in your education different funding bodies and so on developmental biology and neuroscience are considered
those distinctions are quite artificial in the sense that the tools don't don't distinguish them at all we can port everything from optogenetics to to a neurotransmitter machinery modulation of pharmacology for a via channels, active inference perceptual
by stability like I mean all of this stuff maps or maps over.
So what you might do is is try to do a kind of a decoding project on morphogenesis you might say, we'll use the same techniques will understand what the network is doing electrically, and could we extract from that information that will help us understand
and control how these things move through morpho space. So we developed the first tools to do that away from away from neurons.
This is a voltage sensitive die showing in a time lapse, all the electrical conversations that cells in a frog embryo are having with each other as it sorts out who's going to be left right anterior posterior and so on.
We've developed lots of computational tools including simulators, and to understand how these biological gradients form and how they develop and what the dynamics are going to be.
So this pattern.
I'm showing you one that's easy to understand there are many patterns that are actually quite hard to decode and this is this is very hard work that's going to last years this cracking this bioelectric code.
I want to show you a nice simple one. This is this is a frog embryo in time loss putting its face together.
This is one frame out of that movie we call this the electric face, because long before the anatomy of the faces form and before the genes turn on to regionalize the for the ectoderm here and to make a face.
You can already see that these cells know where everything is going to go. Here's where the eyes going to be here's where the mouth is going to be here are the placards.
We can read by by by basically by using the same voltage tracking techniques that people use in brains, we can actually read the electrical pre pattern that's subtle scaffold that determines downstream gene expression.
I'm going to show you why I say that. So, so this is a native endogenous pattern memory that is required for making a frog face if you move this that if you if you change this pattern then the gene expression changes and the anatomy changes.
That so that's a normal pattern and you can might imagine using that to monitor some someday monitor birth defects.
This one is a pathological pattern that you can induce by injecting human oncogenes into these tappals.
Eventually they will make tumors eventually these tumors will metastasize you can see that.
But before that happens you can already see the aberrant bio electrical state that that this oncogene has established and you know where the tumor is going to be and you actually know where the margins are going to be here.
So there's all kinds of cancer diagnostic opportunities there.
Okay, so in addition to being able to monitor these things of course the most important thing are functional experiments you want to be able to read and write this electrical information to prove that it's functionally important and then to to modulate it in medical settings.
So we developed some tools now this is really important. Everything I'm going to show you next. There are no applied fields. There are no electrodes there are no electromagnetics there are no frequencies there are no waves.
There's only modulating the native interface that cells use to hack each other in vivo. And so this is this is really just tools appropriated from neuroscience to manipulate ion channels and gap junctions.
We have predictive control over the bio electrical state of cells.
This is, this is really very high resolution molecular pharmacology genetic modification of ion channel properties and optogenetics and so on.
So when you do this okay so so what happens when you do this if we were to change the electrical information, but back when I first started doing this around 2000.
What everybody said at the time was that what you're going to get is uninterpretable toxicity and death. It was thought that the resting potential in normal cells is a housekeeping parameter that if you if you mess with that, you're going to you're going to just get toxicity.
So it turns out that that's not the case and that this information carries very, very specific instructive, instructive cues. So, so what we can do is in these tackles by by in by manipulating by electrical patterns and this is by injecting new channels by using optogenetics and so on.
You can induce the formation of ectopic hearts ectopic odysses ectopic for brains so this is where the brain normally ends and you can wonder if this guy is that much smarter than than this one.
You can make ectopic limbs so here are six legged frog this one this is actually an optogenetic frog.
And so so you can see that this isn't this isn't just some kind of random toxicity.
We're actually calling up new organs, and this is maybe my favorite example of that which is which is this.
We take a frog embryo and we inject some ion channel RNA. These are potassium channel RNAs that were specifically chosen to make a voltage spot of the kind that you saw in that electric face that corresponds to an eye spot.
And what we would do is inject that into a region of the animal that would become let's say gut.
So what you what you have here is these endoderm cells, and they happily when you establish that voltage pattern they happily make an eye.
Now, according to your developmental biology textbook endoderm should not be able to make I only the the anterior norectoderm should be competent to make I that's actually not true you can get I anywhere if you prompted with the right bio electrical pattern.
Yeah, not the master I gene pack six that doesn't work anywhere outside of this area by the way but but the bioelectric state does.
So you can you can induce these eyes and so and so these eyes can have all the right lens and retina and optic nerve and all the stuff they're supposed to have.
And so notice notice a couple of the additional things here one is that this this signaling that we that we did is extremely simple.
We didn't give all the information needed to to to make an eye, we don't know how to make an eye and we certainly don't know how to specify all the different the stem cell positions and all that we this is a high level sub routine call, we said make
an eye here, all the rest of the competency is in the system itself. Yeah, this is this is of course something computer scientists exploit all the time. Also, and of course doing doing it that way extends the competency of the cells we thought only these cells
could do it actually all cells can do it and that just tells you that when you're estimating the level of intelligence or competency of a given system, you're really taking an IQ test yourself.
Right, if you if you're not prompting it with the right things you you you miss everything and so that's very important.
The other thing is that here this is this is an this is a lens sitting out in the flank of a temporal somewhere.
These cells they're they're marked with beta galactic societies, they are the only ones that have this new channel. Now why are all these other clear cells so these are native cells that were not manipulated by us, why are they participating in this in this construction project.
That's because the another competency of this material, which all of this is really attractive for regenerative medicine kinds of things is that these cells know when there's not enough of them to make a lens.
And what they do is they recruit their their neighbors to help complete this process is another collective intelligence which is good at this and that's of course ants and termites they also do exactly that they they recruit their buddies when when the job needs needs more elements.
So you see the secondary instruction we instruct these cells you need to make an eye these cells automatically instruct their neighbors you need to help, we did not have to micromanage any of this.
And so that is why in our regenerative medicine program, we try for triggers we don't want to, we don't want to 3d print limbs and we don't want to try to manipulate all the cells. This is this is an example of what we've done so in the frog.
So after like 45 days later there's nothing it doesn't it doesn't regenerate.
However, if you apply a cocktail of ionophores that that sets up a particular bio electrical state, then then within within a couple days you get an msx one positive blastima.
And by 45 days you've got some toes you've got a toenail, eventually a pretty respectable leg that is touch sensitive and multi it's a functional appendage.
We interact with that wound for 24 hours. That's it. After that, an adult frog will grow a leg for a year and a half, 18 months of leg growth doing which time we don't touch it at all.
So, so the idea is not to micromanage the process the idea is to say to those cells at the very beginning, you're going to go down the leg regeneration path not the scarring path in morpho space you get them going then you leave them alone they do they do their thing.
And here's where I need to do a disclosure, because David Kaplan and I have, we've founded a company called morphoceuticals, which basically seeks to move some of that technology into mammals, we're now trying this in in rodents with a wearable
bioreactor that applies various drug payloads, and eventually hopes to trigger regeneration while you support it but this with this environment.
So I need to move to a quickly move to another system to kind of really really hit hard this this idea that I mentioned before which is that there is an encoded.
There is there is literally a an encoded representation within tissue of what to do if you get injured. In other words, the target anatomy is represented in the tissue in some way there is there is literally a goal represented in the biophysics of the body.
And I want to show you that we can now see those and change those, at least at least to start just, you know, and set to some extent. So this is this is our plan area and this is our flatworm.
And these guys have amazing powers of regeneration, every piece gives rise to a new worm. And so if you cut off the head and the tail this this you see that that in this one headed animal, the anterior genes are in the front, you know, in the where they where they should be.
They should reliably make this one headed worm. And now what now how do they how does this piece know how many heads it's supposed to have you might think well it's nailed down by the genetics of course.
But remember genetics doesn't say anything about how many heads you're supposed to have not not directly. And so it turns out that what what what it has is this is this bio electrical gradient that has this information one head, one tail.
What you have to do is take this animal and in place rewrite that bio electrical pattern so that it now says two heads. You can see this is kind of messy there's still a lot of technology to be worked out here but we can we can say two heads.
And when you do that that animals hangs around anatomically completely normal gene expression completely normal. But if you cut it, it makes a two headed animal this isn't Photoshop these are these are real.
Literally what you're looking at is literally a visualization of the memory of the tissue of what to do if I get injured. It's a counterfactual memory it's not true right now. This is a this, this is not a map of this guy this is a map of this guy perfectly normal one headed anatomy.
This is, if you think about what what brains allow us to do this kind of mental time travel where you can think about things that are not happening now, you know, future things past things and so on.
This is the beginnings of that this is a counterfactual pattern. This is what I think a proper plenary and looks like and it doesn't matter now because I'm not injured but if I get injured. This is what I'm going to do this is what the cells consult.
Now I keep calling it a memory because know and note that what we have not done is change the DNA we haven't touched the genome they're completely wild type cells.
And if you take these two headed animals, and you cut off the primary head, and you cut off this this this weird ectopic secondary head, and you might think that this middle fragment would just would just of course go back to the normal form dictated by its genetics.
The first two headed worms were seen in around 1903. Nobody recut them until we did it in in 2008, because it was perfectly obvious what would happen of course it would go back to normal because the genome is normal, and that is not at all what happens.
In fact, if you do this they will continuously in perpetuity regenerate as two headed animals, and we can until we set it back we can we can set it back.
And so this is in fact a memory it has long term stability it is rewritable. It has conditional recall here you can see these these two headed guys moving around, because the question of how many heads you're going to have is not nailed down in your genome.
It is the genome encode some hardware that by default will be running some code that says one headed pattern, but you can rewrite it it's all it's it's it's reprogrammable as as good hardware is.
And so, and so this is this is kind of really important, because this is not a genetic trick.
Also, not only can you control the number of heads you can control the shape of the heads, and these triangular headed species are perfectly happy to make a flathead like a pifalina, or around head like an S Mediterranean, but 100 to 150 million years distance between
these guys, but they're they're okay. You're making the brain shape of these animals making the stem cell distribution of these animals, visiting the attractors in anatomical state space that normally belong to these other species, but this hardware can go there to it just normally
doesn't. So you start to get an idea of this latent space of possibilities around what a given genome does, and of communicating the right path to to to these cellular collectives via by electric.
And this is why we're trying to make a kind of a full stack understanding all the way from the molecular genetics of where do these channels come from, then what is the symmetry breaking self organization computation that happens in these electrical tissues,
these electrical networks, and then eventually, or a body level regionalization, and eventually algorithmic decision making based on this by electrical information that we can then use to infer interventions.
And so I'm in the last just couple of minutes, I just want to show you. So, so I've shown you I've shown you a kind of novel organ formation I've shown you regeneration. I'm going to show you birth defects and cancer very quickly.
This is a normal frog to well taphole brain forebrain midbrain hindbrain, lots of ways to mess up this process, alcohol exposure nicotine mutations.
And what we wanted to do was to see if we can now try to repair these complex organs. So what we did was to make a bio electrical model a computational model of the bio electrical pattern that normally tells the brain, what the size and shape should be.
And when you do that, you can interrogate that model for interventions and cases where things go wrong. So, this, for example, is a the effects of a mutation and notch notch is a very important neuro genesis gene if you mutate notch.
And forebrain is gone midbrain and hindbrain are just a bubble, these animals have no behavior they're completely disabled.
What we asked the model to do was to say okay, the pattern in these the bio electrical pattern in these mutants is incorrect and we observe that with our dye technology.
What channels would we need to open or close to get back to the correct pattern, not fix the mutation, but but to get back to the correct pattern the model gave a suggestion there's this htn to iron channel, which has some specific properties that we can talk about.
And, and what we did was, yeah, we we showed that, despite that dominant mutation of notch, these animals can be rescued and this is these are two drugs that open htn to they're basically anti epileptics already in human use that completely restore the brain.
You get your brain structure back you get gene expression back and they get their IQs back they have normal learning rates compared to controls. These have none.
So, so what this shows is that at least in some cases, you can.
And you can you can fix, you can fix various teratogen induced defects as well. So, so at least in some cases, what you can do is you can fix hardware defects in software.
The hardware is so amazing that in some cases, even and I'm not saying this will be true for all genetic diseases, of course it won't, but but for many cases, you can actually fix the situation in the at the physiology level.
And so what we're doing now is creating this kind of this kind of platform where and you can go on you can play with this online, where you choose the cells or the tissues that you want.
It tells you all your possible ion channel targets, we're working on the simulator here in between that will tell you which of these you need. And once you know your targets, then you pick drugs because because something like 20% of all drugs are ion channel drugs is a huge amount of
potential electroseuticals out there. So last thing I want to show is the cancer application.
What evolution has done for us is to scale up the cognitive capacities of single cells towards larger goals in novel problem spaces. So, so individual cells these little little amoebas and such have little tiny goals they all of their goals revolve around this very short.
The cognitive light cone is very small so so local local physiological states and things like that. But together in an organism they're bound into electrical networks that work on huge goals.
So this is centimeters long and no individual cell knows what a finger is or how many fingers you're supposed to have, but the collective absolutely does because because it you can see that because it works towards the set point.
The cognitive light cone scales up their goals are now centimeters in size in this anatomical space, larger goals in a different space.
That scale up has a failure mode that failure mode is cancer, and here's what you see human glioblastoma. These cells are not more selfish than normal cells, they just have smaller cells, because they've been electrically disconnected from the collective.
And now all they all their goals are amoeba level goals. And so if you have that.
If you have that idea, you can try to come up with a therapeutic that instead of killing these cancer cells would reconnect them electrically to the rest of the network and this is what we've done here so we inject human oncogenes.
And then you co inject an ion channel that forces the cells to stay electrically connected. And even though the oncoprotein is blazingly strongly expressed here, there is no tumor in this is this this is the same animal, because it's not the genetics that drives it's the physiology.
And here, just by pointing out that in the space of biomedical interventions.
Lots of focus has been spent here these are all the things that address the hardware, but complimenting that and you can find all the details here are a huge potential set of tools from behavioral science from cognitive science and so on, that really take
an advantage of the competency of the material and I really think you know sort of projecting forward. I really think that future medicine is going to look a lot more like a kind of somatic psychiatry, then it's going to look like chemistry it's going to be about communicating
your goals to to a collective via the bioelectric interface or via some other interface.
So, I just want to thank the postdocs in the students who contributed to this work are various funders are collaborators, the disclosures of companies that have funded our lab here, and most of all the model systems because they do all the heavy lifting.
So, thank you very much and I'll take questions.
