Yeah, thank you for having me.
It's a real pleasure to have a chance,
especially to a computer science audience.
My original training was in computer science before biology.
So I think we have some interesting things
to talk about today.
And afterwards, if you want to find any of the data sets,
the papers, the software,
all of that is here at this website.
So here are the main points
that I'm going to try to transmit today.
First of all, I'm going to talk about agents
and unconventional embodiments.
So we're going to go beyond the typical thing
that people think about when they think about intelligence,
which is brains and brain-y animals.
And we're going to talk about problem solving
in some unconventional spaces.
With all of this is a contribution
to the field of diverse intelligence,
which is this emerging area
at the intersection of computer science,
biology, and behavioral science.
And part of the message here
is that neuroscience isn't really about neurons.
It's about scaling cognition.
And that has, I think, many implications
for machine learning and AI
that often tries to look at the brain as its inspiration.
I'm going to use the control of anatomy
as the example of a collective intelligence,
specifically the collective intelligence of cells
that navigate anatomical morphospace.
And I'm going to tell you that electrical networks,
specifically bioelectrical networks,
carry the computational medium
of that collective intelligence.
And this has all kinds of interesting applications
in biomedicine.
And at the end, I'm going to show you some novel creatures,
some synthetic proto-organisms,
and talk about a very large option space
of new bodies and new minds,
which the young people in the audience
are going to be living with over the next few decades.
So life used to be pretty easy.
People had this view of the world.
This is an old, very kind of well-known painting
of Adam naming the animals in the Garden of Eden.
And it was simple because we knew
there were discrete kinds,
and there were very specific kinds of animals.
And here's Adam, and he's different from all of these.
And so that was easy.
We kind of knew what everything was.
And in particular, there's one other interesting thing here,
which is that in this mythology,
it's up to Adam to name the animals.
It wasn't God or the angels
that were able to name these animals.
The human had to do it.
And I think that's actually pretty profound
because as I'll show you towards the end of the talk,
I think it's going to be on us to name,
or more accurately, to learn the true nature
of all kinds of new beings.
So it used to be pretty simple to know what a human was.
But then with the advent of developmental biology,
where we now realize that we actually emerge,
self-construct from a single cell,
and through evolutionary biology,
where we now see that, again, we emerge,
we started as a unicellular kind of life form,
and eventually became this kind of a human.
So we have this vertical axis of transformation,
but also there's a horizontal axis,
where both through biological modifications
and through technological modifications,
there's a spectrum of human-adjacent possibilities.
And that's because at every layer of organization,
we can augment evolved biology
with various designed or engineered materials.
And so that means that we really need frameworks
to recognize, create, and ethically relate
to a really very diverse set of intelligences
that can be very different
from the conventional ones we're used to,
in terms of how they got here or how they're made.
And so we need a framework to understand
not only familiar creatures,
like let's say primates and birds,
and maybe an octopus and things like that,
but also all kinds of unusual creatures,
like colonial organisms, like ant swarms and so on,
and synthetic life forms, AIs,
whether software or hardware,
and someday maybe even exobiological agents.
And so I, of course, I'm not the first person
to try for such a framework.
Here's Norbert Wiener and colleagues
that already were trying to lay down a continuum,
a cybernetic continuum from passive matter
all the way up to human and above,
sort of second order metacognition and so on.
And so we wanna develop frameworks like this
to help us understand what all these things have in common,
and to move experimental work forward.
And I work with something I call the spectrum
of persuadability, and it's basically this idea
that there are numerous different kinds of systems
all the way from very simple mechanical ones
to homeostats and various kinds of animals
and learning devices, and then of course,
human and whatever's above that.
And the idea is that at different places
along this continuum, there are different tools
that you might use to interact with that system
from hardware rewiring to modifying set points
to learning and training,
and then various kinds of high level communications.
And what's important is that when you're faced
with a new system, it's not enough to have
philosophical feelings or preconceptions
about where you think it has to fit on the spectrum.
You actually have to do experiments.
You have to see which one of these paradigms,
these sets of tools are going to be appropriate,
and you don't know ahead of time.
And so one question you might ask is,
where do collections of body cells fit in?
Are cells more like this, or are they like this,
or something else?
And we'll talk about that today.
And that's important because all of us made this journey
from a single unfertilized egg cell,
so a quiescent oocyte, to one of these amazing morphologies,
even something like this, a human.
And it's critical to note
that this process is smooth and continuous.
There is no magic time point or there's no lightning flash
that at some point at a particular time
turns the physics and chemistry of the early cell
into what you might think of as true cognition,
that there is no such flip over.
So all of this is smooth and continuous,
and we really have to understand how that scaling
of competencies from here to here works.
And, but okay, so that's already a little destabilizing
this idea that actually we slowly metamorphose
from a fairly simple chemical physical system,
but then at least we're a unified kind of intelligence.
We're not like ants or bees or something
that maybe is a kind of collective intelligence.
So a lot of people feel that we're some kind
of a unified true intelligence,
and this is maybe these things
that have some kind of collective intelligence.
But actually all intelligence is collective intelligence
because we are all made of parts.
And Renee Descartes really liked the pineal gland
in the brain because there's only one of them.
And he felt that this unified human experience
had to have one representative in the brain,
not multiple.
But if he had had access to good microscopy,
he would have seen that actually the pineal gland
is full of cells and each cell is full of all of this stuff.
And there isn't one of anything in the brain,
everything is made of parts.
And in particular, we are collective intelligences.
This is what we're made of cells,
a kind of a gentile material.
And this is a unicellular organism.
This is called a lacrimaria.
So it's one cell, there is no brain,
there's no nervous system,
but it has all these interesting competencies
and problem solving in its own scale.
So it handles its metabolic, physiological,
anatomical goals all on its own.
And the thing about organisms like this
is that we really have to think about
how they scale up into something larger.
So here's an experiment where you train a rat
to press a lever and receive a reward.
Now, the key is that no individual cell
in this creature has both experiences.
In other words, the cells at the bottom of the feet
interact with the lever,
the cells in the gut get the delicious reward,
no individual cell has both experiences.
And yet this associative learning,
this idea that there is an owner of this information
that pressing the lever gives you a reward,
is this emergent thing called a rat.
And the idea is that in order to do this,
to figure out, so actually who owns this associative memory,
you need to have a kind of cognitive glue,
you need to bind the individual cells together
and do a sort of, be able to do a credit assignment
and figure out what the different things
that happened in this body,
what do they mean and how do they go together.
And so our bodies in biology in general
is not just physically or structurally nested
from molecular networks to cells to organisms and so on,
but actually functionally,
we live with a multi-scale competency architecture.
Every layer of the body has its own ability
to solve problems in different spaces.
And they all cooperate and compete both laterally
within the layer and up and down through scales to interact.
And so we are all this kind of collective intelligence.
I wanna show you a few unusual examples
of biology that you may not have learned
about in biology class if you've had biology.
One is this, and it's the idea of transformation.
So you've got this caterpillar.
Caterpillar has a particular brain suitable for driving,
basically a soft-bodied robot.
There are no hard elements in the caterpillar,
so you can't push, right?
The controller can't push on any of the elements.
So there's this soft-body controller and it eats leaves
and it lives in basically a two-dimensional world.
Well, it has to transform into this completely different
type of creature, which is a hard body.
So it needs a different controller
that can now push on all these hard elements.
And this lives in the three-dimensional world.
It flies, and it doesn't eat leaves, it drinks nectar.
And in between, in order to convert the brain,
the brain is basically,
during this metamorphosis process,
the brain is basically disassembled.
So all the connections are broken,
most of the cells are killed off,
and it's reassembled here.
And the amazing thing is that it's now been shown
that the butterfly will retain memories
of what the caterpillar was trained on.
So now think, we don't have any hardware like that
that I'm aware of that you can store certain information
and completely chop up and mix around the substrate,
rearrange in a completely different organization,
and still the information is there, right?
So the robustness is kind of amazing.
In fact, it's even more amazing
because there's generalization here.
The caterpillar learns to associate a certain stimuli
with these leaves that it likes,
but the butterfly gets a completely different food
in that assay, it gets nectar.
And so it's not even the same,
it's not that you can learn that these triggers mean
that there's leaves, it's actually the notion is food.
So it's a general category,
which is the specifics are different here.
So there's also generalization going on.
So this kind of thing,
this persistence of information through bodily changes
can be even more impressive.
These are planaria, these are flatworms,
and flatworms have this amazing ability,
and I'll show you lots more about this in a minute,
that when you cut them into pieces, they regenerate.
So if you cut them in half,
the tail makes a new head, the head makes a new tail.
But what you can do is, and they have a true brain,
they have a true centralized brain,
the same neurotransmitters as you and I have,
and you can train them on a particular task.
So this idea that food will be found
where these bumpy spots are,
so it's called, that's place conditioning,
and then you cut off their heads.
Well, the tail sits there doing nothing
until the body regrows a new head,
and as soon as it regrows a new head,
it begins to exert behavior again,
and then you can find out
that it actually remembers the original information.
So if you've ever taken a philosophy one-on-one,
they do this, often they describe this idea
of a malfunctioning transporter
that builds an exact molecule for molecule copy of you,
somewhere else, and then it forgets to destroy the original,
and now there's two of you,
and which one is the real one?
Well, in this creature, you can do this many times,
and they can cut into many pieces,
and they all will have memories of the original.
So it's a really sort of profound philosophical issue,
and you can, both in the caterpillar butterfly case,
you can ask yourself,
what is it like to be a creature fundamentally changing,
changing everything, changing structure,
changing preferences, changing the world that you're in,
but still keeping your memories?
And it's an amazing phenomenon.
It makes human puberty seem like a really uneasy thing,
which it's, of course, not.
So the plasticity also exists in vertebrate.
So here's a tadpole of a frog of Xenopus lavas
here at the nostrils, here's the mouth,
and here's the spinal cord and the tail, and here's the gut.
So what you'll notice is there are no primary eyes here.
We prevented those from forming,
but we did put an eye on its tail,
and I'll show you in a minute how we do that.
But what happens is when you do that,
immediately those cells that make that eye,
they put out one optic nerve.
That optic nerve doesn't go all the way to the brain.
It synapses onto the spinal cord here,
and these animals can see.
We know because we made this machine
that basically trains them on visual, visual assays,
and they can see quite well.
And the amazing thing here is that
you don't need any evolutionary adaptation.
These animals, as soon as they're made like this,
they can already see.
You don't need multiple generations of adapting
to this new sensory motor architecture.
So this is what biology gives us.
It gives us this incredible multi-scale competency
architecture where the cells are able to deal with
huge amounts of injury, plasticity,
and keeping information around when the body is changing.
And so partly what we need to do to understand all of this
is to learn to detect in competency
in diverse problem spaces.
See, we're pretty good at, not great actually,
but pretty good as humans of recognizing
intelligence of medium-sized objects
moving at medium speeds through three-dimensional space.
So birds, primates, maybe an octopus, things like that.
We can sort of recognize intelligent behavior.
But as soon as you get to things that are very small
or very large or very slow or very fast
or operate in other spaces,
we're really not very good at noticing that
as intelligence at all.
And that's because mostly our sense organs
all point outwards.
If we had senses, for example, feeling your blood chemistry,
let's say you could measure 20 different parameters
of your blood chemistry and you could feel it,
I think we would all realize that we live
in a 23-dimensional space and that your liver
and your kidneys are actually intelligent agents
navigating that kind of physiological state space.
So there are many different spaces.
The space of gene expression,
which is a very high-dimensional space,
space of physiological states and anatomical morphospace,
which is a space of possible anatomical configurations
of a particular structure.
So what I think is that evolution
basically pivots some of the same tricks,
these tricks being navigational kinds of competencies
across all of these spaces as we went
from very simple prebiotic states to early life
and then eventually to a linguistic space in humans.
But I'm mostly gonna focus on this today,
this anatomical morphospace.
And I wanna point out something I think is interesting
that Alan Turing, who was always really focused
on what does it mean to be intelligent?
What are minds?
How can minds be instantiated in various kinds of media,
computation, all these kind of very fundamental things?
I mean, he was interested in problem-solving machines,
intelligence through reprogrammability.
But he also wrote, you may or may not know,
he wrote this paper called
The Chemical Bases of Morphogenesis.
This is about how molecules can self-organize
to form a structure in embryonic development.
Now that's kind of weird.
Why would somebody who was interested
in all this computation and intelligence
be looking at what chemicals are doing in morphogenesis?
And I think although, as far as I can tell,
he didn't write about this,
I think that Turing saw a very profound commonality,
a kind of invariance between the question
of where do minds come from and where do bodies come from?
And I think that is a very deep truth.
And there's a lot here.
And that's what we've been studying
for a couple of decades now.
So let's just ask this question.
Then where do body structures come from?
So this is a cross-section through a human torso.
You see the amazing order,
everything's in the right place relative to each other.
But we all start life like this,
like a collection of embryonic blastomeres.
Where is this pattern actually encoded?
Where is this structure?
And you might say, well, it's in the DNA, of course,
it's in the genome.
But we can read genomes now.
We know none of this stuff is directly in the DNA.
What you read from genomes are protein sequences.
So the tiny molecular hardware that every cell gets to have.
The DNA is not software,
the DNA is actually a specification
of the cellular hardware.
And this pattern isn't directly encoded there
any more than the shape and the structure of a termite nest
or a spider web is in the genome of the termite or the spider.
So we need to understand with this computation here,
how do these cell groups know what to make?
How do they know when to stop?
As workers in regenerative medicine,
we like to ask how if something is damaged,
how would we cause these cells to repair?
And as engineers, we ask a further question,
which is what else could they build?
What else could we get the exact same hardware to build?
And I'll show you some thoughts on that.
So when I think about the end game of this field,
so once we have the answer to all those questions,
what does that look like?
And I think what it looks like
is something I call the anatomical compiler.
The idea that someday you should be able to sit down
in front of the computer
and draw a plant, animal, organ, biological robot,
whatever, draw.
So here I've drawn a three-headed planarian,
three-headed flatworm.
You should be able to draw whatever you want.
And if we knew what we were doing,
we'd have a system that compiled that description
into a set of instructions or stimuli
that would have to be given to specific cells
to get them to build exactly this.
Now, why do we want it aside from basic science?
Well, notice that most biomedical problems,
such as birth defects, traumatic injury, cancer, aging,
all of this stuff would be solved
if we had the ability to tell a group of cells what to build.
And remember, this is not a 3D printer.
The point isn't to micromanage this
and put the cells where they go.
It's a communications device.
What it does is it translates from your anatomical goals
to the set points in the anatomical morphospace
of a cellular collective.
It's a communicator.
So now, so this is what we want.
Now, we don't have anything remotely like this.
We don't have the ability to do this and why.
I mean, genetics and molecular biology
has been doing really well for decades.
Why do we not have a way to do this?
And I'll just give you a really simple example.
Here's a baby axolotl, which has little legs.
A baby frogs do not have legs,
so these tadpoles don't have legs.
And in my lab, we make something called a frogolotl,
which is basically a combination
of axolotl cells and frog cells.
And now I ask a simple question.
Well, you've got the axolotl genome.
It's been sequenced.
You've got the frog genome.
It's been sequenced.
You know exactly what the genetic material is.
You know what the specification of the cellular hardware is.
Can you tell me if a frogolotl is gonna have legs or not?
And the answer is no,
that we have no models that will predict
from genetic information what this chimera is going to do.
And that's because, well, we have lots of
lots of methods and strategies
for getting information like this
or molecular level information,
what's going on at the lowest hardware level.
We're really a very long way away
from understanding collective decision-making,
how large groups of cells make their decisions
about what they're going to build.
And I think that's because currently
biology and molecular medicine
are where computer science was in the 40s and 50s.
So originally in order to program,
you have to physically rewire the machine, right?
So you have to be there directly interfacing
at the hardware.
But now you all know that there's way more interesting
stuff happening beyond the hardware level,
which is the software, the ability to reprogram,
the ability to interact with high level controls,
the high level programming languages
and various interfaces where you don't need
to get out your soldering iron
and rewire your laptop every time you wanna switch
to a new application.
And so this is something that in biology
we're just beginning to understand.
And I think what we're still missing
is the idea that in biology,
our material is reprogrammable
and it has all kinds of interesting computational
capacities and we still haven't really embraced that.
Now, when I say intelligence,
when I say that the material has intelligence,
I mean intelligence in William James's sense.
So not a kind of a metacognitive,
I know what I know and things like that,
but really just the ability to reach the same goal
by different means.
It's very nice kind of cybernetic definition.
So he talks about two magnets separated by a barrier.
That's all, that's it.
There's no magnets that are gonna come around the barrier
and get to its goal because the system doesn't have
the ability to do that kind of delayed gratification
of stepping further from your goal to get your needs met.
Whereas Romeo and Juliet have all kinds
of additional competencies.
They have long-term planning,
they have all the metacognition of all these things.
And in between there are all sorts of different systems.
There are self-driving vehicles, autonomous robots,
cells, tissues, insects and various kinds of systems
that are somewhere between this and this.
And so that's the idea when we talk about intelligence,
we're talking about the ability to reach certain goals
despite perturbations or barriers.
So now let's talk about this.
What kind of collective intelligence
do cellular swarms deploy?
What can they actually do?
Well, let's look at development again.
The point of development,
the most exciting thing about it isn't the complexity.
It's not that a simple system,
a relatively simple system like an OSI
gives rise to this amazing complex body reliably.
I mean, that's cool,
that's not really the whole story.
Because actually, if you cut these early embryos
in half or in quarters or more,
you don't get partial bodies,
you get perfectly normal monosygotic twins.
And so what you see then is that
in this anatomical morpho space
from different starting positions,
you can reach the same ensemble of gold states
corresponding to a normal human target morphology,
despite the fact that you're starting
from different positions, unexpected ones.
And in fact, you can avoid certain local minima
and all of that.
So that's interesting.
That doesn't stop at embryogenesis
in some animals like this salamander.
They regenerate throughout their lifespan.
These axolotls regenerate lots of different body parts.
So for example, the limb,
you can amputate at any position.
It builds exactly what's needed
to build a perfect salamander limb.
They regenerate their eyes, their jaws,
their tails, including spinal cord, ovaries and so on.
And the amazing thing about regeneration
isn't that it happens.
The amazing thing about it is that it knows when to stop.
When does it stop?
Well, all the activity stops
when a normal salamander arm is complete.
So how does it know when it's complete?
So what you're seeing is an error minimization scheme.
You're seeing the ability to,
you've been deviated from this pattern to this pattern
and you somehow correct.
So by the way, mammals can somewhat do this.
So humans regenerate their liver.
Even the ancient Greeks knew that.
I have no idea how they knew that.
Human children regenerate their fingertips.
So if you lose a fingertip at a certain age,
you can actually regrow it with a nice,
cosmetically a pretty nice outcome.
And deer are a large adult mammal
that regenerates its antlers.
So bone, vasculature, innervation,
up to a centimeter and a half of new bone per day
when these guys are regenerating.
And so fundamentally what we have here
is the ability of these patterning systems,
not just to make complexity,
because emergent complexity is easy,
cellular, automata, fractals.
It's easy to just have open loop complexity,
but you actually have a kind of problem-solving capacity.
And I wanna show you a simple example of this
that we discovered a few years ago.
So these tadpoles need to turn into frogs.
And in order to turn into frogs,
they have to rearrange their face.
So the eyes, the nostrils, the mouth,
everything kind of has to move around.
And so you might think
that that's a hardwired mechanical process.
After all, all tadpoles look the same
and all frogs look the same.
So all you have to do is all each organ needs to know
is which direction to go and how much, and that's it.
So we decided to test that hypothesis
and we basically made what we call Picasso tadpoles.
We scrambled all the initial positions.
So the eyes on the back of the head,
the mouth is off to the side, the jaws are here,
like everything is scrambled.
And what you find is that these animals
make pretty normal frogs.
And that's because it's not hardwired.
All of these structures go move through novel kind
of abnormal paths to get to where they're going
to be a correct frog and then they stop.
If we had a robotics swarm that could do this,
we would absolutely be calling this
an amazing collective intelligence.
And so what the genetic specifies
is not a fixed set of deformations.
What it really specifies is this kind
of error correction scheme that can deal with novelty.
And this raises an important question again,
which is how does it know what the correct shape is?
How does it know where it's going in this anatomical space?
So that means that to the standard model
of developmental biology, this is what you'll see
in textbooks, it's a kind of like
feed forward open loop system where there are genes
which produce proteins and they turn each other on and off
and these proteins interact with each other
according to the various laws of physics and chemistry.
And then eventually you get this emergent complexity.
And that's all true, all of that does happen,
but there's another piece to this
which is really important and exciting,
which is that after that, if you then deviate
from this target morphology by injury,
by mutation, teratogens, whatever,
if you deviate from this, there are these feedback loops
both at the level of genetics and physics
that actually try to minimize the error
and get back to where you were.
This is a kind of homeostasis,
it's the sort of thing your thermostat does.
But there's a few interesting things here.
First of all, in a typical homeostatic loop
that biologists are familiar with,
so hunger level, pH, things like that,
temperature, things like that,
the set point of this process, right?
And every homeostatic process has to have a set point.
The set point of this process is, it's a scalar,
it's a single number, but here that's not gonna work.
You need some kind of, I mean,
you don't need to know it to the single cell level,
but you need some kind of large data structure,
a descriptor, an anatomical descriptor
that allows the system to minimize the distance from it.
And so that's kind of all,
and you might ask yourself,
how could you store such a thing in biological tissue?
Where is it?
How do you store it?
And so that's unusual.
And what this kind of view makes a very strong prediction.
It suggests that if that's true,
you should be able to find this homeostatic set point
and you should be able to rewrite it, to edit it.
And, well, find it, decode it and rewrite it.
And the reason that's exciting is because otherwise,
your only hope for making changes,
repairs or modifications is down here, right?
If you wanna make changes up here,
you have to figure out what genes do I change
to make that happen?
And this, going backwards here is fundamentally intractable.
It's an inverse problem that's fundamentally not solvable.
Think about, for example, fractals, right?
You've got a fractal formula,
you got this really beautiful complex pattern,
and you look at that and you say,
okay, I want this curly Q to be a little smaller
and I want another one over here.
What should the formula be?
And you can't derive that for exactly the same reason
because it's a kind of recurrent system
where everything adds up on top of each other.
So we said, okay, it would be very nice
if we could learn to edit the set point
and make changes there
and then let the cells do what they do best,
which is to implement that set point.
It's how you use your thermostat.
You don't rewire your thermostat,
you change the set point and let the system do what it does.
So we took our inspiration from the nervous system,
which is a system where we know it's uncontroversial
that there you store complex patterns.
And so the nervous system, here's the hardware.
It's these cells in the network
and each one has these little ion channels
that passes a current back and forth.
And as a result, there's a voltage gradient
and that voltage gradient may or may not be communicated
through these electrical synapse known as gap junctions.
That's the hardware.
And this is the softwares.
What you're looking at here is a living zebrafish brain.
And this group made an amazing video of the activity,
the electrical activity of a living fish brain.
And there's this notion of neural decoding,
which is that if we were to understand and decode
all of the information in this electrophysiology,
we would be able to read the creature's memories,
its preferences, behavioral repertoires, and so on.
We would be all of the,
that's the commitment of neuroscience
is that all of the cognitive content
is stored in this electrophysiology.
Well, it turns out that every cell in your body does this.
This is not just for brains.
Every cell has ion channels.
Every cell, well, most cells
have gap junctions to their neighbors.
And so you could ask the same question.
If you did a kind of non-neural decoding,
what could you learn?
Well, you would learn what it is
that non-brain cells are thinking about.
And so what are they thinking about?
And this is something that we've now been studying
for some years.
And the idea is that there's this really profound,
profound kind of invariance
between neuroscience and developmental biology.
And so in traditional neuroscience,
the electrical activity of the neurons in your brain,
so the software, is giving directions to muscles.
It's controlling muscles to move you
through three-dimensional space.
Now, that's a pretty cool trick.
Where did it learn that trick?
Well, evolution learned this
about the time of bacterial biofilms, super early on.
And what was happening in a multicellular organism,
which is basically a more complex version
of a bacterial biofilm,
the same kinds of electrical circuits
are now controlling all cells
to move your body configuration through morpho space.
So again, it's a navigation.
It's an earlier navigation,
but what evolution did was speed it up, of course.
Neurons are much faster than this,
and also pivoted to a different space.
Instead of anatomical space,
you're now running around three-dimensional space
when nerves and muscles show up.
And so this isomerism between
the kind of developmental biology and neuroscience
allows us to do things like this.
This is a, and you can play with this.
This is a tool that we developed
that you can access it here,
which basically takes any abstract from a neuroscience paper,
such as this beautiful work by Epinotesis and Miller,
and it uses AI to convert it
to a developmental biology paper that doesn't exist.
It's letting you explore the latent space of possible papers.
All it does is convert,
whenever the neuroscience says neuron,
this just says cell,
whenever it says millisecond,
this says minutes or hours,
and so on, it does a few other translations.
But it's really easy.
If you read this, this is a great abstract,
but it generates a very nice,
possible developmental biology paper that actually makes sense
and gives you hypotheses of new things to test.
So that kind of using AI to explore,
and in fact, this thing called field shift,
there's also opportunities to shift papers to other areas,
like financial finance and so on.
And so using AI to exploit these symmetries
between fields is really powerful.
And so what we did years ago was to build
the first molecular tools for reading and writing
electrical information in non-neural cells.
And now we basically appropriated a lot from neuroscience
because those tools can't tell the difference.
They work everywhere.
They're not specific for neurons.
So first it's voltage sensitive fluorescent dyes.
So what you're seeing here is a time lapse
of an early frog embryo,
where we can see all the electrical conversations
that all these cells are having with each other.
And so we get to read the voltages,
and then we do all kinds of simulation.
And so we have the simulator and we do a lot of work
to try to understand how the molecular biology
of the ion channels gives rise to electric circuits
that have specific behaviors.
So I'm gonna show you a couple of patterns.
So this is again, voltage imaging,
and this is an early frog embryo putting its face together.
And there's all kinds of stuff going on.
But one thing to look at is,
this is one frame out of that movie right there.
That's the frame.
And so you can see here that long before the genes
are turned on to pattern the face,
and before the anatomy of the face develops,
you already see that this,
by looking at these electrical pattern memories,
you already see this animal nose.
Here's where the right eye is going to go.
Here's where the mouth is going to go.
Here are the placodes.
It's a subtle energetic scaffold, a pre-pattern
that tells the face what the shape should be.
And if you mess around with the shape,
then the gene expression changes in the anatomy changes.
I'll show you that in a minute.
But so this is a natural pattern
that's required for normal face development.
This memory is required for the cells
to know how to build a frog face.
And of course, you could use this technique
to monitor for birth defects.
Now, this is a pathological pattern.
We'll say a little bit more about that later,
but the idea is that we inject a human oncogene.
Eventually it makes a tumor.
Eventually the tumor starts to metastasize here.
But before that happens,
you can already see these cells
electrically disconnecting from their neighbors
and going off on their own
and basically treating the rest of the body
as just the external environment
because now they're on their own.
So okay, so even more important than the monitoring
is the idea of being able to rewrite these patterns
by functional states.
Now, I'm going to show you some outcomes of that,
but I want to be very clear.
We do not use, there are no electrodes,
there are no electromagnetic fields,
there are no magnets,
there are no waves, no radiations, no frequencies.
What we are doing is targeting the native interface
that the cells are using to hack each other.
What they're using are these little ion channels
on their surface and the gap junctions
that pass electrical signals to each other
into the outside world.
And that's how they set their voltage
and that's how they process information.
So there's a native interface, right?
Like the keyboard of a computer
that gives you privileged access
so that you don't have to try to directly micromanage
the information flow that's happening here.
And of course, when so we use the same tools
that neuroscientists use,
we can introduce changes into these channels,
we can use drugs for pharmacology
to open and close the channels,
we can use light, which is now optogenetics and so on,
same techniques.
And one of the things that,
so now I'm going to show you what happens.
What is this bioelectricity good for?
These electrical signals through the tissue.
And so the argument I'm going to make is that
it's actually, it is the protocognitive medium
of the collective intelligence of these cells.
It's the network, it mediates the network
that allows them to navigate things like
from a single cell shape to a complex organism.
And so when you're doing that,
what you're basically doing is scaling up
the goal space of the systems.
So when you have a single cell,
you could have this nice simple homeostatic loop
that would be respond to a certain local variable
like a pH or temperature or hunger level or something.
But what you want here is,
this is a very kind of humble goal.
It's a very tiny goal,
but you want to expand that cognitive light cone.
You want to be able to pursue a goal like this.
My goal is making this limb.
And it's not enough for me to be a single cell
worried about a local information.
All of these cells need to be able to build this
and then stop.
And no individual cell knows what a finger is
or how many fingers you're supposed to have,
but the collective absolutely does.
And so what you need to do is you need to scale.
You have to use some kind of communication
between these cells to scale them to larger scale goals
and large that cognitive light cone
so that the set points that they're going after
are much bigger and in a different space.
And they're able to recover from partial information
and navigate these energy landscapes.
And so one of the things you can do with bioelectricity
is address a particular failure mode of multicellularity.
That failure mode is known as cancer.
So again, think these, the individual cells
of little tiny cognitive light cones,
all this cell cares about is its own local state.
But here you've got this very large cognitive light cone.
It's a whole limb, but that process can break down.
And as I just told you, what happens is that
if individual cells disconnect from the environment,
this is glioblastoma.
This is a kind of cancer.
They basically treat the rest of the animal as external.
The environment, the boundary between self and world shrinks.
That cognitive light cone,
the size of the goals you're interested in and pursuing
is really the size of you as a self.
It's what determines the boundary
between you and the outside world.
And so when that shrinks, so here evolution inflates it,
then here sometimes it shrinks and it becomes cancer.
And so those cancer cells
aren't any more selfish than normal cells.
It's just that their self is smaller, right?
It's the question of how do you know
where you end in the outside world begins?
And this is one way that cells used to determine that.
And so what we, and knowing that
allows you to start to develop therapeutics.
So for example, here is this nasty oncogene,
for example, a human K-RAS mutation.
Normally it would make a tumor like this,
but what we can do, and it's labeled in red,
so you can see it's very strongly expressed.
In fact, that's all over the place,
but there's no tumor.
This is the same animal.
There's no tumor because what we did was
we injected an ion channel into these cells
to force them to be in the right electrical state
relative to their neighbors.
And even though there's genetic damage,
so the hardware is damaged,
but you can basically get around that at the software level
by having the appropriate connection to the network.
The network can overcome local damage.
And so this isn't chemotherapy.
You're not killing these cells, you're normalizing them.
You're bringing them back into correct functionality
with reconnecting to the network.
So that's what you can do on a single cell level
and we're of course pursuing that
into hopefully human medicine soon.
But you can also work at organ level.
So you can take ion channels encoding RNA
and coding specific ion channels,
inject them into this early embryo
at a location that's going to become gut.
And what you can do is you can recapitulate
that little eye spot.
I showed you that electric face
and there's a little pattern there
that's corresponding to an eye spot.
Well, you can recapitulate that pattern somewhere else.
And when you do that, these cells happily make an eye
and these eyes have all the same lens
and retina and optic nerve and everything else.
And so this tells you a few things.
It tells you that the bioelectric pattern is instructive
because it can call up whole other organs.
And also it shows you that it's incredibly modular
meaning that we didn't put in very much information at all.
There's not that much information to specify
an entire complex eye.
In fact, we have no idea how to make a frog eye.
What we did find is a trigger, AKA a subroutine call
that triggers all the stuff downstream
that encapsulates.
So this very simple signal says build an eye here
and that encapsulates all of the gene expression changes
and the morphogenesis and everything else
that has to happen.
Not only that, it actually encapsulates
some really cool problem solving behavior.
For example, if you only inject a very few cells here
there's not enough of them to make this nice lens.
What they'll do is the same thing
that ants and termites do another collective intelligence.
What they'll do is they'll recruit their neighbors.
So the blue cells are the ones that we injected.
All of these other cells were recruited by these guys
because they realized there's not enough of them
to complete the task.
So all of those competencies are downstream
of a very simple subroutine call
that says build an eye here.
So I've shown you that you can change using these
by manipulating the bioelectric states
you can change the size of that goal-directedness.
So the size of the cognitive light on.
I've shown you that you can induce specific pattern memories
for example, eyes, we can do some other organs.
And now I wanna show you more specifically
what these pattern memories look like.
So again, this is our planarian
and I remind you that you can cut them into many pieces.
The record is something like 275, I believe.
And they're also immortal.
So they go on forever.
They just sort of continuously regenerate
anything that any cell that ages.
And one simple question you could ask
is if we cut these into pieces.
So here's a middle fragment.
We've cut off the head and the tail.
Here's the middle fragment.
Here's the gene expression
that anterior genes were up here at the head.
And you cut this middle fragment,
this middle piece 100% of the time
knows how many heads it's supposed to have.
One head, one tail.
So how does it know that?
And we actually found an electrical circuit
that we characterized that actually carried that information.
And this is what it looked like.
That piece has a pattern, an electrical pattern like this.
One head, one tail.
And so we then asked, well, what happens
if we change that pattern?
If we rewrite it, okay?
And what we did was use ion channel modifying drugs
to rewrite that pattern and make it look like this.
It's a little messy, of course, but do you get the idea?
Here it is.
This technology is very much still at early stages.
And so what you can do here is when you do that,
and this is the animal here,
when you do that, you cut that animal
and that piece will go on to make a two-headed worm.
Now this is really critical.
This electrical pattern is not a map of this two-headed guy.
This electrical pattern is a map of this one-headed,
normal looking and normal gene expression having worm.
That's because this is encoding.
I mean, I promised you when we talked about set points
in anatomical homeostasis,
I told you I was gonna show you where the memory is.
You are now looking at it.
This is literally where the pattern memory is.
We can now visualize it.
This fragment thinks that a normal worm
should have two heads.
It is, that is the representation
of what a correct worm looks like.
And that is what the cells build when they are injured.
And so a normal worm body can store up to one of two different
and no doubt many other things,
but this is what we know now,
two different representations
of what a correct planarian looks like.
And it's actually a counterfactual memory
because at this point, the body is not two-headed
and yet it has this pattern.
It's not what's happening now.
It's what you're going to do if you get injured in the future.
So it might be a sort of the evolutionary precursor
of this amazing mental time travel
that brains allow us to do.
Now I keep calling it a pattern memory
because if I cut these two-headed worms
into again and again in plain water,
they continue to generate two-headed animals.
So you might think that if I amputate
this ectopic secondary head
and the genetics are normal,
we haven't touched the genome,
then that hardware should just go back
and continue to make normal worms.
But that's not what happens.
The memory holds and it keeps the two-headed state.
And then of course we now know how to turn it back.
So this has all the basic properties of memory.
It's long-term stable, it's rewritable,
it has conditional recall and it has discrete behaviors,
discrete paths that it takes in anatomical morpho space.
And here you can see these two-headed worms hanging out.
So the question of how many heads a planarian
is supposed to have is not directly written in the genome.
The genome encodes some hardware
that when the juice is turned on, by default,
makes a pattern that says one head,
but it's reprogrammable.
This issue is reprogrammable such that
when we change that pattern, it holds.
And so what we're doing now is combining lots of ideas
from the dynamical systems theory of these electrical circuits
to some powerful paradigms in connection
as to machine learning to try to understand
how these electrical networks recall complex patterns
from partial stimuli, how they handle noise,
and basically how they navigate these energy landscapes.
Now it's not just about head number,
it's also, you can also do this with head shape.
In fact, you can get a nice,
this species with a nice triangular head shape
to make flat heads like a Pifalina
or round heads like an S-Mediterrania.
Not just the head shape, but actually the shape
of the brain and the distribution of stem cells
becomes just like these other species.
The distance between this and this
is about 100 to 150 million years of evolution.
So what that tells you is that this hardware,
without any genetic modification,
but purely with physiological stimuli,
is able to visit other attractors
that normally belong to other species.
So you're starting to see that plasticity.
In fact, you can get them to make shapes,
really crazy shapes that don't look like a planarian at all.
And that's because there's a huge latent morphaspace
around the normal kind of behavior,
physiological behavior of that system.
And you can push it to explore other areas
of that morphaspace.
So one of the things we're doing now
is trying to make a full stack model
all the way from the molecular biology of ion channels
to the simulation of the electrical circuits
to the large scale global body-wide patterns that appear.
And then ultimately,
and the kind of algorithmic view of this decision-making
so that you can actually,
it's a human understandable set of algorithms.
And so we wanna be able to integrate the whole thing.
And partly why we wanna do that
is for regenerative medicine applications.
So here's an example, frogs,
unlike salamanders do not regenerate their legs,
but we made a cocktail that after,
so normally after 45 days, you get nothing,
but we made a bioelectric cocktail
that triggers a leg regeneration within 45 days.
You already have some toes, you've got a toenail,
eventually a pretty respectable leg
that's touch sensitive and motile.
And the idea is that we're not micromanaging the process.
We're not telling the stem cells what to do.
We're not 3D printing anything.
We're telling the cells at the first 24 hours
after imputation, you should go down the leg-building path,
not the scarring path.
And after that, we don't touch the animal alone at all.
We leave them alone for a year and a half.
This whole thing will grow for 18 months
after only 24 hour application
because we're not trying to micromanage the process.
We're looking for subroutine calls.
We're looking for hooks into the native software
of the morphogenetic agent.
And so now, so having done this now,
we are in the process of trying to do this in mammals,
of course, we have to do a disclosure here,
Morphosuticals is a company that Dave Kaplan and I started
to take some of this technology
and push it into mammals.
So the last thing I wanna show you today
is a set of novel beings because I've told you
that these biological systems are exhibiting
problem-solving capabilities in anatomical space.
And when you ask, well, where do the set points come from?
How does it know what shape it should be?
Typically the answer is well evolution selection.
In other words, if you're gonna be a frog
living in a froggy environment,
then there's really only the small set of form
and functions that will survive there
and everything else died out.
And so that's why it's long, you know, eons of selection.
So what we decided to do was to make novel organisms
that never existed before.
And we decided to ask, can we make this from scratch?
You know, how much plasticity is there?
What are cells going to do
when you reboot their multicellularity?
Where do novel goals come from?
And I'll also do a disclosure here
because this is work with Josh Bongard
at the University of Vermont.
And we have a company called Fauna Systems.
And so Doug Blackiston is the biologist in my lab
who does all of this work.
And what we basically did was take the skin cells
and these are here, these skin cells off of the top
of an early frog embryo and we set them aside here.
And you might ask, we just dissociated them
and set them aside and you might ask, what will happen?
Well, they could just die.
They could spread out, crawl away from each other.
They could do nothing.
They could form a nice flat two-dimensional monolayer
like cell culture.
In fact, what they do is, I'll play this again,
what they do is if you sort of, if you dissociate these cells
and just kind of pipette them here,
what they'll actually do overnight is they coalesce
into this little ball and the flashes
that you're seeing are, is calcium signaling.
And this little ball starts to swim.
We call these Xenobots because Xenopus lavus
is the name of the frog
and we call them bio bots.
We think it's a biorebotics platform.
So they have little hairs on their surface that they wave
and they row against the water.
The hairs are normally used to move mucus
down the side of the frog,
but these guys have used it for swimming.
They can go in circles.
They can patrol back and forth like this.
They have all kinds of group behaviors.
You can see here, these guys are interacting
with each other.
These ones are taking a rest.
This was one that was going kind of on a long journey here.
Here's one navigating a maze.
So you can see it swims down here.
It's going to take this corner
without hitting the opposite wall.
So it takes the corner and then at this point,
for some reason it turns around
and goes back where it's came from.
They have no neurons,
but if you, if you look,
if you image their calcium signaling,
which calcium is basically a readout
of cellular computations,
you will see that there's tons of activity
and you can apply and as we are,
all kinds of information theory metrics
to ask are the cells talking to each other?
Are these two bots talking to each other?
What's the information processing that's going on here?
But there's no neurons.
They're just skin.
And they also regenerate.
So if you cut them almost in half,
they will, they will seal up.
So here you cut them almost in half and boom,
they seal up to their, to their new,
to their new Xenobot shape.
And one of the most amazing things they do,
and this was discovered by Sam Kriegman
in, it was a student in Josh Bongard's lab.
If you, so they were doing computer simulations
of these Xenobots running around
and they found that if you give them loose material
to work with, they do something quite interesting
in making these patterns.
So these are, these are patterns
that these bots etched overnight on this, on this dish.
In making these patterns,
they do something quite interesting.
And what they do is this,
this is basically Von Neumann's dream
of a robot that goes out and builds copies of itself
from loose materials it finds around.
So what we do is these, these little white things
are just skin cells that we sprinkle into the dish.
And we let the bots go at it.
What they do is they run around
and they collect the cells into a little ball
and they polish that little ball.
And that little ball,
because they're working with any gentile material,
these are not passive particles, these are cells.
And so for the same reason
that we were able to make Xenobots,
they are able to make the next generation of bots.
These little balls mature,
they become the next generation of bots.
And guess what they do?
They run around and collect cells
and make the next generation
and the next generation and so on.
So we call this kinematic self-replication.
And so it's just one of many novel competencies
that these guys have.
And so the amazing thing is that,
you know, you might ask like,
what does a frog genome encode exactly?
Well, what did evolution learn
when it developed the frog genome?
And we think,
but if we just look at normal development,
you just see that what it's learned
is to make this set of shapes.
So here's the developmental sequence
and then some tadpoles running around.
But actually it can do much more.
So here's a Xenobot,
here's a two and a half month old Xenobot.
It's turning into something.
I have no idea what it's turning into.
So the idea here is this,
what we've done is we haven't changed the genome.
We haven't put in any weird nanomaterials.
All we've done is liberate these skin cells
from their normal environment.
And we found out that their normal,
boring two-dimensional life as the skin
of the outer surface of the animal
is basically forced upon them
by the instructive interactions of their neighbors.
If you take them away from that,
now you get to see the native form
of what these cells really wanna do.
This is what they do
when nobody's telling them what else to do.
This is a reboot of their own goal states.
They do this,
which nobody had any idea that this was possible.
And you can't use evolutionary selection
as to explain this
because there's never been any Xenobots.
There's never been selection to be a good Xenobot.
This is something that we made for the first time here.
So of course the cells were in the evolutionary stream,
but they lived this life.
They never lived this life before.
So where did this kinematic cell for application come from?
It's a really deep question.
And as we're doing robotics,
now engineering for millennia
has been using passive materials
like wood and metal and so on.
But now we're moving to active matter
and even computational matter,
but the future is here.
It's an agential matter.
It's in materials that you don't control them bottom up
the way you do with this kind of hardware.
You take advantage of all these things
they already know how to do.
And we're working on some techniques for bioprompting,
which is basically to learn to program this kind of material
not by trying to force states as in synthetic biology,
but by training them and giving them various stimuli
that reset their set points
and then make to use all of this.
So the last thing I'm going to say is this.
Darwin had this great phrase,
endless forms, most beautiful.
And he was impressed with a variety of life.
And I just want to say that basically all of life on earth
in its magnificent variety
is all a tiny little corner
of the giant possibility space of new bodies and new minds.
And that's because life is incredibly interoperative
because evolution doesn't make specific
hardwired solutions generally.
It makes problem solving machines
that are open to novel configurations
and coherent action and novel embodiments.
Pretty much any combination of evolved cellular material
and the various kind of engineered machinery and software
is going to be some type of agent.
You've got hybrids and cyborgs
and all different kinds of things.
And all these things are look kind of way.
Actually many of these already exist and have been made
but they're going to be incredibly plentiful
in the coming decades.
And I don't think it's going to take very long.
You in this audience will be living in a world
with many other creatures
who are nowhere on the tree of life relative to you.
That is their origin story and their composition
is no longer a good guide
and their kind of place in the evolutionary web
is no longer a good guide to how to relate to them.
They're going to be truly alien bodies and minds
with different degrees of cognition.
And that means that we really need to develop
some new ethics around a kind of synthbiosis
where you can coexist and flourish by interacting
with beings that are very different from us
and the old ways that we used to figure out
how we relate to plants and animals and ecosystems
and each other in terms of what are you made of
and what do you look like?
Did you come out of a factory or were you evolved
and do you look like me?
And do you have the same kind of brain?
All of those things are out the window.
None of those are good guides anymore.
I mean, they were never good
but they kind of served while things were pretty primitive.
Those things are out the window.
We're going to have to come up with an entirely new way
of understanding diverse intelligences.
I'm going to stop here and just say that
if you're interested in any of these topics
you can follow up with these or many other papers.
And I want to thank the students and the postdocs
that did all of the work that I showed you today
and our various support personnel,
lots of collaborators to thank various funders here.
Again, the disclosures here are three companies
that fund our work.
And most of all, I always thank the animals
because they do all the hard work really.
So thank you very much.
