Lots more details, data, software, all the primary papers are here because I'm only going to have a chance to kind of give a broad overview today.
What I'd like to talk about are three main points here. First of all, I'm going to focus on the competencies of navigating unconventional spaces.
So this goes beyond the three-dimensional kind of problem-solving that conventional brainy systems do.
And then I will talk about a particular example of this unconventional intelligence, which is basically the idea of non-neural cells using familiar electrical communication pathways as a kind of cognitive glue to give them the ability to solve problems in anatomical space.
And I will talk about specific applications of this idea to show that this is not just philosophy or wordplay, but it actually leads to some very interesting biomedical approaches.
I'll talk about briefly about cancer as literally a dissociative identity disorder of this somatic intelligence.
And then at the very end, I'm going to talk about some novel embodiments and mention a little bit about the ethics of diverse intelligence.
And our approach is to study experimentally the collective intelligence of groups of cells that navigate anatomical space.
And this allows us to think about broadly the field of diverse intelligence and what do minds in unfamiliar embodiments look like.
And really to try to fill out the gamut from very fundamental philosophical ideas that have been kicked around for a very long time to how some of these things can become actionable therapeutics.
So one place that we might start is with this kind of old image.
This is Adam naming the animals in the Garden of Eden.
And of course, there are two things here that are important.
One is that there are a set of discrete natural kinds that are meant to be individual specific kinds of agents.
And then here's Adam and he's of course different from the others.
And one of his roles is to name the other animals and this as you'll see in the end of the talk, this is very profound because naming something is in a sense to discover its true nature and it's going to be on us to discover the true nature of some very unconventional beings that they have never been here before in the tree of life.
And that is because this human with their kind of agential glow that a lot of people focus on as kind of a special thing.
We are at the center of continuum, not only on the evolutionary timescale, but also the developmental timescale.
And so when we talk about humans doing this or that, we have to ask which kind of human and where does that happen.
And now with synthetic biology and bioengineering we now know that there's another continuum here, which is that through both engineering and engineered components and biological modifications.
We can make some very unusual hybrids and things like that that again ask us to try to develop tools to understand what is the cognitive world of beings that are really quite different from what we're used to.
Because life is very interoperable and at every level of the hierarchy we can introduce engineered components and make something that has never existed before.
So what I'm very interested in and this is that that paper that Lars was was mentioning was was kind of the first explication of what I'm trying to do which is to develop a framework where we can think about all sorts of agents now so this includes the familiar kinds of things.
You know apes and birds and maybe a whale and octopus and insects and so on. And then colonial organisms and swarms and engineered new life forms and AIs, whether purely software or embodied robotics, potentially exobiological agents at some point
so some kind of alien life. How do we think about all these things what do they all have in common. And obviously I'm not the first person to think about this so here's Rosenbluth, Wiener and Bigelow kind of scale from the 1940s.
And this is a cybernetic view which which specifically goes from from passive matter, all the way up through various categories or phase transitions, if you will, that allow novel kinds of functionality and and behavior to arise, but at the same time
recognizing that this is in fact a continuum that that that these are not categorically different things but that actually you have to ask where things land on this continuum.
And for me, to make this very practical. I like an engineering approach, which is to say that cognitive claims about anything whether whether you know an animal or or anything else.
Any kind of cognitive claim is really a pro an engineering protocol claim. So what you're really saying, I think, when you say that this is a system that is cognitive at a particular level is what you're really saying is what kind of tools can we deploy to interact with it in an optimal
way. And so here are just four very basic examples. So systems like this or simple machines, your only tool and your toolkit is hardware modification, you're not going to convince it of anything you're not going to train it.
This is you know this is all all you can do is modify the hardware. And then we progressively move up to various kinds of cybernetic circuits where you can do more interesting things like reset their set point, and let them do what they do best which is which is try to
maintain it. And then of course you have other kinds of systems that you can do rewards and punishments and training, and then human level metacognition and whatever is beyond that.
So, one of the critical things I think in this in this field is that we can't just have philosophical feelings about where things land on the spectrum we have to do experiments.
So when we ask, where do cellular collectives fit on this kind of spectrum this I call it an axis of persuadability, specifically because from the perspective of an engineer the question is how do we get the system to do something that it wasn't doing
before. So that is that is how we we make this practical. These ideas very practical. And so this question of where do cellular collectives fit. I mean, most people in our field will will will say that that it's they're down here and people say things all the time
like well, it's a chemical machine it doesn't it doesn't have a brain and it you know it can't do this or that.
So we have to do experiments we can't just assume. And part of part of it is that we all started life as a single cell. So a little blob of chemistry and physics that becomes one of these things or even perhaps something like this.
And the one thing we learned for sure from developmental biology is that there is no sharp dividing line that turns physics and chemistry into mind. Okay, you're not going to find any specific stage at which suddenly things take over.
So we know that what we're really looking for in the science is some kind of a principled set of models about the scaling of whatever competencies, these things can do up to what what happens here how does this how do they arise, both evolutionarily and
developmentally. And then, and then there's the issue that so so so people often see this and is okay fine so so we somehow develop from a single cell, but at least we're a unified mind we're a unified intelligence we're not like a collection of answer
termites where people say that these are collective intelligence but but it's really you know it's it's not the same we we are an actually we are actually a unified mind.
So the thing the thing to keep in mind of course is that even something like the pineal gland which Descartes thought was really fitting for, for humans who have this supposedly unified perspective is that if he had had good microscopy, he would have known
that inside that pineal gland, there are huge numbers of individual cells, and inside of each of those cells is all of this stuff this is the molecular machinery in there.
So, in an important sense, we are all collective intelligence is we are all made of parts. Our parts look like this, so this is now now this happens to be a free living organism, which you can see what's going on here at the level of a single cell.
So this, this little creature is incredibly competent with its physiological needs it's metabolic and so on.
No brain, no nervous system. This is this is what it can do about the goals of its tiny little, little world.
And so, again, what I'm interested in is the scaling, I want to know how these competencies, and this this of course is a chemical chemical system these guys can learn.
If we don't think that you can reward or punish a chemical network. That's pretty much what you have here is a set of is a set of these physical and chemical processes.
And so I'm also really interested in this notion of a cognitive glue so if you have this rat that learns to press a lever and get a reward. The cells at the bottom of the foot are the ones that experienced lever the cells in the gut experience the sugar.
Who is it that owns the associate of memory that these things are connected no individual cell had both experiences. There has to be a rat that is in some way, the owner of information that none of its parts have.
We're interested in how the problem solving capacities of these collectives relate to those of their parts.
And, and so we're we're we also notice that the architecture of life is very multi scale, not just structurally but actually each level here of this of this hierarchy is itself competent various problem spaces so they solve all kinds of issues in physiological and
anatomical and other kinds of spaces. So, these are the kinds of models we make of multi scale agents that cooperate and and compete for for various things and then what happens.
We are reasonably good at noticing intelligence of medium sized objects moving at medium speeds through three dimensional space.
We're used to an even and even there when you know it's really hard for people to to to buy the concept of intelligence and unfamiliar kinds of kinds of animals but.
This navigating three dimensional spaces what people are used to, but I think it's really important to understand that while we, because of our sensory apparatus and our lifestyle are very preoccupied with specific scales of space and time, and also with three
dimensional space, there are other spaces in which other types of agents live. They, they operate in those spaces they solve problems they perform a perception action loop they have goals that they meet with some level of, of competency.
These include spaces of gene expression spaces of physiological state and anatomical morpho space. Now I could tell you some amazing stories about cells, navigating and solving problems in these spaces but I won't have time to do that today.
I'm going to focus on anatomical morpho space. I will just just mention one quick thing which is that even small pathways so groups of, let's say 10 or so genes that can turn each other on and off already demonstrate the dynamics of six different kinds of memory including
so you do not need the rest of the cell you certainly don't need neurons to do some things that are really well described by paradigms and behavior science and you can you can see those here, but so already and this is a biomedical research program that we have taking advantage of the learning capacities of the pathways of your body to use drugs in a very different way
than is used now. But, but let's talk about the anatomical morpho space. So, I find it really interesting that Alan Turing, who obviously was the forefather of a lot of ideas in artificial intelligence, he thought about computation.
He thought about minds embodied in different different types of media, and specifically reprogram ability this issue of problem solving machines and intelligence through plasticity. And what does it, what does it mean to program or reprogram a machine.
But what he also did, interestingly enough is publish a paper called the chemical basis of morphogenesis this was an extremely early attempt to understand how do embryo self organized, and why is it that that order arises in embryo genesis.
And so you might you might ask what why would somebody who's interested in cognition, and in computation and things like that, suddenly be writing papers about the biochemistry of early early development.
And I think that, even though as far as I know he didn't write anything about this I think he saw a very profound symmetry a very profound a commonality between the problem of the origin of the mind and the origin of the body.
And I think he was right on I think I think there's a very deep analogies here that we'll explore a little bit today. So where do anatomies come from well, we all start life like this as as a set of embryonic blastomers.
Eventually this is a cross section through the human torso. Look at the incredible order here, right all of these complex parts everything is in the right place in the right, you know, orientation relative to that next to the next to the right neighbor and so on.
So where does this pattern actually come from. Now you might be tempted to say DNA most people at this point say genome it's in the DNA, but of course, we can read genomes now, and we know that the spatial structure is not explicitly in the genome at all any more than the shape of
this termite mound or the shape of the spider web is in the genome of these of these creatures. It's an emergent feature of the of the physiology and the behavior of these cells.
So we need to understand how do the cells with the hardware that the genome doesn't code. And so the genome obviously encodes the, the, the tiny protein hardware that every cell gets to have.
So, so the functional software that then describes the behavior of these cells. How do they know what to build, how do they know when to stop as as engineers we might also ask, how far can we push this process.
And so, so my lab actually does a lot of work on synthetic morphology I'll show you a tiny bit at the end, but it's quite remarkable what cells with a perfectly normal genome can be convinced to build.
And as workers in regenerative medicine we'd like to know how do we repair if something is missing or damaged how do we convince the cells to build some something else.
So I think about what the end game of that of that field, I think it is the anatomical compiler. So someday will be able to sit down in front of a computer draw the plant animal organ or bio bot that you want.
And what the computer will do is compile this description down into a set of stimuli that would have to be given to the cells to have them build exactly what you just drew. Okay, so complete control over growth and form.
And a practical concern, of course, because all of these things birth defects, failure to regenerate after injury cancer aging, all of this would go away, if we knew how to convince a group of cells to build something very specific whatever this that we want.
And keep in mind, this is not meant to be a 3D printer this is not about micromanaging the cells. This is about translating it's basically a communications device to translate our anatomical goals into those of the cellular collective.
Despite the, the, the importance of this thing we don't have anything like this yet. And why not I mean molecular biology and genetics and biochemistry have been going gangbusters for for for decades why don't we have this.
Well that well I think that what's happening here is that while we're very good at manipulating molecular molecules.
It's really a very long way away from controlling large scale form and function. Biomedicine today is all about the digging into the molecular level hardware so genomic editing pathway rewiring protein engineering all of these things are about the hardware.
And if you think about the kind of trajectory that computer science took. This is what programming look like in the, in the 1940s and 50s. So you literally to program you had to, you had to manipulate the system at the level of the hardware you had to rewire it.
But then what happened is and the reason you don't use your soldering iron on your laptop when you go from Microsoft Word to Photoshop is that they've understood that certain kinds of media are strongly reprogrammable that you we can take advantage of their competencies with software level interventions, and
we can use various abstractions to understand how they process information it's not all about the hardware.
So I think what we're missing in biomedicine and what I'm going to talk about today is this this frontier which is which is addressing the, the intelligence layers that I think exist in the biological hardware.
Now when I say intelligence what do I mean.
I'm going to restrict it to I mean obviously there are many components to this and many people have other definitions. I'm just going to focus on this one way of thinking about it, which is kind of William James's idea which is that it's the ability to reach the same goal by various means.
So that means that we're not asking what kind of brain it has we're not asking what it's made of the very sort of cybernetic definition that basically focuses on whatever the goals of the system are how competent or clever is it in meeting those goals when new things happen.
So this means that you can't just infer this from observation you can't watch cells doing things and say oh look, you know they're they're intelligent, you have to you have to formulate very specific hypotheses.
What space do you think they're working in what goals do you think they have what bad what competencies do you think they have to meet those goals and then you then you do the experiment you may you put barriers and so on.
So, so he illustrates James illustrates this in the following example, when you have two magnets trying to come together.
This process is a very, very low IQ kind of the scenario because what the magnet will never do is move further from its goal temporarily going around the barrier to get to where it's going.
It has no ability for delay gratification is just never going to do that. In contrast in his example Romeo and Julia to have, they have long term planning and they have all kinds of abilities to to get further from their goal temporarily to overcome various physical and social barriers.
In between you have all kinds of other systems so you have cells that navigate mazes and you have autonomous vehicles and various kinds of animals and so on.
So this is this is the empirical side of this is we have to make hypotheses and we have to test specifically what competencies do they have. So now let's let's get to it what kind of collective intelligence do cellular swarms deploy what do I mean when I say intelligence and other spaces.
Well, let's consider this this notion of navigating anatomical morpho space development starts like this and ends up like this. And so, if you think about the space of all possible anatomical configurations, what you have here is a long journey to a very specific
ensemble of states that corresponds to the normal human target morphology. And the first thing we know is that this is very reliable. Now that by itself is not not a sign of intelligence because an open loop process that was reliable and always resulted in, let's
say an increase in complexity and the same kind of outcome, that by itself is can be can be just a, you know, a very mechanical kind of thing. But one thing we know about embryos is that they are incredibly resilient to all kinds of
populations. So for example, if you cut these embryos into pieces, you don't get half bodies but you get our normal mono zygotic twins triplets and so on. And so this navigation of anatomical space, they can get there from different starting
positions they can often avoid local maxima. I have many examples that you know we could we could talk for hours about how they do this.
You can you can see what happens in animals that retain this ability throughout their lifetime, like this axolotl.
Here it's got this this limb and you can amputate the limb anywhere you want. And what they'll do is they'll grow exactly the right amount, they'll do the complex patterning, lots of cell proliferation, and then they stop.
That's the most amazing thing about regeneration is that it knows when to stop. When does it stop? It stops when a correct salamander arm has been completed. And these guys can regenerate their eyes, their jaws, their tails,
ovaries and so on. And so what you have here is the ability to get to the same outcome from different starting positions, despite various kinds of various kinds of injury and so on.
Anyway, humans and other mammals can do this a little bit. So we regenerate our livers, deer regenerate antlers at the rate of a centimeter and a half of new bone per day. So like really remarkable as an adult mammal doing this.
So this is just to say that what I'm going to show you isn't about just about frogs and worms because that's what I'm going to focus on.
And even human children can regenerate their, their fingertips. So, so this ability to get to the correct target morphology when you've been deviated from it by injury is not the end of the story.
It's an even deeper kind of thing, which this is one of my favorite examples.
So this is, this is a cross section through a kidney tubule in a in a newt. And what you'll notice is usually about eight to 10 cells that work together to give you that give you this anatomical structure.
The ability to get to where you're going in anatomical space, as I said, is not just about external injury.
One thing that we can do is increase the amount of genetic material in the early cell. So this is, this is a process that can be done with the egg where the cell, the DNA divides but the cell does not.
And so what you end up with is very large cells. So you can make polyploid nudes this way, you know, so so two and four and six and so on.
And when you do this, what you find is that the cells become much larger, but the, but the whole nude stays the same size. So the system automatically scales the number of cells needed to complete this, this process to the new cell number.
So amazing thing number one things work perfectly well, even though you have multiple copies of your genome floating around so that doesn't confuse it.
Amazing thing number two, when you're working with cells that are now abnormally large in size, no problem we know what to do we can use fewer of them to build the same thing.
And then amazing thing number three, which is that when you make the cells truly gigantic, one single cell will wrap around itself, giving you the same structure.
Now what's remarkable about that is that this is a different molecular mechanism. This is cell to cell communication this is cytoskeletal bending.
So this system in the pursuit of this particular anatomical outcome can choose different molecular tools in the in the toolkit available to the cells to get the job done.
Think about what this means for a salamander entering this this this world for the first time, you can't count on having the right amount of DNA, you can't count on having the right size cells, you can't count on having the right number of cells that's a different set of experiments
you're about. And you still need to, to complete your journey through that morpho space using whatever tools you have available. This is not injury this is not something that normally happens to these animals this is not the typical kind of regeneration.
But it is a response to a to a kind of injury at a larger scale which is evolutionary change so mutation. So for this reason and we can talk more about this.
I think that one thing that evolution really does is make problem solving agents I don't think it makes solutions to specific environments, because it commits from the very beginning to the fact that everything is going to change.
And you cannot over train on the priors of past generations. So this kind of problem solving capacity is everywhere. Here's one simple example that that we found just to kind of nail down this this experiment.
These are tadpoles of the frogs and a mislavus here are the eyes here's the brain here are the nostrils the mouth. So typically, what happens is that these tadpoles have to become a frog and in order to do that they have to rearrange their face.
So they have to move all these craniofacial components. Now you could and people didn't think up until we found this a few years ago, that this was a hardwired process. After all, every tadpole looks the same and every frog looks the same.
So all you need to do is move all these components in the right distance a fixed amount and you're good. So we decided to test that that claim and find out like how much actual problem solving capacity there is here.
So we made Picasso, but what we call Picasso tadpoles. So these are tadpoles where all the craniofacial organs are scrambled so here's the eyes on top of the head the mouth is off to the side, everything is scrambled.
And the amazing thing is that they become pretty normal frogs, because all of these components will move through novel unconventional paths to get to where they need to go and then they stop.
Now sometimes they go a little bit too far actually and they have to they have to come back a little bit but eventually they stop.
So what the genetics actually gives us is not a set of hardwired rearrangements, but actually a system of error minimization. It's a system that functionally has a particular set point in it in effective measures error towards that set point and will keep changing until that
error is within acceptable tolerances. So that raises a clear question. How does it know when it's reached the right thing what is this this whole thing is a process of anatomical homeostasis as people study and physiological homeostasis and so on.
So the question is, if you have a if you have a homeostatic system like this, where's the set point. Okay, homeostatic processes need to store a set point where's the set point.
So we took a lot of inspiration from neuroscience. And I don't I don't have to belabor it for this group. The idea that neural decoding is this commitment to the idea that that the the memories preferences, goals, behavioral
repertoires of a system, it can be read out from the electrophysiology of their brain. So if we understood how to decode these patterns, we would know so this is a living zebrafish brain that this this group image.
If we knew how to decode these patterns, we could understand the the the behavior and the mental life of this creature.
This is an amazing system that uses electrical communication between cells to process information in the service of behavior and specifically goal directed behavior that that animals can do.
Well, it turns out that evolution discovered the utility of electrical networks for this process very early on. This is not something that nerves or brains invented.
This is basically as old as the the first bacterial biofilms. So every cell in your body has these ion channels. Most of the cells have electrical synapses known as gap junctions between them.
And what we embarked years ago what we embarked on was a very parallel path to that in neuroscience is to say, Okay, can we use all of the tools that have been developed.
And this means importing practical tools, things like optogenetics, drugs that hit the neurotransmitter pathways and so on.
And the conceptual tools, you know, all this stuff from from behavioral science, all of the, you know, active inference and all all these all these kinds of things we steal everything from from neuroscience, because the tools do not distinguish.
As far as the tools are concerned, this is the same kind of process and that's an important clue the fact that that the tools don't distinguish this asks us to really think hard about why we distinguish this.
Because it turns out that most things that neurons do every cell in the body can do it but on a different time scale so they work on a much slower time scale. And I think that what evolution did was pivot this system towards
the system of controlling your journey through anatomical space became pivoted into controlling your emotion into in three dimensional space when nerves and muscles came on the scene.
So, we wanted to ask a simple question.
What does the body think about we know some of the things that brains think about what does the body think about what are these electrical networks doing as they, prior to the formation of the brain.
We developed some of the first tools to read and write this electrical information from non neural cells, the way that the people have been doing in in the nervous system.
So this for example is a time lapse video using a voltage sensitive fluorescent die of the early steps of frog embryo development. So what you're watching here is all of the conversations that these cells are having with each other in this network around who's
going to be left right top bottom and so on.
And the question is, can we learn to read and decode this information so we do a lot of quantitative simulation, where we start with knowing what ion channels are expressed, and we have these pathways but then we simulate the electrical paths, the way that people do with neural
network simulators, and ask how do they do things like pattern completion error correction, and some other things I'm going to show you taken right out of the typical neuroscience.
So a quick example of, of what these, what these patterns look like. So this is a time lapse of a frog embryo, putting its face together here's one particular pattern.
And the reason I'm showing you this pattern it's it's the easiest one to decode the easiest one we found so far.
We call it the electric face because it basically looks like a face by looking at the electrical pattern in these tissues, you know what the future gene expression and anatomy is going to be here's where the animals right eye is going to be formed
here's the mouth. And we know as I'll show you momentarily, if you manipulate this pattern, the cells build something different.
And there's also so that's so that's an endogenous pattern that is required for normal craniofacial development. This is a pathological pattern that we induce by injecting oncogenes and I'll tell you the story of cancer.
So, watching patterns is all well and good but the most important thing is of course a functional perturbation so that we can see if we can can we really read and write new information into these electrical networks.
But remember the hypothesis that that these electrical networks much like in the brain are literally the the medium the information processing medium of the collective intelligence that solves anatomical problems, much like in the brain the networks
underlie the collective behavior of neurons that solve other kinds of problems.
So, so can we learn to read and write this information. So we don't use any applied electric fields there are no waves there are no frequencies there are no electrodes no magnets nothing like that.
So we do exactly what neuroscientists do which is that we target either the topology of the network by opening and closing specific gap junctions, or we can target the actual electrical state of the cells by controlling the ion channels so we're talking about
drug based openers and blockers genetic mutation of channels optogenetics and so on. And what we're doing is taking advantage of the the interface the electrical interface by which cells normally control each other's behavior.
So everything I'm going to show you works in morphogenesis not because we're so smart and we engineered all this stuff. It works because that is how the cells normally control each other.
This is very much an endogenous native, taking advantage of an endogenous native system.
So, while having seen that that that spot in the in the electric face that makes an eye you might wonder what happens if we introduce that somewhere else so this idea that that that these patterns are basically memories they're basically spatial memories of the set point that
guides morphogenesis.
That makes a strong prediction we should be able to reproduce them somewhere else. So, so okay so we can inject a set of ion channel RNAs into a particular region to establish the voltage pattern that we want that voltage pattern will tell the local
cells, you should build an eye, and here you go you can make an eye anywhere in the animal including out of gut cells.
If you section these eyes they can have all the right lens retina optic nerve they can have all the right stuff inside.
Now notice notice a few interesting things first thing you learn from this is that, in fact, these bio electrical patterns are instructive if you can if you control the pattern and put it somewhere else.
You can make large scale changes coherent large scale changes in the in the anatomy, meaning you can control whole behavioral modules in that anatomical kind of agent.
That's the first thing the second thing is it's very modular. So what we have here is a stimulus a prompt that causes very complex downstream set of behaviors, we didn't have to micromanage the stem cells or tell any of the genes went to come on.
It's very, very top down trigger. It's a stimulus that causes the system to exert a whole bunch of little journeys in anatomical space that are required to make this eye.
The third thing is that in your developmental biology textbook, you would see that only the anterior norectoderm this stuff up here is supposedly competent to make eye.
Now that's because typically what they do is they are they prompt this thing with pack six which is a supposed to be the master hygiene.
And yes, if you if you miss express pack six, this up here is the only region that can make a topic eyes, but that's the wrong prompt if you use a bioelectric prompt you find out that actually any region in the embryo is competent to make eye.
So this reminds us of something important in the field of diverse intelligence is that when we talk about the competency of various systems, we're really taking an IQ test ourselves all we're really saying is this is what this is what we know.
So far, as far as what the system can do, it doesn't necessarily mean that that's the limitation of what the system can do because maybe we have not found the right set of triggers or do not appreciate its behavioral repertoire.
And the last thing that that was I find amazing about this is that this is so this this is a lens sitting out in the flank of a tail of a tadpole somewhere in the tail.
And what you'll notice the blue cells are the ones that we injected with our potassium channel, all of these other cells up here were never injected.
So what's happening here is that there's not enough of these cells to actually build an entire eye so what they're doing is recruiting their neighbors to help them complete the process right that competency we didn't have to put that in the ability of these cells to do a secondary
instruction so we tell you make an eye and they tell their neighbors, you have to help us make an eye is something that we see in other collective intelligence is like ants and termites.
When they where they wear the colony scales its efforts appropriate to a task of you know carrying a large food items and so on. So, so this is this is all part of what the what the material can do.
And of course, we're pushing this now into kind of biomedical areas.
For example, frogs would normally do not regenerate their legs at this stage normally.
There's no there's no repair. We have figured out some bio electrical prompts that set the tissue to a particular state that says, go down the leg regeneration path, not the scarring path.
And so immediately, the pro regenerative genes turn on, and then eventually you get this nice leg that's touch sensitive and Motile.
There's not many early stages it looks like this but pretty pretty respectable leg. And the idea is that we don't micromanage this we're not talking to the individual cells, right, any more than you're, you're talking to individual neurons when you're using high level behavioral control and animals.
It's a, it's a it's a very high level sub routine call where you can say build a leg that process takes 24 hours, and the leg itself grows for a year and a half, you get 18 months it's completely autonomous once you've, once you've convinced those cells that that's what they're
a scar, it goes. So I at this point I have to do a disclosure so morphosutical zinc is a company that Dave Kaplan and I founded to try to do this in mammals and hopefully eventually human patients.
I want to show you one other one other example of of an animal that really lets us see how how much we can we can import from from from ideas and in neuroscience.
They're from a human area and these are flatworms that regenerate. They have some amazing properties that we don't have time to talk about now, but they're highly regenerative. They're also cancer resistant, they're immortal, if no no aging, and they're
extremely resistant to transgenesis. And I think that's because of their incredibly noisy genome if anybody's interested in that we can talk about that. But one of the amazing things is that when you cut it into pieces and the record is like 276 pieces or something
each piece gives rise to a perfectly normal worm, and it has the right number of heads and tails. So we wondered how does a piece know how many heads and tails it's supposed to have what controls that.
And we discovered an electric circuit that determines this process and what happens here is that you have you have a normal worm here is got the head and the tail we amputate those we take the middle fragment.
And reliably it makes a one headed worm but 100% of the time it makes a one headed worm.
Here's what the bio electrical pattern is if you read this this this this fragment here, it's got this pattern that that we've been able to decode as is one head, one tail.
And what we can do is we can take this animal and change that pattern to say two heads. Okay, it's kind of messy because the technology still in its infancy but we can we can do we can make it to say two heads and then this is what they built.
Now here's the really critical part. This bio electrical map is not a map of this two headed animal. Okay, this is really important. This this bio electrical map is a map of this perfectly normal one headed worm.
This map, when I said earlier on that there's a homo homostatic process that has a store set point as a kind of beacon for the navigation and anatomical space.
What you're looking at here is literally we can now see the pattern memories right so we can actually visualize what does this tissue think that a correct planarian looks like.
This is what it thinks it looks like, but it doesn't match the current anatomy and that's fine nothing changes until this animal gets injured.
Then this pattern is consulted and the cells build a two headed animal. So what this is is not only is that a pattern memory that that serves as the as the set point.
But it is actually counterfactual memory. It is a very primitive example of a kind of mental time travel where we're used to brains being able to do this amazing thing where they they can remember things that aren't true right now they can
anticipate things that also aren't true right now. This this state of affairs is not true right now for this animal. The anatomy is normal the gene expression is normal, but this is what it stores as what am I going to do if I get injured in the future at some point.
So, so we now know that the body of a planarian can store at least two no no doubt more but we've nailed down to two representations of what the target pattern is going to be if it should happen to be injured in the future.
Now another reason I call this thing a pattern memory is this this remarkable result which is that if you if you make a two headed worm, and then you cut them again in plain water.
They continue to regenerate two headed as in a two headed way. There is no genetic change here we're not touching the genome we're not reprogramming the at the genetic level. We have we have altered through a physiological experience.
The set point that guides the movement of the regenerative process in in in their navigation of space, and it will continue to that that electrical circuit holds as long as as long as we don't set it back and we now know how to set it back.
It will continue to hold. So this this system has all the properties of memory now not in physical space in anatomical space. It's long term stable, but it's rewritable. It has a conditional recall which I just showed you a moment ago.
It's got discrete possible behaviors so one head versus two, the individual cells aren't doing discrete things it's the group the collective right the individual cells here aren't confused as to whether there should be part of a head or a tail, the collective makes a decision about where it's going to go.
Not only not only can you can you convince this the system to to permanently take up a different set point for the number of heads you can do the same thing for the type of heads and you can make them have heads of other species.
For example, here's a nice triangular headed Dugizia Doradoscephala. If we cut that head off and manipulate the the bioelectrical network, you can they will make heads of flat heads like this Pifolina, they will make round heads like this S Mediterranean, and they will happily that same
hardware that same genomically determined hardware will visit the attractors and anatomical space where normally these other system these other species hang out, but 100 to 150 million year distance here, no genetic change, and the same thing is
is true of their stem cell distribution their brain shape, they can adopt the brain shape and the stem cells of these other species, the behavior we're still we're still trying to nail down whether that's true.
So the last, the last piece of this, I want to show you before we stop is this what happens when, when this this this cognitive glue fails I've been, I've been arguing that much like in the brain, these these electrical networks provide an essential connectivity that allows groups of cells to store
memories, and to pursue error minimization with respect to those memories about goals in other spaces that the individual cells do not worry about so so we're not so so the, the tiny little homeostatic goals of this cell which basically are just the scale of the cell
and they're sort of, you know, metabolic goals and things like that. What evolution and development do is they scale up and give us electrical and chemical networks that can have very grandiose goals they can maintain things like this, where if you deviate away
from this, then they will work really hard to get back and then they stop and relax. So, so, so what happens here is the scaling I in my framework I call this the cognitive light cone for various reasons that we could get into but the size of the, of the set points
towards which the system can competently work is is greatly scaled up from here to here now. Now these electrical processes can fail. And one thing that happens when cells become isolated from the rest of the network is they can no longer
maintain participation in this in this pattern. This is a human glioblastoma. And what happens here is that these cells are once they disconnect from the network they roll back to their ancient unicellular self.
Their goals are now extremely small it's what is it it's it they're there to get as much nutrients as they can and to proliferate as much as they can and to go wherever they want. As far as they're concerned, the rest of the animal is just external environment.
So these cells are not more selfish it's that their cells are smaller. What's happening here is that it's kind of under a dissociative identity disorder as is certainly as seen in conventional cognitive systems as it's just, you know, human human minds.
We can have that here too this system can break up so that the individual cells are pursuing their own agendas, no longer this this kind of collective thing that was working so well before.
So that leads that kind of that's that that really different way of thinking about cancer not as a genetic disorder of a broken genome and so on.
But as a as a as a failure of maintaining the properly sized boundary between self and world. So the scaling of that where do I end in the outside world begins by thinking about it in this weird way that suggests a very specific therapeutic that once you have this kind of there's
the first thing these cells do when the oncogene is expressed as they depolarize and cut electrical connections with their neighbors at that point they can no longer remember what they're supposed to be building and that's it you know then you get metastasis.
So, one thing you might do here is say okay instead of toxic chemotherapy we're not going to try to kill these cells.
What we're going to do is force them to reconnect back to their neighbors. So when I inject this oncogene and they said these are nasty human oncogenes like KRAS mutations and so on.
What you can also do is co inject an ion channel that keeps the cell in tight electrical connection with their neighbors right so it gave it hyperpolarizes it so the gap junctions can form.
So, so this is the same animal here's the oncoprotein it's blazingly strongly expressed in fact it's all over the place, there's no tumor.
And there's no tumor because it isn't the hardware that drives it isn't the genetic state that that drives this, much like in in in the in the neuroscience where where you know the same hardware can do many different different behaviors right depending on the local physiology.
That's what's happening here is that these cells are connected to their neighbor and now the whole network is busy minimizing delta from having nice skin nice, you know liver and then all those kinds of things.
And so this again this also we're now moving into moving into humans. So, so the final you know my final point is that when we're talking about bio biomedicine where where the rubber hits the road with these with these discussions of intelligence and can we is that a category error to think
about intelligence and non brainy systems. To me as a as an engineer, I judge all of this by how much utility you can squeeze out of it and if we can use the tools of behavioral and neuroscience to achieve new capabilities and in in regenerative medicine
and cancer and whatever, then, then I think we're on to something and that means that if we take seriously the idea that that the body has a multi scale architecture where the different pieces have different competencies on the scale.
That means that we have lots of new kinds of approaches and I'm just going to show you one real quick one.
This is, if you if you look at this thing, you might ask what what what is this, and you might think that this is a primitive organism that I got out of the bottom of a pond somewhere.
And I can tell you that if you were to sequence the genome of this little guy, what you would see is homo sapiens. This is 100% homo sapiens genome.
What this is is is a was something we call an anthropot. It's made of cells collected from adult human patients so actually tracheal epithelium that people donate.
And under a certain protocol that we have these cells self assembled so there's no new genetic genetic material no trans genes no weird nano materials no scaffolds.
Automatically assemble into this self motile little little structure, which has all kinds of interesting behaviors. Here's one.
If you plate human neurons here on this on this dish and then you make a scratch so a wound through this neural layer.
And then if you if you allow them to accumulate in a particular area across this neural scar, what you'll see is that they spend about four days knitting the sides together when you lift it up there's there's there's what it's doing.
Who would have known that your tracheal cells which normally sit there for decades quietly in your in your airway are actually capable of having a kind of a novel existence in the self motile form with new competencies we would have never known that this is something
that they can do that we nobody would have known that they can heal neural neural defects. If we hadn't tested their various the plasticity of these cells what are they willing to do.
What do they know how to do this is just experiment one you know who knows what else. So the bottom line here is that for biomedicine.
The molecular approach of always going down downwards in terms of descriptive models and and the concepts that we're using gives rise to all of these techniques, but being able to look at the things that neuroscience is very good at
multi scale kinds of interventions as you know there's been known for for for for many many years that you can look at the scale of the synapses but you can and molecular protein proteins in the synapse but you can also look at circuits and and and
you know group dynamics and all of these other scales. All of this now is on the table and we've done a lot of work here about things that I've not shown you about this idea of really targeting and we've done cell training and things like that really targeting these competencies by taking
seriously the idea that intelligence is not something you can guess but you have to discover and for that reason I think that future medicine is going to look a lot more like a kind of somatic psychiatry then it's going to look like a chemistry of today.
So I'm going to stop here and just say that I think it's important to consider that intelligence can be deployed in in an embodiment can be deployed in many different spaces besides our familiar 3D space that there's an attractive target for biomedicine in the mechanisms that
bind cells together towards goals in higher higher scale spaces by electricity is a key element of this. And I really think that the the major the deep ideas of neuroscience are not about neurons at all and they have to do with cross scale kinds of
dynamics problem solving dynamics that evolution exploits at every at every level of structure. And so that's it. If you're interested in any of these things. There are lots of lots of papers on this where I go into into detail.
I will thank the the postdocs and the students who did all this work are many collaborators are funders the companies three companies that fund our work and always the animals because they do all the hard work. So thank you so much and I'll take any questions.
