Growing up, there was always one thing that baffled me.
How is it that one cell can grow at the expense of the very body it belongs to, ultimately
resulting in its own self-destruction?
To understand cancer, one needed to tell its story, and to do this story justice will have
to go back in time to a social revolution that occurred about 800 million years ago.
Life up to this point was characterized by a world of single cells, isolated actors
pursuing their own self-interest in fierce competition with each other over limited resources.
Each cell had a certain kind of perception of self, a computational boundary of self,
which just extended to the edge of their cell membrane.
But about 800 million years ago, at the dawn of the Metazoan period, certain cells evolved
to expand their boundaries of self to include other cells, mainly through physical and electrochemical
associations.
This allowed for the evolution of more complex, cooperative bodies which could coordinate larger
goals on longer time scales.
For millions of years of evolution, this pattern gave rise to organisms made up of trillions
of cells like fungi, plants, animals.
As developmental biologist Dr. Michael Levin has theorized, cancer emerges through the constriction
of the boundary of self back down to the single cell level, which affects how they behave
in both space and time.
In space, they start to perceive the greater body they belong to as just a foreign environment
to exploit for resources.
Limited to a single cell's capacities, the timelines of their goals shrink too, constraining
them from maintaining the life of the whole organism to pursuing short-term behaviors which
end in their long-term destruction.
In biological terms, they become disconnected from their tissues' morphogenetic field of
information, electrical, physical, and chemical cues which would otherwise help them coordinate
with neighboring cells to pursue higher level anatomical goals.
Thus, cancer can be understood as a disorder of perception, which allows certain cells
to interpret their own body as a site for extraction.
But what would cause cells to constrict this perception of self in the first place?
To answer this, we'll have to zoom out to the psychology of trauma.
As addiction specialist Dr. Gabor Matei explains, trauma is not what happens to you, it is what
happens inside of you as a result of an extremely stressful event.
One aspect of what happens inside is disconnection.
Patients report becoming disconnected from their emotions, from their bodies, and from
the present moment.
Trauma also alters perception.
People often develop a negative view of themselves and the world, and are prone to behave defensively
towards others.
As psychiatrist Dr. Bessel van der Kolk explains, for patients with PTSD, the memory of the
past is constantly kept alive in the present and the body acts as such, modulating endocrine
and neurological systems to keep the body in a constant state of defense as if the event
never ended.
According to this definition, we can understand the narrowing and cancerous boundary of self
as a trauma response.
Cancer becomes disconnected from its normal identity through de-differentiation and from
its surrounding tissue through physical and electrochemical isolation.
It believes or computes it is alone in a hostile world and accordingly activates single-celled
programs associated with the genetic hallmarks of cancer.
It behaves like it is in a constant survival state, persistently haunted by some past memory.
And trauma is a psychological wound that cannot heal in a fracture itself.
This is the permissive context where addictions emerge.
One being defined as any behavior that provides short-term relief with negative long-term consequences.
Cancer has also been described as a wound that can't heal, continuously activating
regeneration programs, much like a blastema, which provides short-term metabolic needs
at the expense of its long-term survival.
This growth phenotype also likely emerges from the permissive context of the fractured
self.
Hinting at this in 2017, Alan et al. injected RNA inhibitors for beta-catenin-1 and flatworms
in zebrafish, thus disrupting the continuity of the body's patterning signals from head
to tail and simulating a fractured self.
In this permissive context, a normal wound to the skin was sufficient to cause inactopic
growth, which meant growing eyes or part of a fin in the wrong place.
Inappropriate growth results from a wound signal getting interpreted by a tissue with
a fractured perception of self.
When a cooperative system becomes fractured through trauma, the ground is ripe for a wound
to cause an inappropriate regeneration program to attempt to heal that trauma.
In psychological space, this is called addiction.
In morphogenetic space, this is called cancer.
Here's a summary of this conceptual model.
Let's call it the trauma-driven tumor model.
First, there is the catalyzing event which forces the body into a state of fragmentation.
This is the trauma.
Second, a local injury triggers the release of wound signals which are interpreted as
a regeneration cue in this permissive context of a fractured self.
Third, neoplastic growth damages neighboring cells, prompting the release of more wound
signals and initiating a positive feedback loop.
This is why tumors have been described as wounds that do not heal.
Now, we should not villainize cancer.
As attacking it creates wound signals which perpetuate its growth and traumatize nearby
healthy tissue, setting the stage for relapse.
We can only cure cancer by healing the trauma by re-establishing its connection to self
and others.
Now, what if cancer is not just a disorder of relations between cells but a more general
disorder that exists in nature across scales of cognition?
To answer this, we'll zoom out again but into anthropology and systems ecology.
We start from the following assumption.
The Earth is an integrated living body.
We can understand this from the metaphysical perspective of Mother Earth, or Gaia, or the
cybernetic perspective of a living system emerging from the actions and reactions of
all living and non-living actors.
Within this context, it appears the same perceptual myopia of cancer has taken hold at the scale
of human societies and is at the root of the climate crisis.
Take for example the juxtaposition of western and indigenous worldviews.
Many indigenous peoples from across the world perceive plants, animals, rivers and the land
itself as relatives, in other words, direct extensions of the self.
On the other hand, the western worldview has historically perceived these non-human
beings not as relatives but as resources.
But we all come from ancestors who were indigenous to some place and who were deeply connected
to the land.
This suggests that the western worldview was born through a constriction of the boundary
of self at the ontological level, which caused us to perceive relatives as resources.
From this narrow perception of self, emerge an extractive economic system based on the
idea that rational individuals act to maximize their self interest.
Such behavior is only rational when you don't perceive the greater communities you depend
on as continuous extraction to optimize profit will eventually deplete the regenerative
capacity of any system from tissues to forests.
The phenotypes of this economic system mimic that of cancer, remodeling ecosystems to direct
matter and energy to sites of accumulation, pursuing infinite growth in a finite body
and colonizing distant sites for extraction.
Now we experience the symptoms of a civilizational scale of cancer as climate change.
With our previous framework, we should consider capitalism as an ecological trauma response
to starvation, as it is undergirded by a negative perception of ourselves as inherently greedy
and constantly recreates the memory of scarcity.
That would generate material abundance in sites of accumulation, that creates scarcity
in sites of extraction, thus perpetuating the addictive cycle of a non-healing wound
and damaging the entire body of the earth long term.
Now to be fair, it's not just capitalism.
Socialists in communist countries have also followed similar growth models based on extraction
and accumulation and decimated environments.
Even though these political economies seem opposite in our very human left-right politics,
they each have operated from a narrow conception of the human as separate from nature and none
of them have expanded that conception to treat non-human beings as kinds of persons with
agency rights and responsibilities.
We should just call this economic corner extractivism based on the oncological ontology that turns
relatives into resources.
But how can we apply the trauma-driven tumor model to understand why we're in the middle
of a climate crisis?
The first step, the original trauma at the heart of western civilization is memorialized
in the fall from Eden.
The story might point to a real traumatic ecological event which generated the feeling
that we could no longer rely on the greater body of the more than human world.
This caused an ontological constriction in the boundary of self and led to the anthropocentric
worldview that sees humans as separate from nature and as the only actors of the agency
in the world.
All of the language of original sin and the belief in the inherent greediness of humans
is textbooks, self-blaming psychology, and people with trauma.
The local injury in this fractured self-contact soldiers interpreted as a regeneration cue
may have been the black plague.
This quote is from Francis Bacon from the book Novum Organum in 1620 to generate and
super induce a new nature or new natures upon a given body is a labor and aim of human
power.
This to me reads like the mission statement of a tumor, the beginning of neoplastic growth.
The third step, seeking to solve scarcity in one place by physically eroding the earth
in another, we damage neighboring communities and ecosystems causing actual scarcity which
justifies the foundational logic and continued expansion of this economic model.
This is another positive feedback loop that has led to the neoliberal order we have today.
Now, this is critically not to villainize capitalism but to contextualize it appropriately
as a trauma response so that we can respond accordingly.
Attacking capitalism only further entrenched it as a wound signals cause proliferation
which is why anti-capitalist discourse that seeks to attack the symptoms rather than to
heal the underlying trauma is doomed to fail.
To truly become post-extractivist and return to a world based on sharing, gifting and community,
we have to heal our relationships to ourselves, to each other, and to the world.
Okay, how do we heal?
It seems that western medicine has not been able to solve cancer for the same reasons
western civilization has not been able to solve climate change.
These are related phenomena at different scales and we've lost the necessary concepts from
our cosmotechnic repertoire, meaning the possible inventions that we could think of starting
from the way that we perceive reality.
This is why supporting and learning from indigenous peoples is not only a crucial point of social
justice but a medical obligation and an existential imperative for humanity.
You will never defeat cancer by destroying it.
We must work to heal its underlying trauma, expanding the tumor's boundary of self so
it can re-integrate into the morphogenetic field of the body.
One promising route is differentiation therapy, using electraceuticals to modify gap junctions
and ion channels to restore the relationships between cancer cells and the broader body,
allowing it to self-heal.
We should study how methods in trauma therapy at the level of human psychology, such as
EMDR and neural feedback, among other methods, can be scaled down to the level of cells to
heal the trauma behind cancer.
At the human level, could we re-integrate into the morphogenetic field of the ecologies
we live in and build our societies as an expression of the land?
That may be too cybernetic of a phrasing.
But the most promising pathway for healing humanity, I believe, is in this discourse
around indigenizing the future, as it has been written about by scholars such as Robin
Wall Kimmerer, Daniel Wildcat, Gregory Katz, and St. Ford Eroes, to name a few.
By no means am I an expert, but from what I've read, there's a few things we can summarize.
We must relearn to see the land and beings that inhabit it not as resources but as our
relatives again, and learn from other general principles of indigenous worldviews.
Wherever we live today, we must support indigenous peoples and learn traditional ecological
knowledge and practices if we can, as practical guidance through how to respectfully thrive
in a given place.
We must reconnect to our own ancestral identities, beliefs, and practices, and combine with local
knowledge so we can create something entirely new and appropriate for contemporary times.
Lastly, we should pursue what Megamarch Elder and scholar Dr. Albert Marshall has called
two-eyed seeing, pairing the advantages of western science and indigenous knowledge
for the benefit of all.
This is what it means to truly become sustainable, to cure cancer by treating its trauma.
In summary, more than just a disease of irreversibly mutated cells, cancer is a disorder of relationships
between beings emergent from a fractured perception of self, which is ultimately rooted in trauma.
Extractivism should be understood as an ecological trauma response to this starvation, which constantly
recreates the memory of scarcity in the present.
At its core, cancer is deeply lost and wants to come home.
Even in its greedy, ecologically disastrous behavior, all it wants is to feel loved, to
feel safe, to feel whole again, and it doesn't know how to.
Going forward, we must embody a compassion of care, even for the tumor.
I go forward with love, y'all.
