Well, I just have a comment on your email mark, which I think we are completely on board with
that in that we're interested in the phenomenology of stress in arbitrary systems, so down to
bacteria and treating physiological stress as some internal measure of variational free energy.
The comment I wanted to make is based on some physics work about what's the structure of an agent
that can deploy multiple interaction modalities, so multiple ways of making measurements on the
world and acting on the world. Mike and I and Jim Glazebrook sort of foresaw this in our 2001 paper
in Neuroscience of Consciousness with the remark that interesting agents that had memory capability
etc. were going to be segmented into components that communicated classically. And Jim and I have
now generalized that if you have a system that can deploy multiple reference frames
that are distinct and so they don't commute, then those components of that agent have to be
separable, so they communicate classically. What that says is that the different components
of a system are measuring different components of variational free energy and that nothing is
measuring the total variational free energy of the system because there's no component that's
looking at the entire boundary. Each component is looking at some piece of the boundary,
and some of the boundary is devoted just to free energy exchange, so that information flow doesn't
get processed as information that one can do computing on. So if we want to model the system's
best guess about its own VFE value, we need to have some metaprocessor that instead of looking
at the external boundary is looking at the boundaries of the components that are looking
at the external boundary and constructing a model of the VFE that those components are getting.
So that's the beginnings in a sense of an affect system, right? That's what the
brainstem in effect is doing, or what the midbrain is doing.
Well, that's basically almost exactly what I was going to say. So let me just say first of all,
I mean, this is the big issue that Mike brought to my attention. It never occurred to me,
to be honest, that basal cognition descends below the brainstem, let alone below the nervous system,
let alone to the level of bacteria. So this has been the big eye opener for me, I mean,
among other things about Mike's work, and that was true Mike that I became familiar with it.
I mean, it was before I met you, Chris, but that for me was the big eye opener.
Now, I want to just comment on, before going to the midbrain, I want to just comment on
what you said to start with there, Chris, which is, I mean, maybe I'm just saying the obvious,
but to me, it's such an important part of the obvious that it bears emphasis.
Because the system has to measure how well or badly it's doing in relation to these multiple
component needs, they have to be treated as categorical variables, which is basically what
you've just said. And the importance of that for me is that that becomes a sort of principled
basis for qualia, because such variables not being reducible to a common denominator
must be distinguished qualitatively. So that's terribly important, I think,
for the whole business of consciousness, and at starting with affective consciousness,
because we're talking about needs, need gradients. So what is continuous, what is a
continuous variable, although I very much take your point that there's no component,
at least at the level of the of the bacterium, and probably in any system that doesn't have this
meta homeostat, which is in the midbrain, which is putatively in the midbrain.
The common denominator is a variational free energy, but there's nothing measuring it.
So there's there's two possibilities. The one is, does anything have to measure global
free energy? If each one of them is doing that, then the totality, the total
workings of the multiple components still has the same outcome, namely that free energy in
general is being computed. It's just been computed in compartments. But because each compartment
has the same imperative to minimize its free energy, there is a global effect of minimizing
free energy. So that's one way of doing it. The other way is the is the meta way which which
will come to. But I want to just make clear that in my way of thinking, that common denominator
is the balance. It just is bad for any self organizing system for its free energy to be
increasing and vice versa. It just is good for it to be minimized. So for it to be reducing.
So there you have value tied, of course, to survival value. So tied to the basic value system
of all living things. And that's the that's the common feature of all efforts is they have a
goodness and a badness to them. They have a valence, but there's an additional feature
necessitated by the very point that we are discussing, namely that there are multiple
survival gradients that that there has to be in addition to valence, there has to be a specific
quail, a specific quality. And I think it's terribly important that it is, at least as far as I can
tell, it's obligatory that they must be a quality. The value has to have a quality and
there we're beginning to, as I said a moment ago, talk about conscious feelings or at least
conscious proto feelings or proto conscious feelings or something of that kind. So that's
dramatically important. Now to come to the other route, which is the meta-homostatic.
I think you have exactly in mind what I have in mind when you say that then we need to go to
the midbrain, is that there is this terribly interesting fact that all of these homeostatic,
all of these need monitoring systems send their residual error signal to the periaqueductal
grade. The periaqueductal grade is, I mean in those of us who've got such a thing,
is therefore, I don't know if we can think of it as computing
a variational free energy in totality. It's just a matter, it appears all that's necessary is a
prioritization of those different homeostatic deviations. Which one of these, I mean to the
extent that there's an action bottleneck, where there's not an action bottleneck, where it's
autonomic, it doesn't matter. But where some sort of action in the external world is commanded,
then we start to come across action bottlenecks. Which one of these needs am I going to prioritize?
Which one am I going to act upon first in the world? And it seems to me that that's the main
thing that the PAG is doing, is its prioritizing. And in the vertebrate PAG, immediately behind it,
immediately dorsal to it, is the tectum with its superior colliculi, which is getting a condensed
mapping of the multisensory mapping of the environment. What some people call a saliency map,
or an attentional map. And so between PAG and superior colliculi, the interaction between them,
we have there the possibility of evaluating needs in relation to opportunities. The colliculi being
the map of opportunities, and the PAG being the monitor of needs. And that is a splendid idea,
which is not my own. It was first formulated by Bjorn Merker, a Swedish affective neuroscientist,
who's sort of retired now, I think, living in a forest somewhere. But that's my way of thinking
about the issue that you've just raised. Yeah. And how far down in phylogeny that kind of
processing system goes that keeps this kind of multi-dimensional representation of stress
updated, is a good question. In something like E. coli, you might just have a bunch of stress
components that nothing is trying to integrate. Yes. Probably has a better understanding of
that from a physiological point of view than I do. So I wonder, Chris, when you first started
talking, you said down to bacteria, I was thinking, what about all this stuff below that?
Specifically, in the case of stress, issues of geometric frustration and materials, the kind
of things people see in material science. And so on the one hand, you might think of that magnetic
domains trying to align and all that. You might think that that's what you just said, which is,
it's a bunch of stress with nothing integrating anything. And so that may be. But I also wonder,
there's this notion which I see referenced from time to time, and I've had a really hard time
finding any of the originals on it. But it's Wiener's notion of virtual governor. So it's this
idea that in certain systems of multiple components where they're linked, and so the whole thing is
rather unstable and trying to control it by controlling each one is really hard. What he was
saying is that you can define this global thing. And in his case, I think it was like
a bunch of dynamos connected together, and they were super unstable that way. But what you can do
is you can define this virtual sort of super dynamo that doesn't actually exist. But what you
can do is formulate a control strategy for that thing. And that works better than trying to
manipulate the actual stuff that's there. And so, you know, so now I wonder in certain kinds of
systems that may be well, that may be not on the phylogenetic tree at all, that may be far simpler
than that, if there isn't some sort of non obvious virtual integration center that is doing some very
primitive version of what you guys were just talking about, right, trying to figure out which
stress do I relieve first. So maybe this is a question for somebody like Robert Batterman who
studies this stuff at the mesoscale and materials where you put some kind of material and maybe
a dumb material or maybe it has to be some sort of one of these active matter things or what,
but you put it under some kind of stress. And I wonder if there isn't a good lens that you
can put on that where you say, oh, look, here's this virtual thing that's actually deciding which
buckles first. And which of the stresses do we relieve first? And you could even imagine
a multimodal thing where there's physical pressure, but there's heat, there's magnetic
domains, you know, you could imagine a multisensory, so to speak, right, kind of thing. And so I don't
know, maybe, maybe, maybe this goes further down, right? I don't know that anybody's done this, but
I can sort of imagine defining such a thing. Yeah, I mean, you can certainly think of something
like this, sinus gelatin as a elastic stress detector that has its own response capabilities
built in, but also is signaling constantly to the rest of the cell about elastic stress or
mechanical stress. Yeah, and I think wasn't it a Gunther Bueller, I think, right, was the one who
was saying that basically he was thinking that the microtubule organizing center was basically
this sort of integration module for the sinus skeleton, trying to make decisions about what
are the priorities and what is it, what's, you know, what are the more phylogical computations
that the cell has to do next? Like he's got a lot of, he's got a lot of really prescient stuff in the,
I guess early 90s, I'm talking about the intelligence of cells implemented by the
sinus skeletal network that's inside. So, you know, so I don't know. I also, I also wanted
to ask Mark, I wanted to ask this, this, this special region of the brain that you're talking
about that does this, but is there anything special about it, aside from its connectivity? In
other words, if you saw it in isolation from the rest of the brain, would you be able to say that,
ooh, this is the kind of thing that would do that? Is there anything special about the neurons
or is it or potentially could any collection of neurons do that if suitably connected to
the rest of the brain? Anything special about it? At the neuronal level, no, it doesn't have any
special type of neuron. It's a rather poorly differentiated structure. In humans, it's,
well, in all vertebrates, it, as the name suggests, the periaqueductal gray,
it is around the cerebral aqueduct of sylvia, which is the canal, the central canal,
which runs through the neuraxis, up the spinal cord, right up into the hemispheres.
In the hemispheres, it's the lateral ventricles, and then the, there's the third ventricle between
the tooth alomai, and then there's a fourth ventricle just in front of the, between the
pons and the cerebellum. And it's, and it's, it's between the third and the fourth ventricles,
there's this little canal. And behind that canal is the tectum, which is, as the name suggests,
the roof over the canal. And the periaqueductal gray wraps around the rest of the canal
and terminates on the tectum. And it's got, it's 14 millimeters long in, in us humans.
And it's, it's got a columnar structure, which as I say, is not very well differentiated.
And the, and the columns themselves are not that well differentiated from the surrounding
white matter. The lack of differentiation partly speaks to its, to its age, you know,
it's an ancient structure. And it's, its location around the, around the canal, the central canal
is, is a precursor of what will happen higher up at the, at the floor of the third ventricle,
the hypothalamus is there. And these, that there are several, what are called circumventricular
organs. And what they, what that location bestows on them is the capacity to sample CSF.
So they, they are, they, they're sampling that there's, there's a blood flow through them.
So they, they're sampling what's going on in the blood, they're sampling what's
going on in the CSF. And then they're getting these neuronal messages from, from all of these
various need detector, other distributed need detector mechanisms.
I mean, that's really interesting. I, I, you know, this is the sort of thing I thought
the long time ago when I first heard about the, the so-called pleasure center, right?
This, this kind of like the, the, you know, this, this currency of reward.
I thought, and so would you know, that's what it was, if it was sitting out in the dish somewhere,
you know, is there something, is there something special about it, or it's, it's anything could
do it. It's just, it has this like, you know, functional connection with the rest of it.
What, what, you know, what, what does a pleasure center do all by itself, if anything?
Yeah. Well, in the spirit of, of all three of our work, I would say, well, it all
comes down to what kind of computations are being performed. It doesn't matter what the
substratum is that's, that's performing them. But, you know, darkly there's, there's more
to, to be said on the topic of the finer structure of the PAG that I wouldn't be able to speak to,
because what, what I've told you is the limits of my own knowledge about its structure, but
there may be more. I should look into it, but for the reason I've just said, I doubt that that's
going to be the, it's more, it's, it's what sort of information it's processing, and in what way
it's processing that information. Now, at the level of E. Coli, and I take your point, Mike,
that why stop there, but, but let's pause there. And, and let me ask, so these various
components of stress that need to be monitored and acted upon, are the duty actions have to be
prioritized or can they, can they be performed simultaneously?
I'll tell you why I asked the question. It's because, well, actually it's coupled to a second
question. So let me ask the second question first and then tell you why I asked both questions.
The second question is the actions that it can perform in response to
deviations from its preferred states. Are those actions monotonous? In other words, is there,
is there only a stereotype response available to the organism? So why I asked both of those
questions? Do you remember I said earlier, which I say again, I think is a fundamentally important
point, that if these are perforce categorical variables, that means they are, in their very
essence, qualitatively distinguishable, must be qualitatively distinguishable from each other.
And I said that is a principled basis for why qualia would, would, would come into existence.
With a valence, remember, these are qualia about which the organism gives a damn existential value,
you know, they have. And the, but if in addition to that, you have to prioritize them,
then there has to be, you could say each of these may be categorically distinct,
but if they're being processed simultaneously and independently of each other, which they can be,
if there's no need to prioritize, then there's a less pressing need for them to be qualitatively
distinctive in the sense of experienced qualities. Because you would, if you're trying to juggle balls
and you, and you want to, you know, which one you want to catch next, there needs to be some way
of identifying it. So it would need to be as it were color coded or, or flavor. And the, the second
reason implied in my, my second question is that you would then have to feel your way through the
success or failure of your action. If the action is not just a monotonous reflex, but in fact there's,
there's a trial and error component to it. Let me try this, let me try that, is this working,
is that working? Again, sort of obliges us to assume there's a, there's a palpating going on.
And again, that's, that starts to suggest something in the nature of, I mean, if you're palpating
multiple systems, you need to distinguish them from each other. And there needs to be some particular
way of representing how well or badly it's going categorically, which, you know, there are even
more than what I said earlier. I just don't see how it can be done without it being done by means of
failure of some kind. And, and to say again, the obvious why this is so important is it is exactly
that, that David Chalmers and his predecessors like, like Tom Nagel and others, they claim that
there is no possibility of a mechanistic account of why there is something it is like to be the
organism. They say a mechanistic account of something it is likeness, in other words,
subjective, qualitative, phenomenal experience. They say it cannot be accounted for mechanistically.
And I think that what we're talking about right here and now is a mechanistic account
of how qualia come into existence. As long as you take the step, which I think is absolutely
essential, I don't see how we can have a science of the mind without it, taking the step of contemplating
the mechanism from the point of view of the organism, you know, you have to take the observational
aspect of the organism. Well, I'll say at least two things about priority. One is all of these
response modalities require energy. So the system has finite energy resources at any given moment.
And a lot of stressors are stressors that decrease the energy supply. So the system,
a system in general, is just not going to have the free energy available to deal with everything
all at once. So that's one point to do with energetics. The other point is that a lot of
these responses require gene expression. And so you have the question of how many,
in something like a bacterium, how many operons can be transcribed simultaneously? And
operons overlap in various ways. The polymerase for one is going to get in the way of the others
and so on. So there's not just an energetic issue. There's also this structural issue
that has to do with the way the genome is organized that will prevent the system from
responding in every conceivable way at the same time. And, you know, I don't know the details of
the E. coli genomics in terms of where relevant stress response operons are.
But for example, if your stressor is that you're running out of the sugar that you're currently
equipped to process, then you need to express the genes for some other sugar.
And if those operons are nearby, then you have to turn one thing off to turn something else on.
And in, you know, mammalian or eukaryotic systems where the signaling pathways are so
interwoven and cross-modulatory, then there are all kinds of winner-take-all or winner-take-most
kinds of arrangements between signaling pathways, which turn one off when another becomes active.
So there's, and again, this may be an example of what Mike was describing in terms of a virtual
govern, that it's just the way things are arranged to enforce certain kinds of prioritization.
That's just fascinating. And what about the repertoire of responses?
Are they fixed and mutable, or are they trial and error possibilities? In other words, the
possibility of something that I would describe as voluntary action.
Well, at some outer limit, they're fixed by the genome, and you can't make proteins that you
don't have genes for. But even there, you have the trial and error of gene transfer.
Now, you can go out in the community and try to get new genes to do something that you need to do,
or whether that can be treated as voluntary or not. I don't know at the level of microbes,
for example, but they certainly do it all the time.
I want to focus on two things. One is to just broaden out. So I think if we think beyond
bacteria, for example, you can't make proteins that you don't have genes for,
but you can take actions in physiological and anatomical space that you don't have
genes for. I mean, you don't have genes for anything in those spaces. But the point is,
I think there's huge room for novelty in problem solving in those higher spaces,
so maybe not in the protein space. That's true. But in these other spaces, there is.
And in particular, I'm thinking of a related model, and we're just starting a project now
that I think will give a lot of data on these kind of things, which has to do with our barium worm
example. So what happens there is you throw barium on these planaria. Barium is a non-specific
potassium channel blocker. So the cells are very unhappy, especially the cells in the head,
because there's lots of neurons. They want to have potassium channel function. Their heads
explode physically just overnight they blow up. And then the next couple of weeks, these worms
grow new heads that are completely barium insensitive. They don't care. And so we asked
a very simple question several years ago, what's the difference transcriptionally between the barium
adapted heads and the normal heads? And we found that there's a pretty small number of genes,
only a couple dozen genes that were differentially regulated in the light of this stressor.
And of course, the best part is that planaria never see barium in the wild.
So there's never been selection pressure to know what to do when you're hit with barium.
So now that raises lots of interesting questions, because what it's doing is it's
improvising a transcriptional solution to a physiological stressor that it's never seen
before. So you can start to imagine what that might be like. And so is it generalizing from
things that had seen before, which is maybe epileptic, you know, hyper excitability or something like
that. But in any case, one of the things, what we're going to do is we're going to try to track
cells, worms, and even groups of worms through this journey to find out how they explore that
space. Because, you know, it's like a, I don't know, 20,000 dimensional space of possible gene
expressions. You don't have time for random search. And the worst part is that you can't just,
you can do some experimentation, and maybe they do. So we're going to find out, you know, do they,
do they like, is it a directed walk to the right region? Or are they sort of
ambling about? And some of them find it? Do they all take the same walks? You can ask all
this. But a lot of the changes you make are going to kill you long before you get anywhere good,
you can't just randomly start, you know, turning knobs on this thing. So, so that, that question
of, you know, creative problem solving, generalization, navigation in this, in this weird
space where, you know, you know where you'd like to be, but I don't know if you know how to get
there. I don't know if they have an internal coarse grain model of their own, that mapping
between the transcriptome and the physiome, which genes do I now regulate to have a particular
physiological capability? Do they have a coarse grained sort of manual to their own cell function
somehow that they sort of know roughly what to do? Or is it a complete sort of, you know,
lightly directed to search that they do? Yeah, so, so I think all of these kind of notions of,
of where do you go? What do you pay attention to? It's all going to play out there. So we'll see,
we'll, we'll see how that, how that works out. But another thing that I wanted to, I wanted to say,
and I wonder if, I wonder if there's a name for this, and maybe you guys know what, and if there
isn't a name for it, I think we should come up with a name for it, which is the flip side of
qualia. So, so people who are interested in consciousness talk a lot about the, the, the
qualia. But this emphasizes the receiving end, the inputs, what does it feel like to be on the
receiving end of various things that happen? But I'm really interested in the opposite side,
which is the active end, which is, what does it feel like to try to figure out what can I do next?
What effectors do I have? What should I do next? It's the, it's the output, it's the output end,
right, which to me is really the critical part of the whole consciousness thing, which is,
okay, yes, what does it feel like to sort of be on the receiving end of being a,
a sentient being in the physical world? But what is it, what's the flip side of that,
which is I have to take action. And by the way, what do I have control over? So, so what do I
know? What parts do I have? What are my effectors? Where is the boundary between me and the outside
world? Do I really control, you know, over there or, or, you know, these are these are the effectors
that I have. So that, that aspect of the, the active aspect, the fact that you can't even if,
you know, even if you, you, you don't believe in free will or whatever, you still,
it's impossible to live that way, right? You can't, there's no, there's no way you could
actually implement this. Well, I'm going to sit back and see what the big bang has ordained for
me. I mean, there's no way to live like that's impossible for us. And so, and so that aspect
of the fact that no matter what you, what you, what you act, you have to be active all the time
that this, I don't know, is there a name, is there a name for that, like the flip side Aqualia?
Well, I would have to answer that question by, by, by
disagreeing that the Qualia are on the receptor or are particularly attached to,
to the receptors as opposed to the effectors. I think the Qualia are attached to the control
center. And, and, and so the way that I would describe it is, and I'm using, you know, I'm,
I'm sort of bringing calls to Newcastle. I know that you guys are very familiar with these sorts
of things, but the sensory states that are of interest are actively offered sensory states.
In other words, I have acted on the world, given my model of the world, or my body,
given my model of the world or my body, I have acted on it. And I expect, given that model,
that to now have this sensory consequence flowing from my action. And if the sensory
consequence is what was expected, then all is hankidori. If it is not what was expected,
then you have an error signal. And the summation of these error signals is what we need to minimize.
The average error is what we need to minimize. Now let's say the, you know, within one of these
homeostats that we're talking about, because there are these multiple homeostats.
That is just the state of me, you know, how it's not the state of the world. It's the state of my,
my free energy is, and you would probably actually have to say, given the point you've just made,
Mike, about it being an action, and the, and the way I've supplemented your point by saying,
it's an action with expected consequences, the expected sensory consequences, then what the
control center is monitoring is changes in expected free energy. So, so there we have,
it's even more action oriented when you start speaking about expected free energy as opposed to
free energy. So, the, the, the, this is in a way the point that I was making with, with Carl,
by the way, yesterday made exactly the remark you just made, same consciousness all about action.
But it's an in this discussion we had yesterday about illusionism versus realism.
This very point came up. And I noticed that some of the people in the meeting, some of the
colleagues on the, on this panel, that they seemed to think what, what you've just said,
what you initially said, which I'm disagreeing with, and I can see from your nods that you're,
that you're, that you're not going to defend the view that clearly I have to do with what the
receptor samples. And that seemed to be their view, you know, that, and the whole, the whole
idea of the illusion, the illusion is, this is what they were saying, the illusionists in the room
that they were saying, well, you know, so the, what we are, our failure, what we are sampling
in our sensory states are not the world. They are our sensory states, they're states of our
blanket. And they are sampling just, you know, small components of reality, the ones that are
of survival interest to me, and they representing them in any old way that I like, you know,
and this is what that chap Donald Hoffman calls icons, you know, it's just, it's just like,
then it speaks of a user interface. And, and I mean, I accept all of that, except I don't think
those are the Qualia. I think that the Qualia are my response to, you know, in terms of what
matters to me, that this active aspect again, that, that you're, that you're speaking to,
and that's an internal state. It's me measuring my free energy or my expected free energy.
All things turning out as expected always uncertainty prevailing from my current actions
in relation to sensory parameters, which are not in and of themselves the point, because remember,
as we get increasing complexity, I don't mean of the predictive model so much as
of the creature. The, the, the homeostats are no longer tied to, to, in a one to one fashion,
to a particular sensory gradient, or particular, I mean, like, for example,
a, an, an affect like feel, you know, which is, which is pretty basic. What sense is it,
what's, what's, what's sensory modality drives fear? Well, a whole lot of them. So it's the,
what the homeostat is having is doing a pretty, the control center is doing a pretty complicated
job there. It's busy. It's busy deciding as it were, you know, is this constellation of sensory
inputs of error signals is this constellation of error signals, a fear constellation. And, you know,
maybe fear is too complex. An example, you could say pain likewise. It's, it's not just one sensory
gradient. And it's a whole lot of things. So, yeah, I think it was, yeah. So, so just, just to come,
sorry, just a round off the point, since we've ended up talking about illusionism, after all,
my point to these colleagues yesterday was that, that means the quail is not an illusion.
It is, it is the direct registering of your own free energy. In other words, it's a,
it's a measuring by the system of its internal state. It's, it's response, it's subjective
response to the, the, the, the actively authored sensory inputs or, or, or the deviations from
the expected sensory inputs. And so that you can't call that an illusion. I mean, in what way can
that be an illusion? It's, it's, it's not, it's not about some world beyond the blanket. It's,
it's about yourself. And, you know, sorry to have to say it, but I mean, what could be more obvious
than that our qualitative conscious states or subjective states, their states of us, you know,
they're not states of the world, but the illusions don't disagree with that. But they,
but they, you know, I think when it comes to affect, which they don't think about,
when it comes to affect, which I think is the foundational form of consciousness,
for all sorts of reasons, I believe that that is the foundational form of consciousness.
When consciousness emerged in nature, and through you guys, I'm learning it emerged
not earlier than I ever thought. You know, it's, it would have taken the form of the kind of thing
we're talking about now. It then becomes a whole different story. Once a organism is able to not
only feel its own state, and remember why it has to, we've been discussing in the earlier part of
our meeting today, all of those imperatives, why it must be a qualitatively differentiated
subjective state of existential consequences. That is the subjective and the valence aspect of it.
That the, I've lost my train of thought. I don't remember what I was going to say about that.
Just, just, I think what I was, oh yes, that's what it was. So that once you have these, I feel
like this, if I can put it into words, of course, such such small organisms are not thinking in
words. But it's, I feel like this, it's just the raw feel. And then that the additional adaptation
becomes, I feel like this about that. And then we extend our affective fields onto a representation
of the world, which must, which must be, there must be some common currency, you know, between
the feeling and what it's about. And I think that's what perceptual consciousness then becomes. It's
an, it's a sort of application of values onto the context, which is generating within which that,
within which that feeling is generated. So that's, you can imagine all the functionality that flows
from that. So, you know, now it's, now you have the possibility of working memory of saying,
okay, I feel like this about that. So I must avoid that and I must approach this. Is that right?
Let me think my way through this. Okay, that's what's likely to happen. You know, all those things
then start to become possible. I mean, I think you're 100% correct. I was, I was just just saying
that I think, as you said, too, a lot of other people focus on the input side of Coelia. And one
example of this that I think is interesting. And it's why I'm looking for a new terminology is,
you know, in all of these theories of consciousness, right? So we have epiphenomenalism.
So, so the point of epiphenomenal epiphenomenalism is that there is somebody home, so to speak,
that feels things happen, but they have no causal power. They don't actually do anything.
But what we don't have is the flip, no, no way, as to my knowledge, nobody's proposed the flip
kind of theory that, well, yes, there's action, but nobody actually feels what it's like, right?
So people, so people clearly prefer, you know, they've sort of clearly emphasized the input side
of things, but nobody's bothered to, you know, and they've chopped it off from, I mean, you know,
obviously, we, I think we, we could say incorrectly chopped it off from the other side,
but nobody's chopped it off in the other direction that I know of. And so, so that's, that says to
me that going all the way back to when, when these things were first sort of proposed,
there's this emphasis on the receiving end as opposed to the active end.
Well, you're, you're, you're both pointing to the fact that this language was
invented by people who viewed perception as a passive affair.
Yeah, exactly.
And, and had this idea of the observer
that runs throughout classical physics, you know, and the whole classical worldview that
the observer's not doing, and it doesn't have to do anything, except just sit there and collect
information. That's what the, it's what the inactivists are rebelling against in their
sort of confused language.
Yes, I, that's, that's right.
And so, and that takes us, you know, so it was Helmholtz was the whole thing of unconscious
inference. That was his, the thing about the what is perceived is what is actively solved.
You know, Carl always acknowledges that his whole way of thinking goes back to
that early work of Helmholtz is exactly on this issue of the active nature of perception,
that perception is the consequence of an action.
You know, I had a slightly wild thought while I was listening to what you were saying, like,
not when you asked this question now about the about the flip side of
whales and all of that, but when you were answering the question about
the extent to which we may describe the action repertoire of bacterium,
you talked about these worms that you study as including voluntary actions and, you know,
you answer is just extremely interesting. But as I was listening to that, I was thinking
about the question that Chris started us off with in our conversation today about the,
is there anything that is orchestrating all of the different components and the wild
thought that suddenly occurred to me is, well, what's orchestrating it is the consciousness.
You know, that's, it's another, you know, when you start thinking as we are in our
conversation today, and every, you know, you take this route and then you take that route and then
you take that route, extensively discussing different issues and they all just converge on
the same answer, you know, that it seems as if something like consciousness sort of more or less
has to, has to come into play if the system is going to be dealing with these sorts of problems.
So it just, it just occurred to me that basically what we're saying is what they nowadays call,
I say nowadays, I mean, in relation to much higher, much more complex creatures,
the, the so-called global workspace, and that's the whole idea is,
so that sort of suggests that, that overarching function is the global workspace,
and the global workspace therefore is not an epiphenomenon, it's doing something
which wouldn't be possible if there was, I'm saying if that is what's doing the orchestrating,
maybe that's the virtual regulator.
Yeah, good point. Yeah, yeah, I mean, so, so I've got a student with whom we are
running through the various popular theories of consciousness, you know, half a dozen or so,
and just asking whether, for the same reasons that each of those theories associates consciousness
with brains, we should then have to posit the same thing in the rest of the body, and otherwise,
because many of those things, you know, people talk about cytoskeleton, and they talk about,
you know, magnetic fields, and they talk about this kind of like action, perception,
cycle, and orchestration. I mean, these things go on in every part of the body all the time,
and it's actually very tough to be able to, on any of these theories to be able to say,
ah, well, clearly, it's, you know, it's got to be the brain, and it can't be this other,
if, as I think about it, if we can, and we don't know very little about how it works, but you can
imagine that with this, trying to navigate your way through this physiological and transcriptional
space with disastrous consequences, if you go the wrong way, does it, is it like something to
be part of that process? Seems like it would have to be. It seems to me to be, it would have to be,
and all of that at the same time as it's also like something to be that worm in whose body,
right, that those are not the same, and so it, you know, it seems, it seems to me perfectly
plausible that there are multiple distinct consciousnesses associated with that system
doing their various jobs in various spaces, you know. Yeah, I was reading a paper just today
that you wrote with somebody, Anna, Anna, what's the name in this?
I was doing it again, yeah. Yeah. On, it was on nervous system, immune system interactions.
But I can't resist making a further leap based on what you were saying, Chris, about
the, the idea that the observer just sits there and observes. Of course, that point that you made
there is the, is what leads us in physics into a participatory interpretation of, I mean, the whole
of quantum mechanics, sort of, the whole of the problem of the observer arises from, so it's not
a problem that only psychology and neuroscience carried. It was the whole, the passive observer
of Newtonian physics gets problematized and that you can't leave the observer out of the,
out of the, out of it all. Yeah, well, I mean, looking back, what I think was really happening
was the observer was being treated as a god, as not being a physical system at all.
Because if you treat the observer as a physical system, then you, you're immediately faced with
Newton's third law, which says interaction is interaction. And, and you have to talk about,
you have to be inactive, you have to be talking about the action side as well.
So, the only way to really have a passive observer is to have a supernatural observer.
Yes, God's I've, God's I've gone to these, there's a, there's a, there's a really interesting
project that I've got another student working on now that it was a very simple, so it was all,
I'll show you guys when, once, once the results are ready, I'll show you some of this,
a very simple system, which are sorting algorithms. So, you know, you have a string
of numbers that are randomly distributed, and there's a, you know, there's selection
sort and then bubble sort. And these just, you know, the whole algorithm is maybe 10
lines of code tops, right? It's just like these little, but, but of course, they also always
presume, they presume two things, they presume an omniscient God's I observer, which can see
all of the pieces and moves them according to his plan, right? And it, it, and it also assumes
infallible hardware that when you want two things to swap, they swap. And so, and so we released
both of those constraints, and we made versions of these algorithms that are cells I view
algorithms that basically just talk about what does, what does each cell want while it wants to
have neighbors that are in a particular order, but, but all the cells want that and so hard.
And so when you do this, there's some amazingly interesting and bizarre capabilities of these
algorithms that show up that are nowhere in the algorithm itself. If you look at it, I mean,
they're completely not apparent from the, from looking at the actual algorithm, they do some
very interesting things, because then, then you can play all kinds of games you can, you can put
different, you can actually make different cells obey different algorithms. So they can be a chimera
of two different sorting algorithms and ask how the two interact and so on, and how they navigate
that problem space, right, of going from a jumble to a perfectly ordered, they all have a target of
perfectly, you know, perfectly ordered to all this stuff. And, and you start to see all this,
and this, I think this goes back to, you know, what, what, what Chris was saying, you know,
you can't make proteins, you don't have genes for, but apparently you can have functionality that
you don't have algorithmic steps for, because, and this is, you know, you, I mean, the easy,
the simple version of this is just sort of emergent and complexity, but I think, I think it's
more than that. I think there's more hiding in these things that you can gain access to,
that are in no way apparent from the examination of the details. So that, you know, that observer
thing is, is I think really interesting moving it around and also the evolutionary aspect of where
