So, I have some questions that we could talk about, but I'm also, I'd love for you guys
to chat.
And we also, there was some stuff left at the end of last time, so we have preferences
of course.
Well, I'd suggest that you tell us the things that would interest you.
I'll tell you a couple of areas that I'd like to go into at some point.
And then, Richard, if you have some that you do, I mean, there are two rather massive
areas of interest for me.
I mean, one clearly is this business of lateralization in life and how much you, for example, share
my belief that this is important functionally and changes effectively the experience of the
creature, the organism.
And the other is the difference between living organisms and machines, particularly in the
sense of there being complex systems that are intrinsically unpredictable, and whereas
with a machine, you can start from the ground up with the syntax of the machine and work
out its meaning at some higher level of what it's doing, you can't really do this with
an organism.
You have to sort of work from both ends, if you'd like, top down and seeing what it
is achieving and what it is seeming to drive at and from the bottom, but you can't actually
get to the full meaning of the organism by working in a mechanical way from the bottom
up.
So those would be two areas that if they're of interest to you, whether you agree or not,
I don't know, but I'd be happy to talk about those.
Great.
Yeah, that sounds that sounds excellent.
I'm Richard.
Any specific topics for you?
Many.
I've really enjoyed reading your chapters, Ian.
There are lots, lots of that material really resonated with me very strongly.
For a while, I found my my linear mind getting frustrated that you wouldn't tell me in the
right order what things that I needed to know, of course.
And then I realized that, of course, you were giving the example of spiraling around the
topic, which was just what you were.
So then I felt a little bit more at ease and that was OK.
But I would like to talk about top down, bottom up understanding.
So that resonates with what you just said about top down, bottom up understanding,
living things.
I would like to dig in a little bit on the metaphor of music.
And as you say, metaphor is the stuff of thought.
So, you know, I really think that there's something.
There's something there that that crosses new gaps that would be worth discussing.
Hmm.
And relatedly, there's stuff about.
Folding away detail to get at the general shape of things that when you look at the
detail of things, you can't see the general shape, you can't see the infinity for all
of the steps involved.
So those are the sorts of things which are on my mind, but the the leap between machines
and living things is captures a lot of that.
Would you like to say, Mike?
Yeah, no, perfect.
Let's let's do all of that.
Some of my stuff will come up while we're doing this and other things that we know I
can keep till next time.
It's fine. These are these are great.
So, yeah, I mean, maybe maybe we can start with with some of the lateralizations stuff.
And specifically, I guess, I guess one thing, one place we can start is for you,
Ian, to maybe talk about to what extent do you think the architecture is specifically
bilaterally symmetric, in other words, that you need to have exactly two things that are
tied in a particular way or and or is the is more of the magic in the specific breakdown
of the roles and how, you know, how they how what what the different functions of each
one is, because I'm very interested in something I work for left in left right asymmetry for
a long time. But I'm interested in alternative architectures, right?
So so could we have are there the cognitive systems, either synthetic that we can make
or alien, you know, or whatever, that could be in a completely different architecture,
you know, we are in a position to make animals with as many hemispheres as you want, really,
right? So we can make three, four, you can you can make you can make things. And so and so the
question is, so I'm interested in how, you know, what is the essential? What do you think is the
essential bit here? And, you know, with Richard, we had also talked about at one point, we talked
about a couple things. He can talk about this, the importance of the sort of ebb and flow of
these kinds of systems. And also, Richard, at one point, a few of this was weeks ago, you had a
really interesting comment about the computational power of having a second copy, so that you could
write. So what happens when you have sort of room to offload some things in the meantime? So
anyway, so so yeah, please, you know, go go for it. I think I think that's a good that's a good
topic. But you may or may not know that it's a theme that becomes more prominent in the matter
with things and particularly towards the second part, or I should say the second volume,
that we need things in the opposites or countries. And we need them both to maintain
their integrity as distinct from one another. And yet also to be capable of a sort of union.
So we need the principles of division and union together, so that when I think about the two
hemispheres, there's evidence that they they sometimes work together in a in a sense that we
would normally call collaborating, they're working together in the same way towards certain ends,
but they're often complimenting one another by taking different approaches. And this is
important, and that we mustn't sort of either collapse them into being versions of the same
thing, or say that they are so distinct that they don't work cooperatively, which they clearly do.
I mean, that's that also sounds like some of the stuff that, you know, Richard has been talking
about as far as alternating cycles of being soft in terms of letting letting the world imprint
on you for a while, and then coming back to push, right? Yes. Yeah, that's why I brought that up,
because I thought that that might be related to what Richard was saying. Yeah, I think that
the union and division, right, it's the if the brain were not in halves,
then you wouldn't be able to have any
differences between the two parts, right? It's important that you have differences,
because the differences between them create a hole that's worth having, right? If the
two parts were the same as each other, then you would just have double what you had before.
It's important that they're different, because by being different, they create a hole that's
more than the sum of the parts through the relation between them.
Yeah. I take your question, Mike, that did it have to be two? What if you divided it into three
parts? And I am bothered by that, because it feels like maybe you could do things
dividing into threes and not twos. Dividing into twos is the obvious way to do things,
it's like if you can't do something with one, then make a copy of it, differentiate them,
and now you can do something more than you could do with the one of them.
But there's something about the, I don't know, this is either going to sound
mad or it's going to resonate with you. There's something about the period doubling in the logistic
map that eventually exits chaos in a third. That makes me think that they're basically the
thirds are real, and it doesn't have to always be period doubling. It's natural to think of twos and
but actually, if you think about early embryonic development, never mind the asymmetry of just
the drawing and midline, that is really not well understood at all. There's a lot of what
happens after you've got sort of a left and right to have, but that first, especially in amniotes,
how it is that you divide, you've got thousands and tens of thousands of cells, and then how you
decide where that midline is is completely non-trivial. And we can interfere in that process and make
other types of, and of course there are animals with other types of symmetries, but bilateral
symmetry shows up very early on. Chirality is there even before that. But it's not super obvious how
bisect something that has lots and lots of tiny. So organisms with symmetries that are odd,
like starfish, is there a nice three-way symmetry? So if I recall correctly, the starfish are actually
not five-fold really. They're sort of bilateral with a, you know, like a Truvian man type of
thing. But there are jellyfish. The jellyfish do have true multiple and symmetries, and there are
all kinds. And they're not always, in fact, they're not always powers of two, they could be.
Yeah. Yeah. That's interesting that a lot of my creatures that I showed you the video the other
day might a lot of them look like jellyfish, right? Yeah. Yeah. Well, a couple of reflections
I just make. One is that this lateral asymmetry is present in the earliest neural network of which
we have any knowledge. 700 million years ago it has this axial asymmetry. And there's a very good
reason, I believe, why that should be the case, because of this business of the organism needing to
pay finely focused, narrowly focused targeted attention to a detail that it already requires,
and its ability simultaneously to keep the precisely opposite kind of attention
open, the broad, vigilant attention without preconception as to what it might find or what
it's interested in. So that makes a natural as it were pairing. And out of that pairing,
almost anything can come after all, through the pairings of one and zero, many, many
complex structures can be made. As soon as you've got two, you've already got potentially many
things. Because as I often say, you need both and either or. So you need the situation where
it's either or, that is an important distinction in life. But it's also important to have that as
well as the both and ability to synthesize these things. As soon as you've got that, you've already
got more than two things. You've got either and or and you've got the combination of the two
and the relationship between all three of them. And so the thing expands from there. So although it
may begin for very good evolutionary reasons as a pair, more than that, almost infinitely more
of that can emerge from it. So one could explain brain bilateral symmetry by the fact that it's
growing in an organism that already has bilateral symmetry, if we're not. But if we take the organism
itself to be fundamentally cognitive, even before it had a brain in a basal cognition sort of way,
then that's just saying bilateralism was always about cognition. And bilateral hemispheres in
brains was just a particular extension of that. And if you go right back to the origin of multi
cellularity, it's like, well, was that likely to have occurred through cell divisions, which didn't
separate? In which case two would have been a natural number. But and you know, then the
vibration that you can get between two cells, that's different from the vibration that you can get in
either one cell, because you can coordinate it. Right now, you can have them, you can have one
doing, they could just be, you know, I'll be on when you're off, right, we're the same, we're the
same period, but out of phase. I don't think there's any point in them being the same period in in phase.
If they're the same period and out of phase, and that's, you know, I'll be on when you're off,
you'll be off when I'm on. But there's also the possibility that one is doing something at
twice the frequency of the other, which is stable. But now they're doing something intrinsically
different. And it seems like, you know, it would be, it would be natural to create things which
were powers of two that way, that will do two doublings instead of one doubling. But it's also,
you know, when you do, you know, the fact that the Taylor expansion gives you a third by,
you know, one minus a half plus a quarter minus an eighth minus a sixteenth gives you a third. And
that the pattern that you have to do to do that is a just an oscillating pattern to do that.
There's, I think there's actually something really, I think it's, I think it is very
natural, Mike, that it pairs to start with. I think that that's a very, there's good reasons
for that. But I also think that there's something very interesting in considering other factors.
A couple of other things occur to me on that. One is you mentioned that chirality goes well before
life. And it does. And of course, famously, there is the weak force is chiral in its nature.
And chirality has a left-handed spiral, a right-handed spiral. I'm not sure what the spiral
would be that was the third-handed spiral. That's where all this in a way starts. And the other
thing is that in the metaphysics part of the matter with things, I spend a lot of time on the
importance of the coincidence of opposites. And much of everything that we see, it seems to be
structured on what we call opposites, because we think in this sense of them being opposite ends
of something, but they may just be the compliments of one another that you cannot have one without
the other. This is a very, very ancient insight. It is present probably in all the sophisticated
cultures that we know of. In the 19th century, it was Pasteur who said life needs asymmetry.
Symmetry it may have in places, but that's completely unimportant. It's asymmetry that
allows life to flourish. And it does so he thought because it reflected the innate asymmetry of the
cosmos. And Pierre Curie commenting 20, 30 years later said that the asymmetry of the cosmos,
not so much of life, but of the cosmos was absolutely central to its existence and persistence.
So I think this idea of asymmetry is good. And asymmetry and symmetry are repairing
that mop up. What else? What would be your third thing in there? I mean, the third thing is chaos,
actually, is simply chaos. Not everything that is not symmetrical is strictly speaking asymmetrical.
It may just be a mess. One interesting thing about the establishment of symmetry in the early
embryo, it's very easy. There are many treatments that we've discovered that confuse the left and
the right halves about which one they are. So you can get double left, double right, you can
get mirror image, that's very easy. But of all of those treatments, in every single case, except
for one, which we finally at the end discovered, but it took a long time, everything else, all it
does is it confuses which side thinks it's left and which side it's right. But all of the individual
cells within that side agree. So if you use a marker that shows you whether something's left
and right, you never see speckled, you never see every cell confused and its neighbor that has a
different option, you don't see that. You just see this way, this way, this way or this way.
But there is exactly one thing that we found that breaks the concordance. So normally you can
randomize it and you can make the left and right halves flip a coin as to which they are. But all
of the cells within each half flip the same coin with one exception. There's only one thing that
breaks that. And the thing that breaks it is a cellular alignment mechanism, literally alignment
but also metaphorically, I think alignment in a cognitive sense. But it's a planar polarity
mechanism that allows the cells to be literally aligned in the same direction, not even in left
right. It's actually an alignment in anterior or posterior. But once you break that, then you
get the speckling. And then you get individual cells that don't know what to do as opposed to
whole coherent cohesive regions that don't know what to do. So I really like that whole model as
this like way of thinking about what does it take to make cells to make a coherent individual out
of pieces that makes a collective decision, right? This sort of collective decision thinking.
What significance would you attribute to this final case that you described
with the anterior or posterior alignment but not left, right coherent?
I think the reason that I found it interesting is because
what it gets to is this question of collective decision making. So what is a collective
intelligence, right? And so which we all are in a sense. And so the question we have to answer is,
in what sense does the collective have goals, memories, whatever else that the individual
pieces don't have? How do these, right? So we are a bunch of cells, fine, but then we have
all kinds of sort of cognitive and morphological properties that the individual
parts don't have. And so that right at the beginning of embryogenesis, when
50,000 cells have to come together to give one, one what, one embryo, one individual,
eventually one, you know, let's say in the case of humans, one human. This is a breakdown of that
collective decision making process. And we have many other examples where they all, all of the
components begin to make decisions as one. They're all synchronized. And some of that is
bioelectrical. Some of it is these planar polarity alignment mechanisms. But to me,
this is the root of the whole business. When you start with 50,000 cells and you look at it and
you say, ah, this is one embryo, right? Like what are you counting when you say it's one embryo?
Which are in a functional sense. And it doesn't have to be one because I can't recall if we
have already talked about this. But if you make little scratches in it for what you'll get is
multiple conjoined twins, because until that scratch heals, each portion doesn't know that
there's other portions around. And it basically decides I'm going to be the embryo. And then,
of course, they all do that. And then eventually they heal. So you can have twins and triplets and
whatnot. And so this issue of how many individuals, how many humans are in any one embryo is not
fixed by the genetics. It's not fixed by the physics. It's a kind of an outcome in softwares,
so to speak, because it could be zero, one, two, three, five. It could be some number.
It's a really perfect example of the top down and the bottom up involved there, right?
If you think of where is the embryo and how many embryos there are as a question that you can
answer bottom up, then it's, well, these are the parts. So that must make one embryo.
But the fact that the whole becomes divided into two parts, that's a macro scale phenomenon
that top down, organizes the parts to orchestrate them to make a whole.
Yeah. And then, of course, we have cases that are sort of partial, right? So sometimes they're
separate and you can make twins that are completely separate, but you can also make
ones like this that overlap. And there are even human, well, you can make them in any
orientation, but there are human cases, of course, too, right? Where we've got two bodies
and kind of the brain is fused or vice versa. They're all sorts of possibilities.
Did I ask you already whether conjoined twins ever join at parts which are not homologous?
Yes. You can.
What was the answer?
There are. That can happen. Yeah, that can happen.
But presumably the conjoining is much more superficial in that case, right? That it just,
if I make a conjoined twin, the joint between the head and the foot, then it's only actually
integrated at the skin or something. No, it goes pretty deep. So there are, I mean, it can,
you know, you can have this kind of scenario where out of the middle of one embryo starts
basically sprouting another one. And at the connection, it's nuts. I mean, they're connected
all the way through. You can make almost anything. And then, of course, these things
occur naturally too. But we can make, especially in something like the chicken, where it's very
easy to kind of manipulate all the parts you can make almost anything.
So I don't know if this is a little bit too nitty gritty, but whilst you were talking about that,
I was thinking about Ian's suggestion of opposites and chaos. And I've still got the
logistic map in mind. Do you mind if I share my screen to point out something in the logistic
map that I showed? Go for it. Mike before, but I didn't show Ian. So in the logistic map here,
you have this first doubling and then another doubling and then another doubling and then
pretty soon it turns into chaos. And it's like, are we up or are we down? And so on this path,
we're up. And on this path, we're up. And on this path, we're up on this path, we're up down.
Whereas this one is down up and this one is down down. So this line going up here,
all the way up here is the up, up, up, up, up, up, up line. And this one going down here is the down,
down, down, down, down, down, down, down line. How come this period doubling ever ends up at this
period three? Because there is no power of two that ends up in dividing into thirds,
this resonance which happens much later on. But as you can see, there's a little sort of trail of
dust, a little bit of higher density stuff happening here that corresponds with the
point of the third. What's that trail of dust there? Well, that's the I go down, I go up,
I go down, I go up, I go down, I go up, I go down, I go up, I go down, I go up, I go down,
I go up, down, I go up. So plus a half, minus a quarter, plus an eighth, minus a 16th, plus a
32nd, minus a 64th. Look at that. It's a third. It gives you the period of the third.
Another way of thinking about this, reflecting upon what Ian just said about, well, there's a thing
and it's opposite, is that in addition to one and minus one, there is also zero. Zero is the
unstable thing that you get with a perfect blend of this much minus one and this much one, this much
minus a half and this much half, this much minus a quarter and that much eighth. And that comes out
at zero, which enables you to have three things instead of two things. Instead of the everything
up position and the everything down position, there's the exactly canceled out position in the
middle. That's the only way to get thirds out of period doubling.
And why does the top part of the graph not produce the mirror image third thing that goes on in the
bottom part of the graph? That's a good question. So there's a third thing happening here, which
lines up with the fifth. Is that one, two, three, four, five? Yeah. Oh, sorry, I'm pointing with
my finger instead of the max pointer. It lines up with there, right? It gives you the other
resonant frequency here. And here we have one that this one is canceling out to give you
half of a fourth. This one is canceling out to give you another half of a fourth.
And together they give you a period four. So there's the canceling out on the top one, which comes
first, because it's more squashed. And the canceling out on the bottom one, which comes
second, because it's less squashed. And when you have one without the other, you have thirds.
And, you know, if you if you if you take a naive view where you insist on opposites,
you say, well, is it a or is it not a? And you say, well, that that's in the getting you get
into this region where you say, it's neither it's just a mess. It's just chaos. But there's a but
there's a null, which is, you know, first of all, you might identify that as well, it's neither a
or not a it's it's null, right? But then there's a more precise version of null, which is with the
perfect, perfect balance of being there and being not there gives you exactly zero, which is which
then takes its place as another genuine state. Now there's one and minus one and zero, three things
and not just two. I think it's a I think it's a lovely example of those paradoxes you were talking
about at the end of the chapter in where you're talking about, well, you know, I take this infinite
number of steps, but I never see the infinity. I take this infinite number of steps, but I never
catch up with the tortoise, right? I take this infinite number of steps in the period doubling.
But I never really see the third, right? But our eyes see the third, for sure, right?
Or we don't see that as some overlapping powers of two all smushed together. The resonance pops out
as the Oh, no, that's a real thing. I wonder if the question of zero, which of course, as you know,
the Greeks didn't have, but was introduced in probably the sixth, seventh century from India,
is is is not such so much a third entity, so to speak, as what happens when you allow opposites
to do exactly what I was suggesting we shouldn't do, which is to collapse. I mean, for certain
mathematical reasoning, we want them to do that. But what I'm suggesting is that in the
in the physical world, the things being asymmetrical, ultimately can, I mean, they may for certain
purposes within very confined systems appear to cancel out, but ultimately they don't. I don't
know if that's something you would agree with or not. But the cancelling out, you say at the
gross scale, it looks like, oh, they disappeared, I've got nothing now. But there's another sense
in which, wow, look at all of those, look at all of that spiraling depth that there is in order
to create, right? It's like, oh, it's gone this way, oh, it's gone that way, oh, it's gone this way.
And you know, that that takes lots and lots of depth to actually to cancel them out to then
stay at level. Oh, it's almost like it went puff in a puff of smoke, and I didn't have anything at
all. Shall we talk about the machine business?
Sure. Yeah. Do either of you know the work of Robert Rosen?
Yeah, I think he's very interesting. And he's probably written about this more clearly than
anyone that the living system has, as it were, final causes rather than just efficient causes.
In fact, a living system is not the result of a single efficient cause. Whereas a closed system
such as a machine, well, it's open in the sense that it's open to an efficient cause. But it all
can be accounted for by that efficient cause within that protected space of the machine.
Whereas in a living being, even if you were to be able to start from a known standpoint,
you'd soon run into problems of complexity where re-entrant loops occur, where decisions that
cannot be predicted are made within the system and so forth. So this seems to suggest that,
I mean, I'm cutting everything very fine here because I talked quite a bit about this, particularly
in, I suppose, chapter 12. But my view is that there are, well, and of course, in chapter 27,
where I argue that it is almost impossible to talk intelligently about life without talking about
the possibility of purpose, teleology, which Darwin was extremely keen on. Darwin said,
thank goodness, and Darwin's bulldog actually also said, the great thing that Darwin has done
is restored teleology, which as you know, J.B.S. Haldane said was like the scientist Mistress
couldn't live without her, but wasn't willing to be seen with her in public.
I think this whole thing of teleology is so important. I mean, whenever you talk to scientists
one-to-one and off the record, they say, well, of course, there are purposes and purposeful
behaviour direct. All of what we watch is directional. And yet, their force, as it were, by
almost like belonging to the same state, and there are rules, things you can say and things
you can't say, just to deny this existence. So, I mean, that's a good provocative place
to begin thinking about the differences between these systems. And I outline in chapter 12,
which is called The Science of Life, a study in left hemisphere capture, because I believe that
while physics gave up on this rather simple mechanical model a very long time ago, at least
a hundred years ago, biology has until very recently clung to this purely mechanical model.
I may be wrong, Michael, but I see you as one of the people who has been able to say, yes,
look, there's more to it than this. Yeah. So, I think we could and probably should at some point
talk about the teleology in machines and cybernetics and all that, but I 100% agree. I think teleology
is absolutely key to all of this. The one thing that one reason I don't like a sharp distinction,
and I like Robert's work a lot. What I don't like about that sharp distinction between living
things in machines is that we know now that as we really didn't in when Robert was writing this
stuff, that we can make all the transition forms. Then we end up in this weird place where we have
to try to come up with criteria. We can now make something that's basically at every level. So,
you've got molecular, a cellular tissue, organ, your swarm, you've got all these levels. At every
single level, we can introduce any percentage you want from zero to fairly high numbers of
something that you would call a machine, right? Something that was designed by humans that
maybe quite complex, maybe has unpredictable behavior. I mean, it's easy to make machines
with very difficult to predict behaviors, but nevertheless, they're designed. They're completely
different from the natural in many ways. Yeah. And then I don't know what we do after that,
because now we have something, you know, we are already there are humans that are, you know,
95% human, but there's some electronics there by which they run a wheelchair or
some prosthetic limbs or some other stuff. And then we also have these rumba vacuum cleaners
and pretty soon they'll have some, you know, some human neural cells living on board to help them
do various things. And then sort of every, but those are easy to deal with, right? Because in
this case, you say, yeah, you're just a human with some peripherals and you're just a vacuum
cleaner with some human brain cells, fine. But we can make, right? And we're going to be seeing
them, cyborgs, hybrids, we're going to be seeing all this stuff. And then I think we get into a
really difficult place where if we try to draw these hard boundaries. And we're interested in,
sorry, go on. No, please finish. Well, that's just it. No, no, yeah. I mean,
of course, there's an enormous amount one could say about all of that, but that would be another day,
perhaps. But I just wanted to make clear that I actually surprisingly don't think there is a hard
and fast difference between the living and the non living. And in fact, Robert Rosen said as much,
he said that animosity is the norm. And in animosity is an asymptotic, never achieved state
in which animosity is reduced to a minimum. But the whole cosmos is animate. And I hold
this to be the case. So what actually distinguishes them, some people would say, well, clearly,
inanimate matter doesn't have consciousness, but we think that living things do have
consciousness. And now we think that very primitive living things probably have consciousness. So
it's gone a long way down, if not to the very bottom of life. But in an earlier chapter 25,
I think, I argue that consciousness is an ontological primitive in the cosmos. And that,
in fact, matter is a state, a phase of consciousness in which it exhibits greater
stickiness, permanent resistance than consciousness, which has no matter in its form. So things persist
longer and cause the possibility of resistance. And I believe that in fact, nothing creative
can happen without an element of resistance. So this thing that matter offers is incredibly
important. So my view is that what we used to calling inanimate matter does do many of the
things very, very, very slowly and very, very, very little that living things do. And what living
things bring is not consciousness, because that's already there, but an increase in the capacity
to respond and the speed of response. So living things respond to circumstances, to whatever
it is that's around them, perhaps a billion fold faster than an inanimate matter could
possibly do, and respond to a vast range of elements that are there in the cosmos. So
responding all the time to things much faster and on a much bigger canvas than the inanimate.
So I see the difference as a matter of degree, if you like, but not that this means that there
are long phases where you can't tell, but that nonetheless, even though animacy and inanimacy
do seem very distinct, they do share important qualities. And the difference is more one of
degree than of not. Yeah, I would like to offer a refinement on that. It's so nice to be able to
have a conversation like that, and for somebody to be able to say things like that, and for us
to be nodding along, I think, and it's just like, yep, I'm on board. Yeah. Yes, it is nice,
and often unusual in science. So we could try and pinpoint the continuous difference between
living and non-living in terms of the scale of the physical scale of the capacity to respond
to the temporal scale of the capacity to respond, the richness of the capacity to respond, things
like that. I think there are reasons to suggest that there are some inanimate mechanisms that
happen at very large scales and very quickly. Supernova explosion is a very big response,
and it happens very quickly, but it's still not living. And there are other things that
happen slowly, and I'm not sure that the fast or slow and the big or small, I don't think you said
big or small, actually, I said that fast or slow, I'm not sure that that's the right. I'm not sure
that going one way makes things more living and going the other thing makes more things more
inanimate. I think it's more about the connection between the scales. Is the large scale connected
to what's going on at the small scale? Is the fast scale connected? What's going on at the slow scale?
When those things are connected, they behave organically, they behave
animately, and when those things are not connected, then they behave like hard balls in space,
whether they're big or small or fast or slow, they just behave like hard balls in space.
May I respond to that, Mike? I like that very much, and perhaps I could
clarify that what I meant was not that inanimate things can never do something fast,
like a volcano exploding, but that generally speaking, without a cataclysmic force,
there is no, there is this fast, the fastest response. I'm talking about a response to the whole
set of circumstances. So for example, there's a lump of rock in my garden, and I don't know what
it is responding to, but whatever it's responding to, perhaps wind, water, and so on, it's responding
to extremely slowly, but there is also a vole in the flower bed that is responding to everything
a billion times faster at least in a way that inanimate stuff just doesn't seem to do this.
It complex reactions to many facets, many different kinds of values, if you like, of affordances to
use that kind of language. There are many, many, many, many affordances for living creatures,
and they use them very rapidly, whereas lumps of matter tend not to. That's one thing I just
wanted to say. The other is I don't know whether, I think it's true this thing about the bridging
of the scales, but I was very interested in an observation made by Micah Bramovitz that
there are different, what he calls structures, he calls the distinction he's making
between architective structures and connective structures, and what he means by architective
structures are things that are relatively rigid and static, and when they change,
when they make a change, they make a complete change, and it's exactly where it is a cataclysm,
and there are things that are connected that change by means of flowing change,
and they are more, I mean, I don't know which bits of my book you've had the chance to catch up
with, and I'm extraordinary grateful for being able to, I can't remember what I said, but
in another section on induction and deduction? Okay, yes, yes, that was because of what you
said about that, but yes. But anyway, I think this is an issue of the difference between concatenation
and flow is absolutely essential, and these types of motion where things flow from one
state into another, and these architective states which hold themselves until there's a
break, and they're rather like what Taleb calls fragile states, and the connected ones are
anti-fragile, they make adaptations all the time so that they don't have that cataclysmic
need to change, and the reason I'm mentioning all this is that he suggests that at the very
lowest level, and particularly at the very highest level of magnitude, you only find
connected states, and that the architective states are found more at the intermediate phase
where we happen to be leading our lives and have our experience. I've probably given a very
bad account of that, but I do a better job in the book. Thank you. Whose terms were those,
architective and connective? There are now retired physicists called Mike Abramovich,
but he has a very interesting web, and we've corresponded, and so there we are. That makes a
lot of sense to me, so there's a sense in which the rock in your garden can respond to things
quickly, like if you kick it, it moves, you hit it with a hammer and it moves a little bit,
it moves a little bit across the garden, and in a sense that's a response to the force that's
acted on it, but then the architective structure, if I can use that term already,
isn't changed. It's still the same rock, it's just over here, instead of over there,
it didn't really change its relationship to anything, and so doing it in it didn't change
its internal organization or connective structure in response to that being
hit with a hammer. But there are the minimal example of a physical system
that I've been thinking about recently that has some connection between scales
is resonance in systems that resonate. So like in a tuning fork or a piece of steel,
when you hit that, it doesn't just move, it doesn't just transfer the impulse and say,
well okay, I'll be over here, but when you hit it and it rings, there is a really intimate
connection between the macroscale geometry of the fork as a whole and a micro-scale elasticity
of the molecules of steel holding it together, and one needs an integer multiple of the other
in order for you to get a resonant standing wave in that geometry, and there's an intimate
connection between the whole organizing the parts and the parts organizing the whole,
and I don't think it's any coincidence that we say that the ringing of a bell
feels organic or has lifelike structured to it. I think that's because of its resonance,
and I think this idea of resonance reverberative connectivity is essential to the understanding
of, well, just about everything, but certainly living things. What I think I may have misled you
by saying is what he's referring to is that there are certain kinds of things which are like
chemical inter-offic for the constituent. They lose their qualities completely and become
something else, so an evil smelling greenish yellow gas mixes with some dull metal and it
becomes table salt, and as it were, they've lost what they had before. This is architective change,
he says, but there are other things that mix with one another, add themselves to things,
and work by accretive processes where their existence is not a zero something, they have
to go and something else comes. They are able to cause something to create a bigger
entity out of the smaller elements that will come together, and I think it's all really that one
needs to take on board for that point, I don't want to labor it, but it just seems to be quite
interesting that he spots that that catastrophic scale is above the scale of particles in physics,
but is below the scale of the cosmos, and then the cosmos and in the very subatomic regions,
what you see is not cataclysms in which one thing is wiped out and changes its nature completely,
but that things come together and create as they do in the wider cosmos, it would create
something new, but it's not catastrophic for the constituent parts. Yeah, I get it, I get it.
So the music metaphor for me is when you put two notes together and they're concordant,
both the notes are still there and they created something new, they created the interval.
Yeah, when you put two notes together which are discordant and they just crash,
and it seems to tear apart the two notes that you had.
Yes, that's a good metaphor, but what an extraordinary thing it is that by putting two
completely meaningless bland things together, a note and another note, you suddenly create an event
and an experience, and the more you add, you can do things that are
completely unpredictable from the outside, you can only know them when you hear them.
Yes,
Yes, you can't tell, so when if I give you 469 hertz and 468.9 hertz,
you cannot tell the difference between those separately, played separately, right?
But when I play them together, you can hear the beat, you can hear the beating as they go in and
out of phase. There was something, I'd like to return to the possibility of the hybrids and cyborgs
that Mike was talking about, and what we were just talking about about whether there's multiple
scales involved in the dynamics or the system or the algorithm that's running.
So in computer science, we have this notion of an algorithm being substrate independent
that you can implement the same algorithm in multiple different substrates and it just doesn't
matter because the details of the substrate that you implemented it on just don't matter to the
essentially symbolic and discreet computation that you're doing at the higher level, right?
It was all syntax and no semantics. Right, so by divorcing it of all of the concrete details
of the instances, you get something that you can apply to other instances, you get the generalization,
right? You get, oh, it's the same one, not yet. But you lose that connection to the concrete
instances in a way that the symbols that you're manipulating don't have any meaning,
right? If you treat them abstractly, then they are, as you said, pulled out of
their context in which they had some meaning. So that notion of the substrate independence of
algorithms suggests that you could replace part of an organism with a machine or part of a machine
with an organism and it wouldn't really matter or you would create something that was in between.
But I'm not so sure about that. I think that when we implement an algorithm on a machine in a
conventional sense, we are doing so in a way which is as divorced as possible from the physical
implementation of it so that it doesn't matter what numbers I put into my sorting algorithm,
it never makes my logic gates overheat, right? That getting to the physics of what I implemented
on just doesn't matter, like whatever computation I do on it just doesn't interact with the physical
implementation. But in organisms, it's not just that it does interact with the physical
implementation but that they are organisms because it interacts with the implementation.
So you can get an organism to behave like an AND gate if you put it in the right circumstances
but when you make it do it over and over again, it says fuck this and it crawls out of the dish
and does something else, right? The interaction with the substrate of which it is made matters
and it matters not just because it's an unreliable algorithm then, it wasn't perfectly
abstracted, that wasn't really a good way of implementing an AND gate then. That was the
thing that made it organic was that when you stress one level of function, the
implementational level of function below it begins to show, it begins to show through.
And that's really important for being able to get those responses that you were talking about,
a quick response is by reorganizing the function. It's like, okay, well, I won't do that function
then I'll do this function, right? And a lot of the higher level and lower level integrity,
the higher level and lower level structure is still there but it's been reorganized.
Whereas when you do that with a mechanical device and you push it beyond its limits,
well, first of all, when you push it beyond its limits, it doesn't show you the in-between states
and you need the in-between states because it can't really be adaptive, it can't really learn
unless it's inside show. And when it's inside do show, you just say, oh, shit, I broke it,
right? Because it doesn't degrade gracefully because you went straight from this really,
really high level symbolic stuff to the physics it was made out of, multiple levels below.
And that means that when the insides do show, it just breaks, it doesn't degrade gracefully.
Hmm.
I think, yes, I don't know enough about the systems that you're working with, really, but how they
would, how they would, could be adapted to the way a plant takes in 15 kinds of measures and
synthesizes them and as it were, makes a decision about whether or not it's time to
bud or flower or whatever it may be. I'm sure you could find algorithms that could
make an artificial flower do something like this but I don't know that it would be
anything at all like the flower. I don't know. Yeah, it's like, I'm not a cyberneticist. So, yeah.
How the flower behaves under normal circumstances could probably be extracted into such an algorithm
involving 15 variables in a bit of logic. But what's really interesting about the flower is
what it does when you put it under circumstances that are not quite like that, right? When,
you know, when Mike does an experiment and says, you know, cuts it in half when it was
half, only half when it was just a seedling, how many plants do you get, right? And that's,
you know, now it's making two decisions. This one is deciding differently from that one. How
did it make two, how can, how can one thing make two decisions, right? It's like, because,
that's right. And also, again, correct me if I'm wrong, but I think this situation,
sounds different from the execution of an algorithm where, and I described this in one of the
chapters, but effectively, Monica Galliano has done experiments with pea shoots where they're
deprived of light and the light comes on in a Y shaped structure that is over the bed in which
they are. And it comes on in one or other arm of the Y, entirely at random. So you can't predict
each time which it will be, but sometime before the light comes on, a puff of air is sent down the
arm of the tube out of which the light is going to come. And these pea shoots of the staff of light
benefit from orientating themselves towards where the light is coming from. And I believe that in
only three days they learn to orientate towards where the puffs of light are coming from, puffs
of air are coming from, because that's where the light will come from. And intriguingly, the
reverse case has also been done as a control in which the puff of air comes down the arm
from which the light will not come and the pea shoots appropriately in the other, again,
within a few days learn. Now, that's not something they could conceivably have been,
as it were, programmed by either from their own experience or from any past historical
experience. This seems like intelligent behavior. Yeah, I don't have any problem with that.
Mike's not surprised, right? No, I'm not surprised. Yeah. And I think what we were just
saying about, you don't see what it can do until you stress it is 100%. I mean, this is why
this is one reason why teleology, it's not the biggest reason, but one reason why people aren't
into it is because what they observe most of the time is the default behavior, let's say, of embryos.
And they think it's a purely feedforward emergent system. They say, oh, complexity in
emergence, right? So local rules, we know local rules can give rise to complexity. And look,
it does this thing. Well, there you go. So, and they said, well, you can't just label that as
intelligence, you know, it's like, it's, it's just, it's just, that's what it has to do. And,
and that's true. If all you do is observe the standard default behavior, but once you start
putting barriers in its way, and you start stressing it in various ways, then, then you,
you get pulled out of this false sense of inevitability. And you see that, oh, it actually,
it actually has what some degree, depending on what you're looking at, of what James called
intelligence, which is the ability to reach the same goal, different means. And you start to see
the incredible ingenuity that these things can muster in different problem spaces.
Okay. I apologize. I have to, I have to run. Can we
