I, historically, I spent most of my time thinking about evolutionary processes.
And in particular, the phenomena of transitions and individuality, such as from single celled
life to multi celled life, where there's a change in the level of the unit that's doing
the evolving.
More recently, I've been thinking about processes of adaptation that are not natural selection,
that are more like learning than natural selection, and I think that they are different.
And I've been thinking about a way of modeling cognition and learning in terms of oscillations
and synchronization, and how synchronization affects higher level decision making processes.
Things like that.
That's where I'm at at the moment.
When you have to summarize your life's work in a few sentences, it's quite an interesting
exercise.
I'll tell you, there's a little home movie that was made of Sigmund Freud after he had
fled to England in 1939.
It must have been one of the early talking home movies, and he totals up to the camera
in the garden of his house in Hampstead, and he says the following, my name is Sigmund
Freud.
I started my professional life as a neurologist, trying to bring relief to my neurotic patients.
I learned some interesting things along the way, but they came at a terrible price.
That's his life.
I think the terrible price referred to is the loss of the credence of his scientific colleagues.
Although I just randomly, your little summary, very modest summary of what you're up to,
brought that to mind spontaneously, I realized that it's relevant to my own story.
I started my professional life as a neuropsychologist, and as it happens, although I'm sure you don't
know him, I worked with a neurosurgeon named Owen Sparrow, who I subsequently worked with.
I trained in South Africa.
I subsequently worked with him in London at the Royal London Hospital, but he then moved
to Southampton.
He also just pops randomly into mind, but I suppose you don't know him.
I think he must be retired now.
I started out as a neuropsychologist because I was fascinated by what is surely one of
the most fascinating questions, which is how do mind and brain relate?
By mind, I meant this thing that we are busy experiencing, and was rapidly disabused of
that conception of mind.
That was literally what was said to me.
I was told not to ask questions like that because they're bad for my career.
In other words, when learning about memory, for instance, I would ask, but why does it
feel like something to have a memory?
That was the kind of question that was shot down, and really a purely functional and behavioral
and cognitive account of the mind left me very frustrated.
This is why the story about Freud's terrible price came to mind, I think.
What I did when I emigrated to England in the late 1980s, which is when I worked at
the neurosurgery department of the Royal London, by night, while working there by day, I trained
as a psychoanalyst, which, as one of my colleagues at that time said, was like an astronomer
training in astrology.
The reason I did that is probably obvious.
It's that for all of its enormous faults, psychoanalysis was the one approach to mental
science which took as its starting point a subjective experience, took as its data, the
experience of the life of the mind.
As part of my training, I had to, myself, undergo a psychoanalysis, which I must tell
you, took me nine years, five times a week, so I really got to know myself five times
a week for nine years, yes.
That was a little longer than was required by the training, but it is quite an education
to get to know yourself in that degree of detail and depth.
What you quickly learn, if you take that subjective observational perspective on the mind, is what
a terribly important part is played by feelings, which is precisely, I think in retrospect,
it's probably the most fundamental form of subjective experience.
It is what comes from the subject, what the subject brings to its deception of objects.
My research around that time, because of the melding of these different interests, my main
focus was brain mechanisms of dreaming.
Actually, I see I'm giving a much longer version than you, because I suspect you won't
know my work as well as I know yours, but what I learned about the brain mechanisms
of dreaming was that they are not the same thing as the brain mechanisms of REM sleep,
which we had until that point assumed they were.
In other words, we assumed that we knew on the basis of correlation that dreaming happens
during REM sleep, and on that basis we assumed that dreaming was simply the subjective experience
of the objective physiological state of being in REM sleep, and therefore they were assumed
to share the same causal mechanism.
Once that correlation was established, the interest in dreams was abandoned because they
are such slippery fish when it comes to data gathering, and we studied only the physiological
mechanisms and using the methods, the best methods available at that time inevitably
meant studying animals, because you can't isolate or you couldn't those days where there
were no methods for isolating which parts of the brain were causally responsible for
generating this state without invasive techniques.
So the subjective side was completely disregarded, and all the work done on identifying the brain
mechanisms of dreaming was done on animals, and then there was no possibility of course
of monitoring what these lesions were doing to the subjective experience of dreams.
And I then did a big study, which are published in the 90s, of human beings, 361 of them to
be precise with focal brain lesions, studying the effects of those lesions on their experience
of dreaming.
And what I found was, first of all, damage to the MISA pontine tegmentum, which leads
to loss of REM sleep in human beings, just as it does in other animals, did not lead
to loss of dreaming.
And conversely, that there was another lesion site in the ventromesial quadrant of the frontal
lobes in the white matter down there, which led to loss of dreaming with preservation
of REM sleep, so they turned out to be doubly dissociable functions.
And that's the price we pay if we ignore, if we disregard, eschew subjective data.
Anyway, to fast forward from there, I became interested in the brain, from the brain mechanisms
of REM sleep and dreaming, I became interested in brain mechanisms of consciousness generally,
and recognizing that we were taking too cortical an approach to the study of consciousness,
that consciousness is fundamentally generated in upper brain stem structures.
For example, the smallest lesion that is required to induce coma is two cubic millimeters in
the parabrakeal complex.
And human beings born with no cortex certainly seem perfectly conscious in the sense that
they wake up in the morning, and that they're reactive to stimuli, and in particular, they
are emotionally reactive, as are decortical animals, but even in human beings with no
cortex, consciousness persists.
And so I became interested in those brain stem sources of consciousness, and then gradually
persuaded of the view that this is not some sort of purely quantitative level of consciousness
that's generated down there, it's not just a blank wakefulness, that it has quality and
content of its own, and that is an affective feeling.
So I've been in recent years working on two fronts, the one is trying to better understand
what precisely is going on in these upper brain stem structures that are both prerequisite
for any form of consciousness, and specifically generate affective feelings, trying to understand
the relationship between affect and consciousness, understanding consciousness as fundamentally
affective, and trying to reduce that to its underlying mechanisms, and even to try and
reduce it to formalism, to mathematical formalisms, because it turns out it's all fundamentally
homoesthetic, affect is an extended form of homoesthesia, it's not a very complicated
thing.
So together with Carl Christen, who I know you both know, I've been trying to understand
at a fundamental level what our affect is generated mechanistically in the belief that
if we can get a grip on that, then we will have a mechanistic group on consciousness
itself, and the other track that I'm working on, which takes me into your world, both of
your worlds, and also somewhat out of my depth, is an attempt to, together with colleagues,
computer scientists and physicists and roboticists, trying to artificially engineer a system
with the mechanisms that we have inferred from the biological case, trying to instantiate
that same mechanism in an artificial consciousness.
And so that's the wildest thing I've ever been involved, I'm fortunately old enough
now to be allowed to do wild things without destroying my career, but absolutely fascinating
thing to be doing too.
So that's a very long-winded account of who I am and what I'm up to, Richard.
Thank you.
Are we assuming that Mike doesn't need to do an intro because we both know Mike already?
We both know Mike, yes.
So one thing popped up there was this two cubic millimeters of brain at the top of
the stem, and its role in consciousness or the smallest lesion that could remove consciousness.
And whether or not that's the same as saying that's the place where consciousness is generated.
They're not the same things, are they?
No, that's a fallacy that has long bedeviled my field.
I mean, starting with Broca, the idea that a lesion in a specific part of the frontal
cortex, which obliterates the capacity to speak or at least to speak grammatically and
that finding means that there's a language centre, there's a part of the cortex within
which the faculty for language resides.
And so, of course, that is a long-headed reasoning.
It's not from the, sorry, go ahead.
No, but I think it nevertheless is an important and interesting fact that's that damage to
such a small area can obliterate consciousness entirely because it demonstrates, and that's
the word that's used, I think, correctly, it demonstrates that it is prerequisite that
without that, you can't have consciousness.
So it must be contributing something fundamental to what is obviously a more system-wide state.
So I mean, it's similar to genes for language, right?
You find what's the smallest genetic knockout which stops you from having an eye or stops
you from developing properly or stops you from whatever.
The smallest genetic knockout that breaks something is not the same as saying that's
the place where the information for that thing lives.
Yeah.
So for that reason, alongside another one, which I'll briefly mention, I told you that
these children, by the way, the condition is called hydranine cephaly, not hydrosethy,
but hydranine cephaly, these kids, of course, they can't speak because they have no cortex.
And so many of my colleagues' question are skeptical to put it politely, that they really
are conscious.
They say that it's the moral fantasy.
I would like to believe that they're conscious.
So I project the property of consciousness onto the behavioral observations that I see.
I hasten to add, none of them have actually related to these kids.
It's something to say that in the kind of abstract philosophical way.
It's a lot harder to sustain when you have experience of interacting with them.
But because of that doubt and also because of the fallacy that you just referred to,
I want to point out that the only evidence for this part of the brain, this upper brain
stems a pivotal role in consciousness and the aspect of consciousness in particular,
is not the lesion evidence.
It's not the only evidence at all.
I'll just quickly mention a few other lines of converging findings.
The one is that if you stimulate those structures electrically, which we get opportunities to
do every now and then in awake brain surgeries.
You generate the most intense affective states.
You don't generate a sort of waxing and waning of a level of arousal.
What you generate is intense feelings.
I mean, for example, suicidal depressions in people who've never been depressed.
Intense fear, dread and pain, excruciating pain and so on.
Really intense affects.
In fact, the treatment of chronic pain follows the same line of finding that there's a part
of the upper brain stem called the periaqueductal gray, where you can stimulate with higher
voltage electrodes and modulate, I mean, very clinically successfully modulate chronic pain.
But so that's the brain stimulation evidence.
There's also imaging.
The brain stimulation evidence, your examples were only negative affect.
No, you can, you know, positive and negative affect.
Although it is an interesting finding.
In fact, it was recently commented upon somewhere just a couple of weeks ago.
I forget where I read that, that we find more sites in the cortex that generate affect generate
negative rather than positive affects.
But the affects you generate with cortical stimulation barely deserve to be called affects.
And they're more like memories or memories of feelings rather than rather than you get
the widest range and the most intense affects from upper brain, particularly periaqueductal
gray, but at all of those reticular activating nuclei and the diencephalic ones and basal
foregrain ones, you know, just above them.
But then there's also imaging, functional imaging, you image research participants when
they are in intense affective states and where the activation is, is upper brain stem
and the pathways ascending from them.
Interestingly, that includes orgasm, by the way, speaking of positive affects.
But interestingly, the main line medications used by psychiatrists, you know, we don't
often think about this, but they are manipulating serotonin, dopamine, noradrenaline and so
on. And these, these are neuromodulators that the source cells of which are in the
reticular activating system.
So, you know, if these systems were just for the level of arousal, you can see why an anesthetist
might be tinkering with them.
But no, it's, it's the everyday, you know, psychopalm ecological interventions that manipulate
those systems.
So if you take all of those different lines of evidence, you know, the lesions, the brain
stimulation evidence, the functional imaging and the pharmacological manipulations.
On the basis of all of that, I think it becomes more reasonable to speak of these structures
actually being where affect is generated.
It doesn't mean that they are the only structures involved in affect because what they are modulating,
what those arousal systems are modulating is everything else, you know, so they are modulator
systems, which means they're modulating something.
But I think that it's, it's not just a matter of critical of a disruption at a critical
site of a complex functional system.
I think it's a little more interesting than that for sure.
I'd love to get your thoughts on, so Richard just asked a really interesting question.
Well, you made the point that the fact that this particular piece of neuroanatomy is required
for it doesn't mean that that's where it lives.
I'd love to dig in and see what, what does it, what would it mean for some to actually
find the place where something like this lives?
I'm not even sure, you know, what does a positive control for that kind of question look like?
Because, you know, the logic, like we understand the logic, that's not, you know, what the
logical issue there is, but what would a proper answer to that look like?
Because I'm increasingly, you know, and here you get into maybe issues of representation
or whatever, but I'm increasingly becoming convinced that we need to change the way we
think about that question entirely.
As people ask me, you know, where does the information for the Zanibat live and things
like this, you know, where.
So this, this, this issue of things being encoded and specified and represented, you
know, I feel like we don't have actually the right framework for this.
And I'm just curious what, what you think a good answer to that would even look like.
Are you asking me that, Mike?
Well, both of you, I'd love to hear you discuss it.
I'm assuming you think it's a question.
I'd love to hear you talk about it.
So I mean, you could go from the, from one extreme, I mean, like the most profound level
of trying to answer that question, which I won't dwell on because it's above my pay
grade would be, you know, the relational interpretation of quantum mechanics.
It's all a matter of interactions of correlations.
But sticking with what I know, I would answer that by, by reference to the, the, the, the
functional architecture that we are building in that artificial consciousness project.
So are we building a thing with, you know, that that's drops with consciousness in a
center or, or, or, or, or something else.
And of course, it's something else.
So it's a, it's a system that has survival means in the sense that it's, if these quantities
are not kept within viable bounds, the system ceases to exist.
So it's a, it's a homeostatic.
It's a system that has to satisfy as it, as it happens in the one we're working on now,
three needs, which are not orthogonal to each other, but which, which conflict with each other.
So there's a need to prioritize these different needs, which importantly means that they are
categorical variables that qualitatively distinguished from each other.
So the way I think about it is these are, these are valenced.
These are, these are system.
This is an intrinsically valenced mechanism in the sense that there is a goodness and
badness from the point of view of the system, that the goodness and badness only applies
for the system to the system.
What I'm referring to by valence here is that increasing free energy just is bad for the
system from its point of view, because the whole purpose of such a self organizing system
is to continue to exist.
And so it's not only a matter of minimizing free energy, it's also a matter of minimizing
free energy across different categories, which are qualitatively distinguished from each
other.
And how does it do that?
How does the system minimize its free energy?
And it does so first of all, by monitoring all three needs states, in other words, prioritizing
them.
And secondly, and more importantly, in relation to your question, what it's modulating, what
it's using the quantity, these free energy or these factorized free energy quantities
to do, is to optimize its confidence in its current policies.
So a policy which is leading to increasing free energy, or as in terms of that formalism
we're using increasing expected free energy, that is a policy in which it loses confidence.
And importantly, given that I'm talking about affect, it's a policy that is bad for the
system.
This is bad for me existentially, the consequences of my current policy unfolding before me.
And so I reduce my confidence, I lower the precision in this policy, and simultaneously
of course increase the precision in the error signals, issuing from it.
And on this basis, it shifts to a new policy.
So although we're talking about affect in an artificial sense, when I say it's balanced
and it's qualitatively distinctive, that is applied to its active and sensory states.
That's, there would be no purpose in feeling that this is going well or badly for me.
By this, you're referring not only to your current state, but to what you can do about it.
So it's the application that if I sort of may anthropomorph or biologize it, it's
affect applied to deception and cognition.
And then of course learning flows from that to come to your area Richard of great interest.
I mean, that's the basis upon which a very important form of learning can occur, namely
learning within your own lifetime rather than by natural selection, what worked stochastically
and didn't a great expense to large numbers of individuals over that period of time.
This type of learning enables you to learn before it's too late and change your mind.
In other words, adjust your policies and formulate new policies.
So it's a system wide thing, Mike, but each component part of the system is of course
playing its own role.
But you can't, it couldn't play that role if it weren't for its place within the system
as a whole.
But maybe I'm answering your question too stupidly because you guys have come here to
scientists and you know, as I keep telling you, not my field, but that's the way I think
about it.
Mike, can you remind me how you formulated the question?
Yeah, so people often when they see a particular outcome or functionality, the number one question
people always ask is, where is this recorded?
So naively, many expect it to be in the DNA somehow or, you know, where it comes up for
me all the time is shape and behavior.
So, you know, we'll make some sort of a crazy looking thing or a Xenobot or something else.
And people say, okay, great, well, where, where was that written down?
And so, and I keep saying, well, DNA, nothing, no anatomy is written down in the DNA ever.
And so they say, okay, fine, well, then where does it come from?
And I think what they're looking for, and to some extent, it's funny because to some
extent, our work actually offered, has answered some of that in a much more traditional sense
than what's been going on, which is, you know, the standard story is emergence, right?
That it, well, it's nothing's written down anywhere that it's emergence that the local
rules, the lots of things obeying simple rules and voila, you know, something complex.
And so, well, nothing's written down.
And so, and so we've actually found that no, actually, there are biological patterns that
literally a presage and encode what's going to happen later, right?
So we've actually found some of these things, but more fundamentally, I think, you know,
this question of where is it, where is the thing encoded?
There's sort of thinking of a traditional representation, you know, some sort of data
storage and then an interpreter that looks at it and sort of, and some of that I think
does actually exist, but kind of more broadly, you know, I wonder if we have frameworks for
thinking about where do some of these things, what's a good answer to that question, you
know, because, because it naturally, it naturally comes up all the time.
And I eventually, I always eventually end up leaning back on, on mathematics and sort
of Platonic businesses, where's the distribution of primes encoded, that kind of stuff.
But, you know, I don't know if there's a better, I want to know if there's a better way to
think about it.
The, it's related to the, it's, it's, there's a pair of questions, perhaps it's like, where
are the symbols, which is like, where is it written down?
And why did the symbols mean anything, which is how are the symbols grounded?
And there's a, there's a back and forth between those two things, which is slippery and annoying.
Right.
So if you say too much about where it's written down, you know, like this is the gene that
codes for this, and this is the gene that codes for that, and this is the neural correlate
that generates this, et cetera, et cetera, then we end up with a sort of mechanistic
explanation, which doesn't explain the thing that we wanted to explain, which was the how
did that have any meaning, how did that produce consciousness, how did that result, how, what
was it that was doing the interpretation, was that some other machine that was looking
at this machine and all sorts of strange loops like that.
I'm just going to use this way I would.
And then, so that's the sort of, you know, let's, let's, I want to, the attempting answer
to the question, where is this written down is to point to some sort of symbol system that
is recording the information that describes how, how to do that, how that's written down
or what the meaning of it was.
But we also need those symbols to be cashed out into, as Mark was saying, something that
actually does something, that's something that's active, something that's connected to
your senses, something that's connected to your actuators, something that actually does
something in the world that matters to you, that matters to your ability to maintain or
sustain whatever behavior it was we were talking about, or your confidence in your understanding
of the world if we're taking a Fristonian position, or a change in policy.
And my, my feeling about that is that the, these are, it's like levels of description
that there are different levels of, of describing something.
But they're not just descriptive, they're also causal, so they're different levels
of causal frames of reference or something.
So there's a, there's a causal process going on at one level of organization.
And you point to that causal process that going on, you say, look, it's doing this.
And then you say, yeah, but why is it doing that?
Where did the information come from?
And you want, you need to, you necessarily need to step down a level to say, well, you
know, because, because what's that, what that's made of, made it do it, right?
You know, that's, that's just the way, that's the way that those components work when you
put them in interaction with one another.
So why did it end up doing this holistic thing and not some other holistic thing?
Or you want to, you, you end up with answers like, well, because those particular parts
in this particular arrangement couldn't have done anything else, and a mechanistic
understanding, but it's, but then you haven't answered the question of, but why were
those particular parts in that particular arrangement?
They could have been in a different arrangement and done something different.
And the, hold on, it's all, so swimming around a bit, which is perhaps appropriate.
My feeling is that to answer these questions, we need to have a framework where there are
multiple levels of organization, each of which is causal, each of which has a, a mechanistic
process going on at that level of description.
But there needs to be multiple levels of those, and they need to be connected to one
another so that they are not, it's not just that the, if they were too connected, then
the reductionist position would be sufficient of just saying, well, the higher level processes
were entirely determined by the lower level processes, and we don't need to talk about
the high level processes, then they're, they're, they're, they're, they're, they're
were entirely determined by the lower level processes, and we don't need to talk about
the high level processes, they're not really a thing.
Organisms aren't really a thing.
Evolutionary units above the level of genes aren't really a thing.
Mines aren't really a thing, et cetera.
But we don't want those.
So we're, I think we're okay in this small audience with thinking about higher levels
of organization have being causal processes in their own right when we think about them in
terms of error correcting codes and such like that there are, there are feedback mechanisms
happening at that level of organization, which are self-sustaining, which don't particularly
depend on the level of organization below.
So that's a, that's an escape from, from explaining away, right?
So we don't want to explain away these high level organizations, high level causal
processes, the high level causal processes are real in their own right at that level of
description, but we don't want them to be disconnected either.
So there's this slippery in between where we have high level causal processes, which happen at that
level of organization in their own right and are not entirely determined by the level below, but
also they're not entirely separate from the level below either.
Because we're interested in things like how the high level processes orchestrates the behaviors
of the lower level processes and how the lower level processes implement the machinery of the
high level processes.
There are connections between them, but they're not one to one.
And I think that as we, as you move between those scales, the level of indirectness increases
that
a bit like in the layers of a deep learning neural network, that the level of description
between one layer and another only has meaning in so much as itself consistent within that
layer and communicate something appropriate to the layer above and the layer below.
And as you go deeper and deeper in those layers, how the stuff that's happening on the output or
the output input feedback loop at that level, massively under determines what's happening in
the deeper layers of the network, but isn't, but what's happening in the deeper layers of the
network isn't completely undetermined or what's happening in the outer layers, it just gets more
and more undetermined as you go down in levels of organization.
I doubt anybody could disagree with that.
It sounds, I mean, I know you're taking a position which is different from a narrow reductionist
position, but it is really, I think demonstrably true what you're saying, it just has to be so.
Now, I know this cuts to the heart of what you've just been saying now, cuts to the heart of some
of what you're doing and some of what you've been doing with Mike in terms of levels of
individuation, how does, if we start more or less randomly start at the level of the single cell,
the interactions occurring at the level of the cell and then their interactions at the
level of the organ constituted by those cells and then at the level of the organ systems and
at the level of the organism as a whole, and then all the way back down again in both directions,
you know, if you think about it physiologically, it's just patently obvious that what you've
just said is so. But now, because I'm interested in consciousness and in feeling, which as I say,
I think is the most fundamental form of consciousness. I want to throw something into the mix,
which is that I do not, this is a kind of, I'm going to say this as a perfectly statement,
and then comes to the question. And I do not think that it's a matter of
hierarchical emergence. I don't think that's the right frame of reference for thinking about
our mind emerges, or how mind in my subjective sense, in other words, of there being something it
is like to be the system. I don't think that it's a matter of, well, first you have cells,
then you have brains, then you have consciousness arising above the level of brains. It's such
a common way in which people think that in at highest levels of the emergence of the functional
system, of the nervous system, you get bingo, suddenly you have consciousness.
I think it's much more a matter of, first of all, which is not to say this is consciousness,
but it's the prerequisite for consciousness, is you have to take the subjective point of view.
It can only ever be observed subjectively. So it's taking the viewpoint of the system upon
its own states. So that's not a level. That is, what is it like to be the brain? What is it like
to be the cortex? What is it like to be a pyramidal neuron? And beyond. And this is a question that
I've been exploring with Mike and Chris Fields in another forum. And because of your special
expertise in this business of what constitutes an individual, I would love to know what you
will take his on that. Because Mike and Chris have really, I was going to say broadened my mind,
but I think more like blown my mind. So what is your take on that, Richard?
Well, yeah, that's a good question, isn't it? I wish I had answers for you.
I guess I can say something about how not to do it from the field of natural selection
and evolutionary units. So the conventional way that it's done, the Dawkins-esque way of approaching
from Williams before him, is to think about the smallest replicating unit, the smallest
unit that reproduces faithfully. And the obvious problem with that view is that whilst it might
be true that those small units get to replicate faithfully, they weren't the units we were interested
in, the higher level organizations that were, well, the question is whether they were manifested
by those genes or whether they were orchestrating the behavior of those genes for the purposes of
their higher level persistence. There's been lots of people trying to talk about, you know,
if I put a bunch of replicators in a bag and select on the bag in which circumstances can I
reasonably call that collective a new evolutionary unit and not just some sort of context in which
the smaller evolutionary units were being selected, if that question makes sense, right?
When is selection on the whole different from the sum of the selection on the paths?
When is the product of natural selection acting on the whole different from
the sum of natural selection acting on each of the paths?
And you can see people getting all bent out of shape in that area in the same
sorts of ways that they get bent out of shape about that in neuroscience and in developmental
biology as well, I think. So I have at least one thing to say about that. So if you want the
effect of selection on the whole to not be decomposable into the sum of the selection on
the paths, then the relationship between the character on the whole and the character on the
parts needs to be a nonlinear separable function like X or if and only if. It can't just be a
nonlinear function like you get an extra bang for your buck, you get a sort of nonlinear
synergy or diminishing returns or something like that. The relationship between the character of
the parts and the character of the whole, I mean, it obviously can't just be linear or additive,
but it can't be sort of simply nonlinear that still remains a nonlinear separable function.
It has to be that still remains a linearly separable function. It has to be a nonlinear
separable function. And that means that, well, the reason that that's important is because that
means that there isn't any character that a part can have that can explain the fitness of the part.
Instead, there can only be combinations of characters that collectives of parts can have
that can explain the fitness of the parts. So to make, to crudely, right, to make, if you want to
know what this input has to do to make the X or output true, there isn't any value that this input
can have that makes the X or output true. That's only a function of itself and the other input.
That tells you what it needs, what they need to do in combination to make the X or output true.
But if the parts are going to get access to the fitness differences that are created by that
interaction, then they have to control the interaction. They can't just be static things.
They have to be things which interact and communicate with one another in order to figure
out answers to policies like, okay, well, if you're going to be plus one, I'll be minus one,
and if you're going to be minus one, I'll be plus one. So we need to, I need to know what you are
and you need to know where I am and I need to respond to what you are and you need to respond
to what I am. We need to do this little dance in order for us to satisfy that non, that non
decomposable product at the higher level of organization, which in evolutionary terms means
there needs to be a developmental process. The developmental process is where that communication
happens between the parts that creates a whole, which is a non decomposable function of the parts.
And the parts can't just be, the fitness of the whole can't then be decomposed into
the fitness contribution that this part made plus the fitness contribution that that part made,
right? Because if you can do that kind of a decomposition, then the whole wasn't anything
at all. So you have to have that developmental process that computes and a collective phenotype
from the collection of particulate phenotypes that you had. And that computation needs to
compute a non-linearly separable function like a deep neural network does, not just like a
perceptron, not just like a shallow network. And then you can have a character that properly
belongs to the collective that can't be decomposed into the fitness contributions of each of the parts.
Now, that's something about sort of what needs to happen and the kind of machinery
that you need to have in order for that to happen. But after you've got that, you start to realize
that the whole, it's reasonable to say that the whole is telling the parts what to do now.
That it's not just that the parts have figured out how to make a whole, but that the whole
is telling the parts what to do. So a simple example in XOR is that a way to calculate XOR
with two hidden nodes is that hidden node one will calculate A and not B. And hidden node two
will calculate B and not A. And then the output can be the XOR of it. But there are other ways to
divide that problem into two hidden nodes. And choosing between one way of dividing it and the
other way of dividing it needs, you need to make that decision, right? We can't, because the other
way of doing it, for example, is well, I'll calculate A and B and you calculate neither
A nor B and then we'll calculate XOR from that, right? And there's no right way to do it. And
which way you're going to do it isn't determined by the correctness of the output. The correctness
of the output doesn't tell you which way to do it. Which way to do it is determined only by
the complementarity of what the parts are doing with respect to one another.
They, you know, they can't discern the output on their own and they can't discern the output,
the correctness of what they're doing with respect to the input output of the system as a whole.
They're only correct with respect to the complementarity of the other parts. And that
complementaryness is something that belongs to the whole. And I think it's reasonable to say that
it's the, it was that the whole is orchestrating the parts to play the roles they need to play
in order for the whole to do the function that the whole wanted to do, right? That that that
responsiveness at that level of organization orchestrates the parts to say, okay, you do A
and not B and you do B and not A and then together that enables us to do this whole thing, right?
So even in that really simple example, I think there's enough there to say
that you're, that a bottom up way of thinking about what's going on there doesn't really explain
enough about what's going on. Is that, does that nibbling at individuality? I'm not,
I'm not sure. I mean, it's obviously at a very low level of description, but it's,
it's the kind of non decomposability that we're reaching for when we talk about emergence
that's that I think is the, the nub of it.
That's, that's very, very interesting. I had an almost,
almost a deceitful thought that occurred, which I will mention before coming to the more serious
question. I was just thinking, given what you were saying about the fundamental part played
in all of this by development and by implication, by learning, given the way that you, that you
think about it. It's amusing that us living systems who are seeking to, to prevent the
ravages of entropy, that in order for us to do this negentropic work, there has to be an arrow
of time if there's a, if there's a learning process. And so that was the semi-deceitful
thought. So in biological science, we have another derivation of the arrow of time, which,
which is in fact resisting the second law rather than derive from the second law.
But more seriously, I mean, everything you say makes perfect sense and it makes formal sense,
forgive the excess light in this room. But away from the light mark.
Let's, let's, let's return to, to my level of, of work. So what you're saying makes perfect
sense from, you know, soul to organ to organ system to organism. It also makes perfect sense
in terms of at least the group, you know, I don't know about the species. I don't know if there,
if there is, if there's work being done at the level of the species. I think the species might
just be the beneficiary, but certainly at the level of a group of, of, of, of social animals.
There, there are functions that are performed, which are directly
survival of the individual members of the group that cannot be performed by them individually.
They require the group at the, you know, it just sort of unpacking the mechanism you've just described
into a prosaic sort of biological situation. But now to the question of consciousness, does that,
does that mean the group is an individual, first of all? And, and, and, and why do we stop at the
group and not, you know, and not at the level of the species? And, and is there, is there a
meaningful and important way in which the, the group is not an individual in the sense that the,
that the, that the individual phenotype is an individual? You know, that, that seems to be an
immediate kind of question that flows from what you're saying. And I don't know how to, I just have
this sort of ridiculous intuition that there is not a, there's not something it is like to be
a group in the way that there is something it is like to be me.
Oh, you do. You, can I say that back? You, your feeling is that there isn't something that it is
like to be a group in the same way that there is something that is like to be in it.
I would emphasize feeling though, because it doesn't make logical sense. It doesn't make
mechanistic sense. So it is just an intuition, or rather, I should call it to prejudice. I find
that, I find that this is what I mean when I say that Mike and Chris have been blowing my mind is
that I find it very hard to make that leap. I'm sure that sales, your sales say the same thing
about you. Well, and, and, you know, and part of it, and this is this has been hitting me more and
more. And I know that, you know, this isn't the kind of issue that we have. But, but I think that
many folks who think about this really emphasize that what's it like to be in an experiential sense.
And in other words, that the input side of the, of that equation, right. And so we have this thing
called epiphenomenalism where some people think, well, yes, you do have real experiences, but you
don't actually act on anything. But there isn't as far as I'm aware, nobody's proposed the opposite
view. Right. In other words, there's a really symmetry in the emphasis that people put on the
feeling side of it. And I'm, I'm very interested in the action side. And in particular, you know, like,
like, so, so first person and then third person, I've been really focusing on second person,
as in starting out all of this getting going by trying to control by, by systems like cells and
smaller things and so on, trying to say to each other, you should do this, they're trying to
sort of hack each other's behavior. And from that, from that action, so I don't even know what the
vocabulary is, but I would be really interested to, you know, sort of the flip side of, of what a lot
of people mean by qualia, which is that, you know, I'm receiving, I feel it's this, but, you know,
the action side, right? What's it like to do? What's it like to know that you have causal,
you know, active, active causal power in the world and to know what your effectors are and then
there's a, there's, so I didn't say anything about the relationship between individuality,
natural selection and learning in that long little monologue that I did. But I think it's much more
to do with, individuality is much more to do with whether you're a kind of system which can
hold history that affects your future, right, which is by learning, right? Can, are you the kind of
system that can be affected by your past in such a way that you hold history that affects how you
behave in the future? But, you know, not in the same way that, well, I put the chair over that,
in that corner of the room and it stays in that corner of the room and then that affects what can
sit on it later, but it has to be in a, in a non decomposable way as well that the whole is more
than the sum of the parts. So there's a related question Mike that occurred to me from what you
just said about this in contrast to the question, what is it like to be? If you think about it in
terms of, is there something that it is like to be a system that has history like that, that has
memory like that? It's more like the question, the question is, what is it like to have been
a system like that, rather than what is it like to be right now in this moment? And then, so there's
the backwards in time, what is it, what is it like to have been a system like that, to have had those
experiences, to have had those learnings, to have had those, to have had that history, what is it
like to be that, right? And then looking forward is like, how does, how does being a system with
that history affect what you do next in, you know, in the cognitive light cone way of thinking about
it, right? That's a fantastic question.
