there we go. Yeah, it's good to see you guys. I was really looking forward to this. Yes,
me too. Yes, you too, Chris, very good to meet you. Chris, we can't see you. I mean,
it's okay, but just FYI, the cameras. There we go. Okay, that's better. Excellent. Excellent.
Do you guys already know each other? Have you already met before? No. Okay, so I thought
maybe each person take 30 seconds and just give your background and then we'll go from
there. Well, I'm a neuroscientist, Chris, and I was trained in the early 80s and I was
frustrated by how little mind there was those days in what with the most interesting thing
about the brain, namely, its mental functions seemed to be treated in a very desiccated way.
So I took the rather strange step of training in psychoanalysis to immerse myself in a discipline
that took seriously the subjective experience of the mind, and then spent the rest of my
working life trying to reconcile the two, trying to build bridges between, to bridge
the vast chasm between those two disciplines. Since I was limited to 30 seconds, that's the
best I can do. No, that was just a suggestion. Take as long as you want. In recent times, let
me just then add some commentary. In recent times, I've been working on, I mean, I've always, for
obvious reasons, given what I've said, I've always been interested in brain mechanisms of
consciousness. And so in recent times, I became convinced of the view that we shouldn't be using
higher cognitive forms of consciousness as our model example. We should be looking to much more
rudimentary processes, and specifically to the upper brainstem and associated subcortical
arousal mechanisms, which we were always taught are prerequisite for consciousness, but are
themselves devoid of phenomenal qualia. And the evidence just increasingly accumulated to
suggest that that's wrong, that these arousal mechanisms are intrinsically affective, that
they valenced and have affective qualities. And so my view is that if we're wanting to understand,
at a fundamental level, what the mechanisms of consciousness are, at least from a neuroscientific
point of view, we should be starting there with these fundamentally homeostatic mechanisms that
regulate the affectively valenced raw feelings of us biological creatures. That's probably the
dawn of consciousness was when organisms became aware of how they're doing within a biological
scale of values, which is what which is what affects are. And them being relatively simple
things, they become they become computationally tractable. So I became interested in the free
energy principle and active inference framework more generally, in terms of trying to see can we
define mechanistically the fundamental mechanisms whereby feelings are generated. And then very
recently, I've become involved in a project where we're trying to engineer such a system, a system
that has rudimentary feelings. So that's a that's a probably a fuller account of what I'm up to.
Wow. Well, I'm a I was originally trained as a physicist. And then became a got my degree in
philosophy. And then worked to went to work on the human genome project. So I'm sort of a elapsed
physicist, elapsed philosopher, and a lapsed molecular biologist, all together. And spent spent
a long time in the private sector and out of it, not doing any science at all. And then one, one of my
motivations actually, back into this crazy game was Tomasio's book. And I have to admit that I read
your frontiers paper from a couple of years ago, sort of to find out something about you. And it was
one of those papers that I was able to say yes, yes, every couple of paragraphs. I really appreciate
your point of view and what you were saying about basal awareness, which all seems completely correct
to me. And what what I've been doing recently is trying to understand the free energy principle in
terms of fundamental physics. And in Carl's group, they're using classical statistical physics. And I've
been working with some colleagues to try to understand it using quantum theory. And we're doing this, in part
because we're all interested in the emergence of space time. And this idea that space time isn't
fundamental. And that it's a product of some sort of information processing. And the free energy
principle is a theory of information process. So and we as as organisms find ourselves embedded in space
time, but we also have to measure space time, we have to measure time, and we have to measure geometry, and we
have to measure distance. And so we have to have the perceptual and cognitive wherewithal to do all of
that. And when one starts to try to describe those computations physically, they seem to provide all you
need to to generate at least an apparent space time. So it's, it's straddling the border here between
biology and cognitive science and physics, which seems like a fun place to be. And Mike and I are very
interested in this notion of having an account of things that's completely scale free, that operates in the
same way. From the micro scale, however you want to define that, up to a macro scale that includes not just
organisms, but communities of organisms, ecosystems, biosphere like entities. So we're very interested in
consciousness and cognition as collective phenomena that appear at larger scales, because they're also implemented
at smaller scales. And the smaller, the interactions of the smaller scale entities, implement the capabilities of the
larger scale entities.
Thank you. I, well, let me say what I should have said that the very outset, Mike, I'm very grateful to you for
for facilitating this meeting, because, I mean, who else in the world would you want to talk to than people who
are interested in things like that? It takes me back to my youth. I mean, really, when you're when you're a kid, you
think about these big questions in a naive sort of way. And then you gradually get it beaten out of you by your
professors, you know, that you shouldn't ask questions like that, they're bad for your career. And then, you know, there
comes a point where you sort of end up back where you started. The problem is that it requires one to dabble in fields
which are not one's own. I mean, it's clear from all three of our backgrounds that we found it necessary to straddle
different fields and to immerse ourselves in them properly. But in recent years, I found myself having to having to
immerse myself in fields that are, you know, that I've come to late in life. So when you describe your, your, your starting
points, you know, I often rue the fact that I didn't study physics deeply. And I now find myself really feeling like an amateur with
all of the nervousness that comes with that, you know, that you sort of, you sort of feel that you're not qualified to make
observations. And this is why it's so gratifying to hear you saying things like what you've just said. Because
you know, that's intuitively one feels just everything you've just said must be true. It must be doable, must be possible. And this is the
way one should be thinking about these fundamental questions. So this is also why it's great to meet you so that I can, I can
interact with, you know, with, I can, I can get around my own deficiencies by collaborating with and communicating with people who
do not have the same sets of deficiencies as I do. It's really what you're saying is fantastically interesting. And I've read your papers,
recent papers, and, and especially the ones that you've done together. And it's, it's, it's sort of amazes me and alarms me at the same time,
because it makes me realize, you know, compared to my colleagues, just just by going down to the levels I've gone to, in other words, the
levels of biological mechanisms at the, at the, at the brainstem level, and speaking seriously about consciousness in terms of
these fundamental body regulating mechanisms. So and that's, that already puts me deeply out of step with, with most of my
discipline. But then when I met Mike, and, and became acquainted with the work that you guys are doing, I realized that, you
know, that isn't nearly basic enough, the level at which I was thinking. And so it's sort of, as I said, breathtaking and scary at the
same time to realize, oh my God, I'm going to have to go even further away from where my peers are. But shit, you know, why not?
Life is short.
Yeah, I would say that not only are probably most neuroscientists not interested in basal cognition. And I think people like, you
know, Christoph Koch, for example, are kind of deeply uninterested, even in the idea of most physicists aren't particularly
interested in consciousness or awareness or are saying anything in a language like that, and would, would like if they possibly
could to get away from the idea that physics involves observers, or that science involves observers, you know, this attraction to the idea of
describing everything from the point of view of the eye of God, or whatever you want to view it as, is very deep within the field.
Yes.
Yeah, and it's clear that that's where the trouble begins, you know, as soon as you try to write out of the script, where the phenomena are registered as phenomena, you know, you, you're on a hiding to nothing, it can't work. And you end up with, with absurdities like the hard problem.
Yes.
Yes.
And so tell me, are you, are you sympathetic with John Wheeler's interpretation.
Yes.
Yes, actually,
I, for some reason, received a preprint of his paper is physics legislated by cosmogony, which was the first paper where he used that diagram of the universe looking at itself.
And I came upon this when I was still in high school.
And that had sort of a deep effect on me, not expressed for a long, long time.
But yes, he's, I think he's the one person who everybody in the field respected so much that he could get away with talking about all of these issues very openly.
And what has happened to his standing in, is he star rising again in theoretical physics, or is he still a relatively marginal figure?
I think his, his, his star is very high in the quantum information community and quantum computing community, because they, they all in some way view information processing as fundamental.
So this idea that the fundamental ontology is an ontology of information, or of information exchange is, I think, deeply attractive in that community, even if people don't want to or just aren't equipped to.
Pursuance philosophical implications very deeply.
But people like.
Lease Mullen or color of valley.
They're, they're more popular writings are, are touching on those issues so.
That's good to see.
Yes, I noticed that Revelli recently, after having said, you know, very deflation saying things like you know a physicist know nothing about consciousness we can't comment on these things that more recently I'm only familiar with his popular writings, but I see more
more recently he's, he's realizing that this sort of what what he's calling a relational interpretation of quantum mechanics that this speaks directly, very, very directly to the point that that we are discussing now.
And so it's good to know that that that it's not only in popular circles that that that sort of ideas game interaction.
Well, and I think Carlos kind of the, the poet laureate of quantum information at this point, in terms of writing very eloquently about it.
I see that also in recent times, Carl is no longer shying away from speaking of, you know, as sentient machines and and of us have been possible for us to, to reduce all of this to, to something engineerable, which leads me to the question that I wanted to ask, which is, you know, the, the, the, would you
agree that the where we have to go in terms of trying to, you know, because it's all well and good to have to interpret these things in this way but where we have to go is to engineer something is to be able to, you know, it's it's like, I like that.
That's a statement from from Feynman's blackboard about you know, if I can't create it I don't understand it.
I feel that this must be, you know, if we're on the right track, we must be able to produce consciousness. We must be able to produce something that feels like a
something that is not biological that where we've actually been able to engineer it.
Before I ask my next question, do you agree with me that that's, or do you think that that's not not the best way to proceed in terms of trying to trying to demonstrate the validity of this way of thinking.
Yeah, I, I would say that it's either engineer something and then one is faced with the problem of convincing other people that it has the phenomenal properties that one one claims that it should have.
Or even that it says it has the other route that seems maybe equally plausible to me is to convince ourselves that we've already done it.
The other route that seems maybe equally plausible to me is to convince ourselves that we've already done that in some sense.
And one still has the convincing and explaining problem to do. And there doesn't seem to be any way around the latter problem.
And I suspect that the solution to that will be generational, not argumentative.
But yeah, I agree. It's certainly a strategy very much what it's pursuing.
And what you say there about it being generational.
I think that that might well be so the, the, because certainly there's been a sea change, I mean in very recent years, young people don't seem to be at all dismayed at the serious talk about about a sentient
change of things. And, you know, and in the media recently I see there's been since this lambda thing there's been a whole flurry of talk about it and it doesn't.
I mean it really was just a few years ago you were immediately considered slightly mad, slightly nutty, you know, if you're involved in this sort of project.
And I also very much agree with what you just said about what ultimately comes down to the problem of other minds, which is a kind of an impossible problem.
You know, how do you demonstrate subject the existence of subjectivity objectively, and how, how on earth does one do that.
Two kind of thoughts on this question one is I, it always seems strange to me that people who find this this perspective, you know impossible or unpalable.
I wonder if, if, whether, whether people don't read science fiction anymore, if that's what it you know me is that what it is, because it seems that this has been addressed for many decades ago when, if you are confronted with something
that shares, you know, let's say an exobiological agent of some sort that shares no mechanistic lineage with you know evolutionary lineage with you.
If you're not prepared to take interaction evidence as as evidence.
What else are you going to do right if you can't look for the frontal cortex and see if it looks like a human. What do you have left and, and, and you know this was this was addressed in in sci fi a long time ago that really, you know unless you're
prepared to say that only humans right only things that look like us get to have this magic stamp on them. It seems it seems completely ridiculous not to be open to to novel embodiments right for this kind of thing it's just, I just I just don't get it.
I think I think in terms of this convincing thing I think that's very important to me this dovetails with the problem of what is it that what what one thing that makes theories of consciousness different from all other theories and why what makes it
a problem is that it's not at all obvious what those what format those theories would make a prediction it right so theories of physics of behavior you know what the you may not know the answer yet but you know what format it's going to be it's
going to be some numbers some observables about this and that what kind of answer is a proper theory of consciousness supposed to give never mind what will the answer be but just like what will it be and I think I think the closest we can get to this.
And maybe this has something to do with being able to convince others is that I think what theories of consciousness ought to output our protocols not measurements but protocols for making the recipient or the conversation partner.
Feel the same state that they feel, in other words, some sort of art or some kind of, you know, some kind of output that we in order for you to understand what I feel I'm going to produce some some something that when you take it as input, it will put you in a similar
state and then we have a shared right so I you know this is all very very fuzzy still but but it seems to me that that's the only way to to.
It's not going to be third third person objective numbers or facts are ended none of that will do what might do is putting yourself into the same state relevant state that I'm in.
You know, then we can share something right so so I think it's going to be and in that in that tame paper, I sort of try to do that progressively right slowly where there's the objective thing where I study your brain and sort of have some idea of what's going on but really just behavioral data really
But eventually you can sort of take out the middle man right and take out the the electrodes and fuse us together and eventually just really fuse the brains together the way that the hemispheres are fused together and different different degrees of that connectivity might allow us to share
to gain evidence of consciousness from a first person perspective, not some kind of third person measurement, I think that's about the only hope we have, I think.
So, an idea that came to me here listening to both of you is provoked by a recent paper from car hard Harris, looking at the effects of different hallucinogens on the construct of nature relatedness.
And the, the gist of his paper was that the psilocybin use consistently correlated well with nature relatedness, but whereas other psychedelics didn't.
But this, this I think may be an aspect of this generational change in that nature relatedness in a sense seems to be going up with the sustainability movement and climate change and all of that and that may be correlated with people being much more willing to
sympathize with the idea that plants are conscious or microbes are conscious or or at least other living things are conscious, but taking nature relatedness to its, its kind of limits involves relatedness to
mountain ranges and rocks and rivers and all sorts of
not straightforwardly biological things.
So it may be that that particular construct may be a useful way to formulate the criterion that you're talking about.
So I know Robin car hard Harris from about 1015 years ago when he was still living in London.
Well he only recently moved over to your side of the pond but I mean I haven't had personal contact with him for a few years, but I remember what you're just saying now reminds me of an experience in my in my misspent youth.
You know, not with Simon but with with LSD of exactly that kind of not thinking but rather experiencing initially that I was, I was in a nature reserve.
I was in South Africa, and I experienced a fact that I and this rock rabbit that was hopping around near me that we were both conscious beings, you know and that they I have a very deep connection with this thing.
And the same you know there was a that that that nature relatedness but then much more interesting was the next step in my trip, which was realizing this didn't stop with the rock rabbit that it applied to the to the grass that it was hopping over, you know and I had a very moving and and affecting
the experience of the truth of the fact, you know that we are, we are all I and these blades of grass, you know, we're of a piece, and the, the bond with with nature.
It was it was really very, a very pleasant feeling but the thing that that I'm reminded of by what you're saying, which I think is the crux of what you're referring to is that it wasn't a thought.
It wasn't an inference it wasn't a deduction. It was an experience it was a direct perception, you know, of the of the fact.
And that's an optimistic view that you have there and I think, but I, I'm, I'm so so so I agree with all of that.
And with what you were saying prior to that Mike, but I'm also dealing with babies, concrete baby steps, because I want to make progress with all of this.
As I'm sure we all do before we die I don't want to wait for the next generation to, to, to wake up.
And, and who knows maybe even realize that we wrote something along those lines long ago. I want to be, I want to be to try at least to, to be part of persuading our colleagues now while we rely.
Because, you know, let's just be frank I mean these are such profoundly important things that affect each and every one of us as scientists and as living beings you know it's to, to, to be able to have the opportunity to engage at a fundamental
level with these questions here and now, I think needs to be gross.
So, that, that little project that I'm, that I mentioned in my introduction that I'm involved with one concrete way. Well, let me tell you two concrete steps that we're that we're envisaging rather than taking so the steps that we're taking
involve engineering this agent, which has, which has basic needs survival needs.
And I hasten to add, as you know Mike, it's not an agent that's embodied in the three dimensional sense of the word.
It's a purely computational agent.
And it's an artificial it's an individual environment that it's that it needs to survive in.
And it has to find the resources.
It's, it's, it needs, it needs to, and these are, of course, ciphers because they can be. So I'm just calling them these names. It needs to breathe.
It needs to find energy resources. And it needs to rest, because it needs to repair a damage to itself as it's banging around, trying to obtain its energy resources and an important part of the design is that these things are, they operate on different
time scales and they compete with each other these needs. So, you know, while you're seeking energy resources which is a relatively resource depletes relatively relatively slowly, you have to breathe all the time.
And it's constantly having to skip to, to states where where there's oxygen, while it's on a longer trajectory toward where it thinks its energy supplies can be found and, by the way, I want to just pause there if you forgive me for a second.
I can't, I can't come up with a better word than the word I just used there, while it think where it thinks its energy resources on and what, what the hell else is it doing other than representing to itself this is where the energy resources are, I think.
I hope that I will find them there in other words it's busy. It's, it's, it's palpating its confidence in the policy as it, as it executes it.
So, so that's the basic idea that it's, it's having to breathe, while it's heading toward its energy resources and bangs into things which, which give it a mark of, you know, there's a waiting of tissue damage, then it needs to rest in order for that to be repaired.
Obviously, while it's resting, it can't be seeking energy resources and all it can do is this oscillatory breathing thing, you know, that's, that's compatible with rest.
And having done that, and mastered that environment, we then change the environment.
In other words, move the energy resources, shift, shift, so that the oxygen supply is not evenly distributed but rather is more available at the one end of the, of the environment than the other.
We've also created a little hill where it's able to, it's able to disambiguate, am I in epoch A or epoch B. And so it also has to learn that sometimes exploring is more, is more valuable than exploiting, you know, and all of this sort of thing.
And there's a lot more I could say, I don't want to, I don't want to over egg this you're getting the basic idea, because I want to move on to, to what I was going to say so this is what we're doing.
And what we are envisaging doing next is, first of all, having a conference is symposium of colleagues and I think that, you know, I've just found two of the, of the people that we should invite to this.
We want to have it. I don't know if this will put you off but we want to physically get together, you know, so that we can actually talk to each other and have a drink together and, you know, and, and, and get to know each other.
So just to work out what sort of criteria are we convinced by, you know, what do we think is is what sort of behavior.
I know that what you just said Mike is absolutely true, no behavior. In other words, no behavior or numbers or anything, no objective anything is going to prove that the agent feels like something.
The fundamental claim that that as that those policies in which it has to palpate its confidence, it has to feel it's, there's no other word for that then that it is, you know, it is feeling its way through the problem, by which I mean, objectively stated, you know that this mark of
a registered agent is registering its own states.
It's inferring its own states that these states are, are of existential consequences for the agent, and that there's a goodness and a badness to those states it's intrinsic to those states they are, they are, they just, they just is from the point of view of the system that just is bad as its energy
states are depleting it just is bad as it loses confidence in its policy.
So, where I think you know that is a valence state what else can you call it but a subjective valence state, and then because there are multiple needs.
They are categorical variables they have to each of them be met in their own right, they can't be reduced.
They can ultimately be reduced to a common denominator of free energy, but they have to be treated as categories by these by the agent, because it has to know how am I doing in this.
In other words, these are qualitatively distinctive variables.
They are considering how well and badly it's doing across these different qualitatively distinctive variables, those just are feelings.
And that's what it's using in order to make the decisions that it makes in this bomb DP away.
So, so I'm, I'm, you know, I'm persuaded that when you said earlier, well first of all we have to get over our own inhibition about recognizing we've done it already.
We have done it already and I don't just mean my little team I think that in all sorts of ways, because we're talking about something that varies that that's something that that exists by degrees.
You know, this is a major insight that I have to say, I got primarily from Mike I mean it's obvious and insight as it is that that this is that sentience is something that has to exist by degrees, and that there must be very very very simple forms of
sentience, which, which one has to attribute ultimately to the single soul and beyond.
And, but that to the extent that the agent is making choices, which are rooted in these, what I think you can only call feelings.
In other words, it's, it's, it's, it's monitoring of its own, if it's own needs, its own existential needs across the different parameters that I was just mentioning.
And that to the extent that it is able to make choices which are not given that they are its own, the products of its own cognition.
And that's that are rooted that are ultimately tethered to these to these needs states, you know, I'm, I'm persuaded that such an agent.
It feels like something to be such an agent.
So, so I wanted us to have a symposium where we can look at what this agent doing talk about things that can, but, but really just about how what kind of behavior do we want to see what sort of behavior would we predict if we were to do this what do we think
would happen etc, just among ourselves not trying to persuade people who start from prejudices that you know are insurmountable, so that we can, as a community, relatively like minded people come up with some criteria.
You know, which are at least rational.
You know, if not, if not empirically persuasive they are at least rationally persuasive that that makes sense in terms of those principles for those who, you know, who shared basic assumptions that such a thing is possible.
But then, so that's the one concrete step that you know I very much hope I'll be able to persuade you guys to come over and experience the joys of Cape Town for a week or a few days.
And we'll look after you very well and we'll, and we can talk about these things and come up with a consensus in a statement about about what what what we what we would consider are the kinds of behaviors and
and whatnot that that would convince us at least.
Then the other second thing which goes more to what you were saying Mike. Again, it's a very concrete thing and forgive me for bringing this all down to such concrete steps is that I've been thinking with my group that if we once we've done this, we're saying here we believe the agent is
feeling this. That's how it's doing what it's doing here we believe the agent is feeling that and in relation to thinking this in other words as you know, as it's as the numbers are showing what's happening to the precision waiting in relation to the
current active policy, you know, across the three different needs states and so on.
If it had a feeling at this point it would feel like this to be that agent, then to work with colleagues in virtual reality to create us a virtual reality that we can immerse ourselves in that is basically the same as our agent is confronted
by so that you know we know okay I've got these three needs. I'm monitoring them on the screen, you know and here I'm in this environment and and I'm trying to find the things that I need and deal with the challenges that I'm that I'm confronted with.
Do I feel what we infer the agent would feel. And I know it's artificial in all sorts of ways because we're not literally going to die in that virtual reality.
But you know it's at least empath, it's a it's a little bit more than just empathizing with the system it's a little more literally putting yourself in the system shoes.
And the prediction then which is beginnings of something empirical is to say, I predicted this point, I would feel something along or a human being in this environment will report feeling.
This is feeling better and this is feeling worse and you know this is here I'm losing confidence in this in the subjective meaning of the word.
I don't think it's a very brilliant idea. It's a very concrete idea but I think something along those lines might be might be a way to go.
I think you go ahead person.
I was going to say that in what you describe is very much like a video game type of environment.
And there's loads of available data out there.
Or data, I think that could be collected about how people who immerse themselves in video games, which I've never done actually but feel about what they're doing and interacting with with virtual environments that have those kinds of requirements for for resources for repair, etc.
And I don't know of any literature in this regard, but I expect that it would be data that would be fairly easy to acquire, even with things like physiological monitoring or EEG or things like that as a as a supplement.
You know where some it just occurred to me some some data that might come of this. So, so there are data on people using various prosthetics the kind of extended mind idea right when they you get you get an extra hand or an extra, you know finger or something like this.
But it just occurred to me that in those cases, as far as I know, all of the prosthetics that people use are themselves very low agency devices right they don't do much on their own.
But I wonder if we could imagine having imagine if you're if you're bought is is a prosthetic where we are joined in the right the player in this in this virtual environment is joined to that system, the way that two minds would be joined and in the same sort of biological
and the way that people do immerse themselves in, hey, this, this, you know, this hand that rotates a full, you know, full 360 degrees that's now my hand and that I mean that works perfectly well for her apply with neuroplasticity.
But I wonder if at the other end was another, you know, you could make a temporarily joined agent within that video game where you were you do share a consciousness actually.
Well, a model for that, although it's not quite what you're saying but it's in that direction is the experiments of about 10 or 15 years ago with they still being done but they were introduced about 10 or 15 years ago with the body swap illusion.
And where where the, the, the research participant has has goggles VR goggles, which are onto which are projected, what is seen by the other person through the camera mounted on their for it.
So you experience the world from the point of view of the experiment and in fact it's also been done with mannequins, so that you, you know, and you're perfectly aware that the what the experimental setup is you know I'm Mark Jones, I've got a VR goggles set on my face.
And I, and onto this is being projected what the experiment or the mannequin is seeing, and you, you, you rapidly feel yourself to be the mannequin or to be the experimenter.
You then shake hands with the experimenter, and you, you feel as if you're shaking hands with this guy called Mark songs, you know, you don't feel you are Mark songs, you know you are but you don't feel you are you feel that guys Mark songs and I'm shaking his hand.
And then to your point Chris about about a skin conductance and so on.
If you threaten to stab the mannequin, even though I know I'm not I'm not the mannequin I'm me.
The physiological stress response is greater when the knife is lunged toward the mannequin than it is than when it is toward me which kind of is like kind of objective evidence that I am identified with the spatial embodied the embodied space of the mannequin.
So, yeah, that's very interesting so it's building, building upon that sort of paradigm into this is said that what you experiencing is from the point of view of the agent that is that is that is navigating this environment.
You know, it also occurs to me there's a yeah you said something really important earlier which which was this this bond, you know this concept of bond.
And I think that it addresses both the issue of this kind of like generational attitude shift, and also the attempts to to synthesize to synthetically create these kinds of agents and that's this.
The whole, of course, developing and I mean the roots of it are very very old but but this developing idea of making synthetic companions of various types right ai's that we're going to interact with in various ways.
And one thing that I hear all the time from, let's say, some of my dad's friends and people even you know if my generation to is, I don't want a bond with a synthetic I bought I want to bond with a human.
And I say, I argue back that you don't really want to bond with a human what you actually want, you don't want a human bond which you actually want is a spiritual bond.
That's the question of the okay so now what does that actually mean because I don't think anybody actually cares or knows most people who say that don't actually know what's under your skin and they don't care.
You know, really what the what the physiology and the genetics are.
When you think about what it what is it that you want from a bond right is this somebody you're going to be friends with somebody you might have a spouse somebody you might want to take with you if you're going to Mars like what what is the bond that we want.
These that come to my mind and I'd love to hear what you guys think about this. One is that you need to have a shared existential struggle.
Specifically that all the questions of where do I end and the world begins how do I know what I am where I'm like all of these things that the basic I mean so I think all three of us have spent a lot of time thinking about what happens at the very
beginning when you have this undifferentiated medium whether they'd be cells or neurons or whatever it's going to be. And out of this mass of multiplicity comes some sort of one semi unified agent that that considers themselves and a single thing and separate
from everybody. So what are the, what are the dynamics that lead up to this because it's not obvious you don't upfront know what you are what kind of effectors you have what kind of senses you have.
What is your environment versus where do you stop like you or we don't know any of that upfront we have to develop models of it and so I feel like what we're really looking for is something that has been through that authentic process not something like a modern
where everything is your energy needs are met we know here's the here's what you are here's everything is sort of given to you you've not had that issue.
And so that so that shared existential struggle and a kind of that cognitive light cone that I talk about which is this idea of what types of goals and what spaces and what size of goals can you potentially
work towards you know if there's a huge mismatch it's not going to work right it's very hard to be friends with some it's something that's you know has a bacteria size cognitive light cone.
And I'm sure the reverse is true to right I don't know how you would have that relationship with a cosmic intelligence of this massive light cone that you couldn't even begin to understand what they're doing.
And so that kind of kind of impedance match right between the the goal setting and that and that those that that struggle that that comes from emerging as an individual in the first place.
I think that's what should and so and so all that goes to say I think the, the young people in the future who are going to be surrounded with the kind of agents that that you're talking about Mark and various other things.
That's in the end going to be the criteria and it's not going to be the origin story of where you came from or what's inside of you or any of that stuff.
It's going to be these kind of what can I count on you to do what kind of struggle have you been through what are your goals and then then after that it kind of doesn't matter what your provenance is or what you're made of them then we can you know then then you're real as far as I'm concerned.
I feel like that's going that's where things are moving.
I feel as if I'm probably speaking too much so Chris forgive me, I'll be brief.
I think to two sets of things in different directions, flowing from what you've just said, the one which the other one is a reaction to the one thought is, well, these values.
These shared values, existential values.
You know, of course they are, for want of a better word they arbitrary, apart from the actual existence of the system that that's kind of universal for that that that that's sort of at the heart of the, of the free energy principle I suppose or what Carl calls his particular
context which you guys are building on the idea of, you know, of meanness or fitness or a system as opposed to not system.
Apart from that which seems fundamental. The other values.
Like, you know, I fear, you know, I don't want to be harmed by this thing, or I don't want to be impeded by this thing that makes it into a not me type of thing, as opposed to we're on the same side.
We're in the same boat together.
Your survival is my survival we're a, we're a team we're a group. It's us versus them rather than me versus them.
We're affiliative bonds of that kind in attachment bonding in mammals, for example, and, and, and play, which is a wonderful emotional drive that that all mammals at least, possibly spurred to, you know, share, they all relatively arbitrary it's just you know, because
you know, what kinds of creatures we are.
The, so that was the one line of thought I was thinking well, you know what would be.
We want something fundamental that doesn't reflect our mammalian values or that you know.
And so that led me to this other thought which is that I suppose it's an extremely simple thought that is speaking more formally.
And that justifies your drawing a blanket around you and these other things.
If mechanistically it's justifiable to say that you are that that that your mark of blanket and this other agents mark of blanket can themselves be justifiably blanketed by a meta blanket.
And then you, you are formally describing the state of affairs that you're describing you know which raises the much more sort of reductionist question of what justifies the drawing of a blanket.
Because I've always because I am stuck in the envelope I'm stuck in, you know, I've always I find it much easier to think, yeah, my, my nervous system is is is blanketed.
And that within that, you know, the, the various nuclei are themselves blanketed and within that the individual cells are themselves blanketed and so on I find it easier to realize to feel that I am a composite of blanketed agents which is again something
that you have forced me to see and I have no difficulty seeing it anymore when I say post I mean I was compelled by the, but by the force of your arguments to realize of course that's right.
And, you know, and Carl says the same thing has been for a long time but you know I'd never, but I find it much harder to go in the beyond that as soon as I start myself.
You mean I'm, you know, is there a consciousness that that is shared by all of humanity or all of all living things.
Is there literally a consciousness of all living things that you can speak of as as as an, and you know, and formally I think you can I mean it must.
I mean the whole of natural selection ultimately is just a self organizing system, but I find it harder intuitively to, I want to stop with myself, you know.
Yeah, I think that that's in a sense the flip side of this discussion is what what would be required to make it experientially evident in the way that you were discussing earlier.
So that I am a component of a larger system whose experiences I am not having cannot have and can't even properly conceive of with the with the tools available to me, except perhaps in a very abstract way.
Of course, we have to have this very abstract way to even have this conversation.
But the FEP gives us that abstract way.
I mean, one can from a purely okay Mike is leaving.
Yeah, I do have to go in four minutes but to address the second part of his comment. I would love to carry on. Not today I can't but to arrange a follow up meeting.
You're saying that Chris, that's it, you know, I that's that I agree with that every word of what you're saying. It's, I guess I would just propose adding that to your earlier goal for trying to sort out as an important question.
Well this has been this has been great. Thank you.
Yeah, thank you. Thank you. Thank you so much super interesting. So I will I will I will connect again and we'll we'll make the next part to marvelous.
Thank you again Mike for facilitating it and thank you Chris great to meet you truly great. Yes.
Absolutely. Thank you guys talk to you.
Right.
Thanks.
