How it'll go, but I'm going to try.
So I want to talk about dynamic interfaces and arrangements.
What I'm hoping is, so let me just start actually so I can write.
So what I'm here to do is basically, I'm hoping that there will be some valuable exchange
of ideas.
The stuff that you know is complimentary to the sort of stuff I know.
I've watched about 10 of Mike's talks and interviews.
I've talked with him and Chris fields a little bit.
And what it seems like the work you guys do from what I know of it, it leads to this kind
of unusual worldview about life that a lot of people find surprising.
And yet when I look at it, it seems very natural.
Everything that Mike says in his talks and everything I've talked to Chris about, except
for maybe the quantum stuff, which I don't know that well, the kind of underlying philosophy
is really concordant with the sort of philosophy that comes out of my work, which is just in
trying to philosophically and mathematically analyze what life might be or that sort of
question what organizations in life and that sort of stuff would be.
So category theory is a branch of math and it emphasizes structure rather than quantitative
analysis.
It's not about breaking things down or finding fundamental building blocks.
It's about, it's not about like plays of quantity.
It's about structure.
So like the relations between things and coherence and things like that.
So when you're putting things together, when you understand the basic building blocks,
when you have some building blocks already, how do you put them together and what does
it mean for them to cohere and stuff?
So applied category theory is bringing this branch of math out into the world and hoping
to show in various relational disciplines where you're really, instead of thinking about
numbers of things, you're thinking about quantum, you're thinking about the qualitative and
relationship aspects of things.
That's where it really is designed to work.
So I want to tell you about applied category theory, but specifically in reference to morphology.
Not that I know almost any biology, but just from kind of the philosophy I hear in the
work from coming out of this lab.
So when people think of math, like people often think of number, but I think of mathematical
fields as accounting systems.
So arithmetic is a branch of math, but it accounts for, you can make an account of like the flow
of quantities.
So in finance, you might multiply some numbers because you sold 50 widgets and you might add
some numbers and subtract some numbers and arithmetic is how you write down an account
of what money flowed or how many sheep flowed or whatever.
If you're trying to talk about quantum mechanics, then you need a different accounting system
and you need the accounting system of vector spaces with a way of taking inner products
and looking at angles between things.
And so you need an accounting system called Hilbert spaces.
If you want to account for why certain hands in poker are more likely than others, then
you use a different accounting system with probability distributions and you talk about
what are the legal moves instead of plus and minus what's legal is conditioning or branching
structures and things like that.
So in various fields, you need different sorts of accounting systems and for each one, someone
has invented a mathematical field to make that sort of account.
If you want an account of phenomena, what you need is like when I point at the board
and say, where was at the spreadsheet and say, where did this $12.83 come from?
You need to be able to talk in the high enough fidelity language that you can answer that
question in a way that I get.
So if I want to make an account of elementary particles, what sort of language do I need?
Well, I need some high fidelity language where one person can point to something and say,
hey, how do you account for this?
And so we need to be able to track certain aspects of say quantum mechanics or finance
or probability and throw away other ones.
We don't want to know what brand of deco cards you're using.
We just want to know how many face cards there are and stuff like that.
So certain type differences like face cards versus number of cards, you do want to track
and you want to be able to kind of track the relevant type differences there, like what
sort of thing we're going to be talking about and how they and then you want to be able to
talk about operations like plus and times or conditioning or inner product.
And so for each accounting system, there's sort of what you want to track and then what
sort of operations you can do to it.
And that's what a mathematical field is.
It's kind of telling you the what and the kind of structure, the stuff and the structure
and the properties, I guess they say sometimes of that you're going to be dealing with.
So category theory is a branch of math.
So it must be according to my definition, it must be an accounting system for something.
And what it's accounting for is or what helps you make an account of is that things that
you can build structures, that structures exist in a coherent like you can build blueprints
of buildings, that's a structure, but it's also about just building mathematical structures.
And so the fact that there are structures that we can we can build is what category
theory helps you take account of.
And so I often hear Mike talking about analogies and the importance of them.
And so what those are are similarities in structure across different content domains.
So although the content is different, my love is like a red, red rose, like a rose and
your love are not the same sort of content, but there's some kind of analogy there.
And so making similarities of structure into formal objects is what category theory is about.
So it's been useful in math and computer science and physics and material science and linguistics
and a whole bunch of places, places where you're concerned with structures and analogies
between structures.
So the driving question of my research is basically just to kind of aim right at the
center of this moment in some sense.
So we have this incredible world before us.
We have amazing forms of life from cells to humans on earth.
You also have the built world where we have transportation systems and computers.
We're on zoom right now.
We have language that I'm able to speak to you and you're able to speak back, which is
like systematic presentations of knowledge through slideshows or whatever.
We have morality, like rules of thumbs for how to live together and all of these things
in our world evolved through the push and pull and struggle of living.
So all of all these ideas I'm having and telling you about and things I'm hoping to hear from
you afterwards came because we've tested our ideas on each other, but same with morals.
We tried different moral systems.
We see where we've gotten and we've tried different life forms and we've seen where
we've gotten.
And I'm kind of interested in how that structure could be written down.
Like what of that?
What could we throw away and what could we keep?
What could we track to understand what's going on with all that?
So how do these systems develop?
Like how can we talk cleanly about them in one common language?
Words like evolution, words like niche, like what should these words mean?
Can we make accounting systems that are tight enough and high fidelity enough that we understand
each other and can like really test each other's accounts and stuff?
And maybe we could use that same language to engineer new systems.
So you might, and you might want to know like what constitutes a health of a system?
What makes it sustainable and gives it a sense of direction?
I'd want to be able to account for words like health or morality or something in this accounting
system without having to say, here's what the answer is, but instead letting different
people tell about their view of these things and account for it in terms of, in mathematical
terms, just to be able to make the account whether or not we agree that it's the correct
one.
It's at least holds up.
So like when I check your finance report, I may not know whether the numbers are right,
but I can at least see that they add up, that the liabilities and the assets add up to the
same thing.
So the part I'm going to discuss today is a potential accounting system for these sorts
of things.
I'm not going to actually give an account.
I'm going to just say what sort of system I think an account could be given within.
And so the subject of this talk is dynamic interaction.
So what am I trying to account for?
I'm trying to account for things like morphology and behavior, where you've got little systems
interacting to form a bigger system.
And the interaction structure itself is changing through time.
So the way the different cells are interacting now might be different than the way they're
interacting later.
And in the same sense, the way you and I are interacting now is different than we were
interacting 20 minutes ago when there was zero interaction.
So things come in and out of interaction, and when they're interacting, they're affecting
each other.
And so that's kind of what this mathematical language is supposed to do.
So in some sense, much of this talk will be a case of its own subject matter or some
kind of recursion here.
So I'm interested in the development of life and stuff like that.
But in particular, we are kind of hanging out together right now.
And so in science, the way science develops, which is affecting life, is that there's interaction
between fields.
And so right now, we are having this interaction between fields, between different people in
different fields.
And so there's a communication happening.
We're affecting each other's internal state.
So there's some dynamical systems of you and me.
And this is like a real-time case of development of things or of ideas.
So the concepts described in this talk should be kind of about the talk as an interaction.
So in other words, I guess I'm going to pause just to hear if this is making any sense or
if you have any questions so far, that the math I'm talking about is supposed to talk
about how what's happening right now affects us and leads to the development of structure
and that I'm trying to find an accounting system for that.
So let me just see if I can pause and look at your people here to see if this is making
any sense.
I don't know if I can see anyone.
So first, can you see us?
I can't see you.
So I guess I'll stop sharing for a second.
It's fine.
So if what you're describing is more about, for example, would not necessarily capture,
let's say at some point you say something, your next slide is incredible.
And all of a sudden, everything that you want to convey is like boom in my head and I get
it now.
Is the math that you're trying or the system that you're proposing, would it capture that
sort of internal realization or more about what was happening roughly around that time
in terms of?
It would capture.
So we will be able to say in this accounting system that I output certain things, a slide,
and that you are close enough or in an arrangement with me, and I'll be talking about this, we
are arranged together in Zoom such that you received that thing and that that thing that
you received updated your internal state in such a way that was kind of put you in a new
part of state space that you never left again for 50 years or whatever.
In other words, that something about your interaction with the world was refined so that when you
interact, you no longer were random in a certain dimension, you were refined in that
dimension.
Okay.
So then the accounting system would then need to cover the arrangement, kind of what was
passed between us, but also the internal state of all the pieces.
That's right.
Okay.
Yeah.
And the fact that like sometimes our arrangement changes, like maybe you found that so compelling
that you moved to Berkeley and, you know, or maybe you didn't, right?
And then it didn't change how we arrange in the future.
And so that's sort of what you said was right on.
Yeah.
Okay.
Should I go back?
Any other questions?
I'm happy to pause here.
Okay.
We'll continue.
So I'll just continue.
I guess I have one last question.
Is in what you're going to propose, will it cover it all?
Let's say we're in this interaction, soon you'll be done and I'm going to go have my
lunch and 20 minutes, you know, and 20 minutes into my lunch, I update my internal state
kind of based on my thinking after this has happened.
So how would such a system track kind of like self, you know, rumination or something, you
know, as I'm thinking to myself, how could I possibly, if it was separate enough, maybe
it's in two weeks that all of a sudden something you said, like, how would you track that type
of internal interaction?
Right.
So somehow you seem to store this interaction.
I don't really know what the hippocampus is, but you store it, you know, somewhere where
it's like not really processed yet, maybe on a sheet of paper.
And it's not really processed.
But then later you look at that region of your brain or that part of the paper and something
else is active in you at that moment that like uptakes what was in that hippocampal region
or on that paper, such that it now affects you in this deep way.
But yeah, that's the sort of thing I want to be able for someone to be able to give an
account of in this system.
And yet I don't have like a precise like mathematical account of what you just said, like what what
a storage region might look like, what the difference between storage region and active
region is stuff like that.
Yeah, the reason I ask is I I think also some of us come from information theory.
So what I think about information processing, I think of like, you have to be able to store
stuff, share stuff, and then things will need to be transformed for any of it to be somewhat
useful or meaningful.
So I'm trying to think kind of put together my internal state with what you're presenting
to see how these things come together.
Yeah.
And yeah, so that's the sort of thing I would want to be able to talk about.
And yet I won't be talking about that exact thing today.
Okay, cool.
Right, so maybe one thing that's might be related to that is that I think compression
and elaboration play a big role.
So we compress our past into a form that we can elaborate in the present, like you've
compressed, say, ways of thinking about the world into this information theoretic thing.
And then you try to elaborate it here in front of me and maybe maybe there's some uptake
and maybe there isn't.
And in the same way DNA and DNA compresses information about who died and who thrived
and it compresses it to a language.
And that language is elaborated in the cell and the ribosome to create, you know, a new
body that follows those prescriptions of what's successful.
Theory itself is a compression of past experience into language.
So that's what these slides are.
And then I'm going to elaborate them in the present.
And now the experience of interacting with you gives feedback and selection pressure
on that theory.
So how good is the information theoretic point of view?
How good is the category theoretic point of view in the presence of the other person?
That's kind of what, that's one thing.
So experiment and experiment, people think about happening in math, in biology, and maybe
they don't think about experiment happening in math, but I think experimentation does
happen in math.
And that is that in math, you're trying to articulate and compute things.
You want to be able to speak clearly, carving nature at its joints, and that's what I mean
by articulate.
Then you want to be able to kind of run processes.
And so we value a formalism F if it makes the expression or articulation and the computation
easy.
So for example, I don't value Roman numerals very much because XIV times VI, like that,
I don't feel like I'm really expressing very well, I also don't feel like I can compute.
So that does the product of those, I have to turn them into Hindi Arabic numerals where
I get to like think of 14 as, you know, 10 plus four and use a distributive law of addition
and multiplication to like figure out that you get 84.
And so if you try to make a program that just takes you from XIV times VI to LXXXIV, it's
really hard to see what you would do.
But so the experiment in math is like, how workable is this?
And today, I'm going to tell you the results, you know, I'm going to tell you this language
that experimentally works super well, and theoretically works super well.
I'm just going to tell you that I've done some experiments and that it's like very workable,
and that doesn't mean that like, and then there's just usually in math, I have to prove
it to somebody, but because I'm not talking to mathematicians, I'm not going to prove
anything to you guys, I'm going to tell you that like the chili tastes good, you know,
in the chili taste cookoff point of view of science, like how good or how good does it
feel to use this?
I'm going to try to convince you that this experimentally is like Hindi-Arabic numerals,
that it works really well.
So that's the sort of value claim I'm making about what I'm going to discuss today.
So the plan for the talk will be, I'm going to talk about kind of this interaction on
Zoom here with you guys and how that's a presently available case of the thing I'm trying to model,
which is interaction between systems and the way they affect each other.
Then I'm going to give a whirlwind tour of what the math actually looks like.
I'm not really expecting you to understand it, I'm more expecting it to kind of wash
over you in a way that like you see I am addressing the things I'm claiming to address, and maybe
just the first sense of what the math looks like.
Then I'll talk about some existing applications and open questions and then I'll briefly
conclude.
So right, so here we are on this call together, what's going on with that, how can we start
thinking about this?
I want to break it into three structures, which are interfaces, dynamics, and interaction.
So each one of us on this call has an interface, and what I mean by that is what we can express
and what we can take in, kind of what's on the surface of the cell.
So for me what I can express is words out of my mouth and you can see my facial expression
but you don't see other parts of me.
So in terms of the interface, there's what I'm expressing out to you and there's what
I can take in and unfortunately on Zoom right now I'm not actually seeing anything.
If you interrupt with voice I can hear you but I'm not seeing any faces.
That could have been different but it isn't.
So now there's the interfaces, there's my interface and your interface, and then each
one of us has dynamics which is like my internal brain state, body state, and how that updates
based on what I'm seeing.
So I'm seeing in front of me this screen and I'm able to press buttons to like affect
the screen and that affects my, what's happening inside my mind, my body.
And finally the third thing is interaction which is that you can affect me and I can
affect you.
And if you turn your speakers off I will not be able to affect you anymore or if you leave
Zoom.
So the interaction is the way that my outputs or my expression gets into you as inputs and
how your expression gets to me as inputs.
And right now this is a bit feed forward because I'm not hearing any voices but earlier it
was more interactive and that affects kind of what flows between us and therefore how
our internal state flows.
And so we draw boundaries around things and we modularize by nested reference frames.
So I'm going to talk about nesting where you have littler systems inside of larger systems,
you might have atoms inside of molecules, you have proteins inside of cells and organizations
inside of societies, and I'm interested in how these nest, how you build larger systems
from smaller ones, but this math is again not numerical, it's structural.
So we're going to see how it manages these interaction reference frames and lets different
dynamical systems housed in different interfaces talk to each other.
So just like geometry is about shapes, category theory is about structure, neither of them
really is about number.
So we're talking about the structure of interaction and what's going on with how interfaces and
dynamics and stuff go together.
So right now we've got, right, I want to be able to talk about cells and tadpoles and
us.
Soon I'll talk about what an interface is as a mathematical object called a polynomial
functor.
It's a big word that you don't have to know anything about, I'll tell you about it and
again it might just wash over you but you'll see that there's math about interfaces.
Right, so, but I want to be able to talk about this stuff in a way you'll understand.
So since I don't have any tadpoles and I don't know anything about tadpoles, I'm going
to talk about us.
So ourselves in the zoom call, each of us can do certain things and receive certain things.
So from now on blue, I think I've coded it so that blue is like outward expression and
green is inward incoming stuff.
So we can outwardly express some stuff and we can take in things and that's what I mean
by interface.
And I'm going to call these positions and forces that we express ourselves through positions
and we are affected by forces.
And if I put a force on your body, that's actually a force but I'm also considering my voice
to be like a force that's moving you through your internal state space.
So when I say, you know, some, if I said a curse word right now, it might force you into
like some weird part of state space that like was unexpected.
So I want you to consider like an attitude of my body, like what I'm doing with my hands
or whatever sounds coming out of my mouth as a kind of position I'm in, my larynx is
in varying positions and that as my voice box changes position, it affects you.
And your inner states and my inner states, they're outwardly expressed as those positions
and then the world impinges on you or directs you or moves you by what I'm calling forces.
So those are just outputs and inputs if you like.
But one thing about this formalism that I think is important is that what your body
can receive in a given moment depends on your position.
So this is, you could have it be independent.
You might be the sort of thing that always receives, you know, a single bit stream.
But it could also be that when your eyes are open, you're receiving a bit or a million bits.
When your eyes are closed, you're receiving no bits, say.
It could be that when your car goes through a tunnel, your input sensorium is smaller
than when your car is in the open because of GPS.
And I think relevant maybe to you guys is like, if you're a caterpillar one day and
a butterfly another day, then like the position that your body is in, like the sort of way
you're expressing outwardly a shape, affects what sort of sensorium you might have.
It may be that the butterfly actually receives a different type of signal.
It's R to the million versus R to the 10,000 of a caterpillar.
So that's the sort of thing I want to be able to do that like if I mute myself or I, if
I change what my zoom position is doing, you will be like what I'll receive and send will
be different.
Even what I receive will be different if I turn off my screen and things like that.
So that's the sort of thing I want to enable with this accounting system is the ability
to like when a protein folds or a cell is in a certain shape or a, you know, hedgehog
is curled up.
It's just not receiving as much as when it's open.
That's what I want.
I want my accounting system to be able to do that sort of thing.
Okay, so you output forces positions, you receive forces, the force or the sensation
you have or the input, whatever we want to call it changes your internal state.
And that new internal state is outwardly reflected that it's a new position at which point you
may have a brand new sensorium as you metamorph into something else.
And this repeats over and over.
It's just kind of this constant dynamics and that's what we mean by dynamical system.
But then where do these forces come from?
Well, they come from the interaction.
Maybe you're just in an enclosed box and like as you buzz around, all you hear is your own
closing, but still there's some interaction between you and the enclosure in that case.
And here there's you and me and we're, my outputs are becoming your inputs and that's
happening through the arrangement.
So zoom arranges it so that my outputs get to you as inputs.
And as you receive what I say, your body shifts or you might say something in the microphone
and that's your output.
So maybe I'll pause at the end of this slide just to see if there are questions.
So the way this works, like the way you receive from me and I receive from you is based on
this arrangement that we call zoom.
And this program is arranging it so that my, I can input your output and vice versa.
In fact, I'm a little bit sad about zoom right now because my input is, oh, wait, I can press
this button.
Oh, I can see you guys, if I just press the right button.
Oh, cool.
Hello.
And so now I'm our interaction with the program.
I just changed the arrangement so that I'm now, yeah, that's really great.
So I just, this is an instance of what I'm talking about.
I can do something with my output and that will change the arrangement so that I'm receiving
different things than I was before.
Okay.
So maybe I'll pause for questions.
I assume for like a nested system, everything you've presented would just apply again and
again and again and again.
That's right.
Okay.
The map is designed to make that move very, very easy.
Okay.
Yeah.
I guess a related question is there seems to be a preferred scale here.
So we as human agents are the elements of the set or the category, whereas you could
take an even more reductionist approach and talk about or the positions of our atoms.
Yeah.
But you're not doing that.
So I guess.
Oh, yeah.
So from a high level theory, and if you do the nesting, could the theory change, could
the structure of the theory change?
No, that's the, that is the point is that the structure, I don't want to ever deny you
origins is what I call it.
Like whatever level you're on, you're allowed to zoom in to the lower level if you can produce
what's inside of there.
So if you know what's going on in your cells and you can say that that stuff is what's
causing what's going on in your organs and what's what's going on in your organs is causing
what's going on in your tissues, then you can use the theory to like zoom in.
So the point is that the same theory applies at all those levels.
In other words, the vocabulary words I'm giving you access to are going to make sense, no
matter what level of discussion you want to want to be at.
And I call it a reference frame that we are talking on the human level right now.
That's actually an interesting perspective because the traditional view is that the language
of atoms and molecules and genes are very different from human level language.
So I would expect that there is no such thing as a scale free theory.
Free scale has its own theory or the most efficient theory.
Yeah, so there's the theory of what sort of dynamical system you want.
Maybe at the very low level, you want some kind of Lagrangian or Hamiltonian guiding
how the system develops.
Whereas at our level, we want to talk about emotions and like what you just said made me
feel and how that affects what's going on.
And so the account itself are going to be very different.
The accounting system, which are that there are going to be interfaces like the molecules
or atoms have some way that they can be affected by the world and there's some way that they
have can be in positions that they have internal state, maybe like what quantum something,
something or spin there in or whatever, that sort of thing is persisting through all the
levels.
We do use analogous like words like state or or interface or we can I can present you
these words and I think they will persist throughout the different levels.
So it's like saying everything can be mathematically models, the same kind of mathematical structure
that the perfect parameters are the values.
Exactly.
Yeah.
So category theory is about the structure.
What structure is held in common between these things and not so much what the content
is.
I'm going to let you put the content in for your theory of, you know, how organs work
and all and Bob will put in his account of how how emotions work.
But the point is that the words we're going to use are going to mean the same things across
all of them.
So related questions, perhaps, yep.
When we think about these states, you know, you've talked about them as though they're
sort of informational bits or streams of bits or something like that.
And I take it that baked in here somewhere is the notion that those bits are being processed
in some way.
There's some correspondence between the inputs and the forces that I generated the results
or what appears on my interface.
But there's like some informational processing layer somewhere that transforms some bits
to other bits.
But it strikes me that also there's some way to process bits such that the structure of
the system changes.
You could give me instructions on how to build that microscope.
And now I can see things that I wasn't able to see before.
And so is there a notion here that bits can be understood as containing instructions for
how to build new structure or is that sort of separate from this model?
No, that's exactly right.
So what I want is that my positions not only can affect you through the arrangement, but
they can also affect the arrangement.
And so my positions, when I moved my mouse over and like found the Zoom button, it changed
the arrangement for me so that I was now seeing a different thing.
What could also happen is that I moved my body into certain positions and like arrange one
tinker toy and like I start applying force to this tinker toy or Lego.
And then I start applying force to this other Lego by putting my body in certain positions.
And as I apply those forces, those Legos move through space and they now start to feel each
other.
So the arrangement changes and now they're applying forces to each other and they're
actually linked into a Lego, whatever you call it, when you put two Legos together.
So when I build integrated circuits or microscopes, that's just a more complicated version.
I sent you instructions, they change your internal state in such a way that you were
now able to kind of like walk through those instructions as you received the correct inputs.
So as soon as you felt the Lego in your hand, you started to move it.
And when you felt the other Lego in your hand, you started to move it and then you put them
together.
And so you can build things using this accounting system.
Yeah.
Okay.
So that makes sense.
And if I'm understanding correctly, you're saying essentially that you're less concerned
with how it is that bits get turned into actions than just that they do.
Like meaning you focus on the sort of inputs and outputs and the model assumes that there's
some layer in between that does the processing.
But it's sufficient just to say there's some layer in between that does the processing.
We don't necessarily need to know how it works.
Yeah.
I'm focusing on like letting you tell that story because I don't know any stories.
Like I feel like I'm wanting to like make an accounting system, a spreadsheet tool or
something where people can write their financial accounts.
And in the same way, I want to enable you to like tell me the story of how you build microscopes
without, but my goal here is not to actually tell you how to build microscopes.
Just enable you to tell that story.
Yeah.
Cool.
I'm trying to find limitation to this kind of view.
How about that kind of view can handle the time dimension or deterministics, the system
that are not able to return back?
Yeah.
It's very possible that what happens when you give me a certain input called a bullet
and all of a sudden my arrangement breaks down so that no longer is my heart talking
to my lungs anymore.
And it's not receiving the inputs it needs to maintain this far from equilibrium state
and now it's broken and it falls into a very basic equilibrium.
Right.
But there are systems that you cannot reverse the time dimension.
So yeah, in that system, you can't reverse the time dimension.
Two different states might flow into the same state called death.
And you can't reverse it because you don't know how to kind of undo that bullet.
It's a special case when you are in a reversible regime.
Right.
I have a final question before we move on that is unrelated to what we talked about so far.
You said the word structure a lot.
Is this similar?
Am I correct in tying this to existing knowledge, thinking about the structure of data like
when you measure complexity through like the limble Z algorithm?
Is this the similar kind of structure you're talking about or am I incorrect in putting
these things close together in my brain?
I would say incorrect.
I can just discard that and ignore that.
Yeah, just discard that.
My structure I more mean like what an architect might be looking at when they structure a
building or I don't know if you've heard of like, I guess you probably heard of vector
spaces of vector spaces of structure.
It's that with an operation called plus and a zero and a times and so you build stuff
up.
Okay.
It's more of that.
Okay, that helps.
I just want to make sure that I stick this in the appropriate relationship with what
hardy exists in my brain.
Yeah.
Okay, thanks.
Can I ask you guys a question about the length of this?
Like I'm on slide around nine out of 23.
Should I go until noon or what's the kind of idea of sorry, sorry, I call it 11.
I'm in central right now.
We normally go to the end of the hour, but since we've been asking, I mean normally it's
like, you know, sometimes a talk and then questions.
But since we've been going back and forth throughout, I assume, I think Mike is here,
but I assume he will leave at the end of the hour.
Yeah.
Unfortunately, I've got to run at the end of the hour.
However, if people, I guess I'll leave it up to everybody.
I'm going to leave this being recorded because I think it's super interesting and people
will want to view it even if they can't stay now.
So you guys have a choice.
You can keep going or if you want, we can just call it at the end of the hour and do
a part two at some point.
So either way, I have a slight preference for doing a part two just because I don't want
to like awkwardness of making people choose or something.
Okay.
That's, that's fine.
So, so we can, yeah, we can call it in 20 minutes and then we'll just, we'll just reschedule
for another Tuesday.
Absolutely.
Okay.
Cool.
All right.
So, right.
We're trying to talk about this accounting system and now I'm going to like do a thing
that might just be really dumb, which is to tell you what it looks like and it might
be dumb because I'm basically going to go through something that's going to look kind
of strange and, and unmotivated maybe, and I'm just going to tell you, hey, have faith
in me that this, that this like that I've done the experiment, the mathematical experiment,
which is like how well does this, how workable is this, how easy it is to work with and that,
that it works really well.
Okay.
So let me just recall the keywords that we're going to use.
There's interfaces.
That's like what you can, what positions you can put out and what forces you can receive,
what kind of your sensorium in various positions.
There's states.
There's arrangements.
There's enclosures and there's nesting.
So all of them are going to be in this picture here.
So each of us has an interface.
So this might be the interface of one of my cells is the interface of another cell and
this is the interface of another cell.
It's, it's expressing something through its membrane and it's receiving something through
its membrane and maybe when the cell is in one position, it actually can't receive as
much as when it's in another position.
That isn't indicated here, but it's part of what is in this accounting system.
So given what, you know, but then there's me and I also am an interface and some things
happening inside of me, I can't see and other things are exposed on my surface.
And so now inside of each of these things is, is a state.
So the state of a cell and the state of another neuron or another nerve cell or any, any cell
because we all know that neurons are just the same as any other cell.
They just go 50 times faster.
And so you've got all these cells in here and I hope that's true.
I think I heard that from Mike once upon a time.
So we've got all these cells in here and then there's me and what you can see of me is like
affected by that.
And so our internal state is affecting what comes out of us as positions and is affected
by what comes into us as forces or sensorium.
Now we have multiple interfaces interacting together and I'm calling that the arrangement.
So this, these guys are arranged in this way.
And inside this enclosure, which is like the outer membrane called me with cells inside
of it.
And then there's me over here and there's you over here.
And we're sending each other information.
Then there's this whole zoom call.
And maybe like outside, there's actually somebody on this in the zoom company watching us and
subtly affecting this.
And I hope that's not true, but maybe it's true.
And so there's this kind of nesting as hierarchical nesting of things.
Now what I didn't write here is that the arrangements can actually change through time.
So this wiring is not fixed in reality.
It's fixed in this picture.
But right now I did something on zoom earlier where, where I, my, what I was receiving from
you guys changed.
I actually started seeing faces, whereas I wasn't before.
So the arrangement can change through time.
The interfaces can change through time also in this accounting system.
And something could it be a crawling robot one moment and a flying robot another moment.
So an interface consists consists of two things, a set of positions.
So what position, the set of things, positions you can be, maybe you can, you can just be
in three different positions or maybe you can be an R to the 44 number of positions, whatever
set you want, you as the accounting person, as the bookkeeper, you get to pick what, what
you can output.
And then for every position, if you say, I'm in position A, I'm a, I'm a caterpillar,
then I will tell you the set of force, then, then you also need to provide for me what
forces or sensorium you can receive when you're a caterpillar with your legs in this position,
when you're a caterpillar with your legs in that position, when you're a butterfly with
your wings in this position.
For each of those, there's a set of forces you can receive, they might be exactly the
same or they might be changing.
So what can arrive when you're in that position?
That's this f of I thing.
And now I'm going to encode this strangely in a data structure, like in, in, in C yet
and computer science, you might make these data structures.
And just because it's a tree doesn't mean that like, that the user is thinking of it
as a tree.
It's just that you're holding it as a tree.
And we're going to arrange all this, this, this interface stuff as a polynomial in one
variable with non-negative or integer coefficients.
And it's strange.
It's a formal thing.
Don't freak out when you see the sum sign.
So here's an interface.
It says the interface for this thing is the sum over all.
It's a polynomial.
It's like y to the something plus y to the something else plus y to the something else.
And it's the sum over all of the positions of y to the power, the sensorium there.
Okay.
So these indices here are the positions.
And for each one, there's a set of, there's an exponent, and that's the set of things
you can receive when you're in that position.
If you're a hedgehog and you're folded up, you receive a different thing than when you're
unfolded.
Okay.
So imagine this weird polynomial.
It would say that I have one position I could be in where I'm receiving five inputs.
I have 62 possible positions where I'm receiving three inputs.
And I have two positions where I'm receiving nothing.
This one, I, my body can be in our three many positions.
I can walk around in our three space.
And no matter where I am, I always have the same sensorium.
I'm receiving a million bits or a million variables of information.
So you have different polynomials that say kind of what this, how your interface works.
Can I ask a good question?
Yep.
What does Y represent here?
It's a formal variable.
I didn't use X.
Just I use a, there's a kind of category theory reason I used a Y.
It stands for your data, but that's not very important.
It's just a formal variable that is housing a polynomial and like this data structure,
I could have called it X or Z.
I called it script Y.
So there is no direct link to any of the features of the agents here.
Does it represent physical or?
There's no direct link to what?
Does it represent anything physical like physical?
This thing is represent, this whole thing is representing the physical interface or
the, the, the way that the modeler is thinking of the caterpillar, a butterfly system.
So not in terms of its internal dynamics, we'll get to that later, but just in terms
of its interface that the butterfly and caterpillar, there are two, there is a bunch of positions
that can be in and for each one, there is a bunch of things that can receive.
And you can encode all that in one thing, one data structure, which is a polynomial.
And why do a polynomial?
That's what the next slide is about.
Why we're doing this kind of strange way of encoding things.
And remind me, hold on, sorry, I want to make sure, this is cool.
So I want to make sure I'm grabbing it.
And by position, it's like, if you're outputting a bit stream, your positions would be zero
and one.
Okay.
But maybe you're receiving two bits of information.
So you're receiving two bits and for every moment you're updating your state and outputting
one bit.
Okay.
So position doesn't have a lot to do with like necessarily the state of the system that
you're looking at now.
I mean, it's connected, but it's not the state of the system.
That's right.
This is the interface.
It's the housing.
It's what you can, when you're probing your butterfly or your tadpole, it's the way you
can affect it and the way you, what you can see about it.
And okay.
That, the way you said that, that clicked.
Okay.
I'll take that.
Thanks.
Okay.
So these, this is all the stuff you can see.
And for everything you can see, if it's in that position, it might be receiving a different
sensorium than when it's in that position.
Okay.
So the reason we use polynomials is because there's a bunch of operations on polynomials
that means something with respect to interfaces.
We're also going to be able to get that dynamics in terms of polynomials and we're going to
be able to get arrangements in terms of polynomials and all the stuff I wrote and all those different
colors of green and blue and orange and stuff, those all are going to be within the same
system.
I don't need to like, I guess when they first started with math, with arithmetic and stuff,
they had like a different counting system for cheese and for goats and stuff and like
people who knew the cheese accounting system didn't know the goats accounting system.
This one is supposed to work in the exact same way, no matter if we're talking about
the interfaces, we're talking about the dynamics, we're talking about the arrangements, all
the stuff I've been talking about is all going to be within polynomial functions.
And again, I can't tell you exactly what they are, but I can tell you things about that
you might already know and how, what it looks like.
So we have operations on polynomials, like we can add them, you can multiply polynomials,
like if you have two polynomials and you want to multiply them, you know, x plus one times
x plus two is x squared plus three x plus two.
You can compose polynomials, so like y squared composed, y cubed plus one is y to the six
plus something something, you, but there are other operations too, and each of these operations
is going to mean something in terms of interfaces.
So if you have an interface called P, you know, a butterfly interface, you have interface
called Q, catapult interface, then P plus Q is a new interface.
So sorry, so I'm just going to take these things, if this is P and we have another one
for Q, then I'm going to be able to add those two polynomials up and get the P plus Q or
I can multiply them just like you did in middle school and get another polynomial interface.
So what is P plus Q, it's another polynomial, so it represents another interface that can,
its outputs, its positions are the positions of P and then just jointly also the positions
of Q.
So it's a position of P or a position of Q.
Now given one of those, if you're in, if you're, what's the sensorium there, well if you're
in a P position, a butterfly position, then you get the sensorium of the butterfly in
that position and if you're in the Q position, the caterpillar position, then you get the
sensorium of the caterpillar and that's just how P plus Q works, like when you add them
up and you just get like, I'm either in one of these three or one of these six, that's
why they're nine, why are the fifth?
In either way, I have five inputs and if I'm in one of these two positions, I have four
input possibilities.
If I'm in this position, I'll have three input possibilities, et cetera.
So when you add two polynomials, it just says like, oh, I know how butterflies work, I know
how caterpillars work, this thing can either be that or that, but the dynamics inside is
staying like there's something that's translating between them or like flowing that's allowed
to have either one of those two positions, either one of those two interfaces and maybe
we know that for the caterpillar butterfly dynamical system, it transitions one way but
it never transitions back.
That might be a thing that happens.
P times Q is also a polynomial, P composed Q is also a polynomial, there's all sorts
of things you can do and this polynomial, if you like go back and think, okay, what does
P times Q really do?
What are the sum ends of that thing?
It turns out that a sum end of this, one of those positions of this is a pair consisting
of a position of this one and a position of this one, whereas an input there is that you
would either input from P or you would input from Q and to see that, I'm just giving you
a simple thing here.
So if you have five y to the fourth, this thing is outputting five possible positions
and for each one, inputting four possible things and this one's outputting six and inputting
three and when you multiply them, you get 30 kind of a grid of like, which P position
was I in?
Which Q position was I in?
There are 30 possibilities.
When you multiply, you get a seven up here.
That's because you're either receiving a four or you're receiving a three, one of these
four things or you're receiving one of these three things.
So again, I'm not expecting you to get this fully, what I'm saying is like different operations
on polynomials give you new ways of combining interfaces.
So when you compose polynomials, that's going to be an interface that runs P and then Q
in series.
The sort of thing that like does a strategy like I'm going to run P and then no matter
what you give me, I'm going to run Q according to that.
Like I'm going to output something depending on what input I get from P or P tensor Q runs
both P and Q in parallel.
So you've got kind of two systems side by side and they're each running some dynamics
and this interface will kind of output what both of them are outputting and input what
both of them are inputting.
We're going to get so P or Q runs either P or Q or both.
These are just operations you can do that takes two polynomials and gives you new polynomial.
And there's this other thing you can do which is like running arrangements and we'll get
to that one later.
But what are arrangements?
So we considered ourselves to be in the zoom arrangement right now so that my output goes
to your input or they're like organelles in a cell or cells in a tissue, an arrangement
of how information passes between interfaces.
That's the arrangement.
So this yellow stuff here.
We can make it much more general where there's no perfect wires but in fact P is kind of
information, you know, has some noise in the way that it gets to all these different other
guys.
We can also make the information sharing change so that like who's connected to who can change
in time and all of that will be written in terms of polynomial functors.
So we'll have these polynomials P1 through P5, these interfaces here, we have this interface
Q and what's called a natural transformation in category theory will encode this arrangement.
So interfaces will be polynomials and natural transformations will be what are called natural
transformations.
The category theory will be called will correspond to or denote or account for arrangements.
So I told you that an arrangement is a natural transformation but that's a category theory
word and I'm not even expecting you to have any idea about so why am I doing that?
I'm again just trying to show you kind of what the math looks like and how it feels.
Yeah.
So what I'm talking about is about interfaces and how you manipulate them, arrange them,
nest them, how interfaces have outputs and inputs, they're captured as polynomials which
aren't supposed to be thought of as functions but as data structures and then we can manipulate
these polynomials to like get new interfaces, get new arrangements, get new dynamics, all
from the old ones and now that I'm like here I'm kind of wondering I don't know whether
to just blow through these slides and like I'm wondering if I do do a part two how I'll
like kind of skip right to this part without like reminding you everything up to it.
So well I think right before the next one we could either I mean we'll just take a look
at the recording or you could have one or two slides before the next one just to remind
us.
I think it's okay.
Okay well then maybe I'll stop here.
I cannot wait to see the end I want to see the rest right now but I'll leave it to the
rest.
Well I mean if there is enough interest I could do it now what should we I don't know.
It's fine as long as there's a few people staying keep going and then you can have a
discussion and then I'll keep the recording on and then everybody else can do it.
All right let's let's just do that and if we want to do meet again one day we'll figure
that out.
Okay so I'll just keep going then I'll just go at the same pace approximately and just
people who want to leave just will leave and if there's zero people left I'm going to stop.
Okay so right so we've got all these arrangements and these the dynamics and the interfaces so
we're looking at this thing suppose you had a dynamical system in each of these p's in
each of these interfaces this dynamical system was out was in a current state it's outputting
some position along these wires so I so something is visible to the outside world and those
visible things arrive to other dynamical systems as like part of their input so it's seeing
p2 is seeing what p1 is doing and it's hearing something from the outside world and maybe
it's like got an echo of its own it kind of hears itself somehow.
And then so what arrives affects the internal state so if you're sad and you see something
you're affected and become into a new state whereas if you're happy you might go into
a different new state even though the input was exactly the same so that's a dynamical
system it's a discrete dynamical system we could also be using ordinary continuous dynamical
systems or systems of ODE's the math works either way so I mean it's slightly different
map but the same sort notion of arrangement and dynamical system and interface are all
persisting through that change so yeah so that's what this is a picture of.
Mathematically a dynamical system is a natural transformation from one thing set of states
s y to the s some weird polynomial s y to the s to p to your interface and again what
is a natural transformation I have not told you why is it s y to the s I haven't told you
but what I have told you is that like whether we're talking about dynamics like this stuff
or we're talking about interfaces or we're talking about arrangements we're all going
to be doing it in terms of these polynomial functors and the natural transformation between
them so we can compose so I'm saying the math is working I'm not proving that to you I'm
just claiming it but then I'm saying that if we had a dynamical system each of these
we would get a dynamical system in this whole thing by a kind of variable sharing formula
that says like well this guy's outputs become this guy's inputs and we're just we're just
going to take the states of all of them and kind of put them all together to get the states
of this big system so given a dynamical system an open dynamical system that's able to change
based on inputs in each of these five things and given this arrangement we will get a dynamical
system in Q so this is the last math slide I want to think about dynamics a little bit
more so we were talking about operations you can do on polynomials so a dynamical system
on P plus Q as some set of states and for every state it's either outputting a P output
or it's outputting a Q output and then it receives the sensorium some some sensation
or force or whatever in that in whatever position it was in so if it's exhibiting caterpillar
behavior then it's receiving some caterpillar input and when it's outputting butterfly behavior
it's receiving some butterfly input a dynamical system on this interface P times Q is outputting
both I haven't seen this one as useful so you might not find it that useful or maybe
you have a really great case of this it's kind of it's outputting both P and Q so imagine
you can see both the P and the Q at the same time this is no longer butterfly caterpillar
I don't know what it would be it's outputting both at the same time but you're only allowed
to send it one or the other and why am I making that rule because I'm literally multiplying
the polynomials and telling you what it does when you when you multiply polynomials it
literally receives kind of a plus upstairs in the exponent whereas there's another
operation on polynomials that no one's ever heard of outside of like some math areas called the
Dirichlet product where you multiply exponents instead of adding them so you have two polynomials
and lo and behold you can like do this weird thing where y to the third tensor y to the fourth is y
to the 12th and that sort of machine that sort of interface a dynamical system there will be
outputting both output of P and an output of Q and receiving both at the same time so it's kind
of like you've got legs and you've got arms and so you can output a leg position and you can output
an arm position and you can feel what's happening on your leg and you can feel what's happening on
your arm and that that is what P tensor Q does as an interface and P composed Q as an interface will
be dynamical system that outputs a P and a strategy for whatever input you get on P what Q it will
output so that's way more like a protocol that you might find in like in like how you connect to
the internet or something like that not so much an animal that I know of but it'd be pretty interesting
if you could find this in an animal some kind of it might be in the cerebellum if I had to guess
anywhere where like you have prescriptions for hitting a tennis ball or something that are like
your state is not going to get is going to go through like P and then like a strategy of moving
through P then Q based on based on stuff but it's very kind of ballistic or something so that's
what I think P composed Q might be and then the last one that the last operation I think is important
that I haven't told you anything about is what's called the internal harm and what this dynamic
a dynamical system on this will do is it will output arrangements from P that put P inside of Q
so this thing is an interface for arranging little guys inside of a big guy so this thing
is a new polynomial I haven't told you the formula for it but just like you can add polynomials and
tensor polynomials and multiply polynomials and compose polynomials you can do this operation
to them and when you run a dynamical system on this polynomial interface what it does is it outputs
positions for the P1 through P5 inside of the Q sorry outputs arrangements meaning it outputs how
they are connecting how they're receiving from each other and what it inputs is what's flowing
between them so like the the current what I've output here has determined what I'm seeing of you
guys and so the arrangement is using my output like this machine is like zoom is this sort of thing
zoom where these five people or however many there are in this meeting here Q is the external
interface of zoom and like the way we're sending each other data is the current arrangement and
zoom is a dynamical system that takes our outputs like what I say like hey zoom please update to
mute my microphone and it decides based on what flows whether to change the arrangement or not
so like me saying that did not work but if I press a button it will work and change how my information
is flowing to you guys so zoom is one of these things controlling how we're talking to each
other and I feel like probably in the you know it's been a while since I've watched
uh you guys talks but um I feel like somewhere in the tadpole there's gonna be something like
this happening maybe there's an electric field that's kind of affecting the arrangement so like
that's the sort of place that that would live so in terms of yeah sorry can can you go back
real quick I want to make sure that I understand like I guess when you have p plus q you can have
things switching between p mode and q mode and I guess would in a could an arrangement help govern
that as well yeah um well are you saying like I'm thinking of this p as itself sometimes having
like two inputs and one output and sometimes having three inputs and five outputs or something
and that's controlled by the arrangements here sorry that's controlled by the okay of p
that would be controlled by the internal state of this one switching among these guys
but now okay the arrangement might be sending p something that says like hey p go into butterfly
mode um you know um morpho morphologically sends it some signal that says hey stem cell move into
being an adult cell or something it permanently changes its interface because of what it received
okay okay so it switched just a dynamical system that sometimes is in p and sometimes in q
mode but because of what it received through the arrangement with its other with the other cells
in this soup uh it received a signal that permanently put it in q mode say okay that that
helped uh that helps clarify the what I was thinking through okay cool thank you and as it sends out
some new signal the arrangement itself might learn that p is kind of fixed there and like start to like
develop new neural connections or sever connections or whatever and that severing that thing that's
deciding the arrangement of all these guys is living in this um this operation you can do to
polynomials so there's some interface that controls this yellow this orange stuff here
okay so um digital circuits for example and control systems fit neatly into this
formalism so a computer is a nested arrangement of dynamical systems you can take two transistors
and get an AND gate you can wire them together through and you get an OR gate you know you split
this and you get a NOT gate you split you get NOT gate you do this you get an OR gate and you can
keep doing that and get adder circuits etc and all the stuff I've been saying works it's just that
this is a really easy case because the arrangement is soldered in it's fixed for all time that's not
like a more full of morphological situation really um the dynamics are super simple because the state
is like unnecessary there's no memory in these guys and AND gate just runs and to build it like to
build a flip flop or a memory unit I need to use feedback which I can but the little systems inside
have no memory so they're all very simple and then but with enough nesting of these you know
feedback circuits and adders and all this stuff you get a computer so this is a very like
very powerful language in the sense that you can build very complex things with simple things
using the same sort of pictures and mathematical rules with polynomials and that sort of stuff
as I've been talking about control systems have complicated dynamics but again they're still
in this fixed arrangement so yeah in this one there's no memory and in this one there might be
some memory in a control system like a thermostat or cruise control or whatever but still there's
usually a fixed arrangement of how things are wired together thermostat is receiving from the room
the furnace is receiving from the thermostat and the room is receiving from the furnace
deep learning is also another case of this so the interface there it's also a little bit very
very simple in a certain way namely all the interfaces are the same so here I have a little
one of these interfaces here another one here another one here's another one and the arrangements
so every one of these is outputting a reel and inputting a reel the output reel is kind of its
guess for what's going on right now and the input reel is its is its loss function is called and
so but the arrangement are all very simple they're just these activated sums weighted sums so like
what I'm going to put out here is some non-linear function of 3.2 times whatever's coming out here
minus 1.5 times whatever coming out here and 0.7 times whatever coming out here and so when you
train these guys a training of a neural network will be something where the arrangement the weights
and biases that tell you how one neuron is built from smaller neurons usually they they this looks
like in and out usually they draw these things to the left and this one to the right but I kind of
put them in and out to make it look the same as other ones in this slideshow so far but what I was
saying is that like at what flows along these wires just like what flowed you know when the stem
cell said I'm now an adult cell but flows along these wires and what kind of flows into the outside
world affects the arrangement affects these weights and these weights then affect how the outside world
sees the activity of what's inside. Okay so I think that's basically what I said here.
Question here so kind of back to the the switching that you mentioned like some of those
polynomial operators is that basically how you envisioned how like that switching is accomplished
by basically setting like if you wanted to switch between that the plus operator between one input
and the other but he said one of them to zero based on some internal state or how would that be
accomplished I wasn't confused by that. There would be a dynamical system so a set of states
and in one state I would be outputting something in P and then when I receive something from that
sense element of the sensorium some image I get there it might send me to a new state that went
into Q. Now what I heard you say was something like zeroing things out and plus and you were
thinking I think you were thinking of the plus from from back here as a kind of numerical thing
whereas this is all data structures so in computer science a data structure may not look
the way that the data is housed in the computer as a heap or a you know a binary tree or whatever
is not really of the same nature as like what the person's using it for and in the same sense I think
that you're confusing this plus as a kind of data structure operation with addition in terms of
like how you might accomplish or how you might like write out the dynamical system.
Okay yeah I know I'm not giving you enough information to actually use any of this I
am hoping to give you enough information that you it's like a calling card like if this is interesting
you know where to find me or something like that right so here the interface the arrangement is
dynamic like as the loss comes in and is just and is sent to these different things as like loss
by the chain rule for them to deal with that loss function is also affecting how much trust
or the weights that it gives to the outputs of these different systems. Same with that like a
prediction market a prediction market is also a case of this where like the amount of wealth everybody
has is updated based on how well they do in their predictions so the arrangement is changing
based on what's flowing through the wires. There's a big gulf between circuits and control and
artificial neural networks in circuits and control theory there's interesting wiring
but the arrangement is fixed forever whereas in artificial neural networks the arrangement is
dynamic but there's no communication between these peer nodes and in this this point is really
difficult to make to machine learning experts that there's actually a ton of room that is not
being used at all between control theory and artificial neural networks that you could do
all sorts of interesting things in neural networks even though they think that they can have really
cool arrangements like recurrent and convolutional and intentional layers and all the stuff
none of it gets far in the direction I'm talking about this direction I'm talking about is more
like the sort of thing you guys do so let's see so many people think of math as a number I'm not
sure I need this slide we're building up bigger things from littler parts we're talking about
interfaces dynamics and arrangements this is a really nice language I know I'm like complimenting
it and like that's kind of rude to compliment your own thing but this really isn't my thing polynomial
functions have been studying studied by mathematicians for a really long time and it's they're
considered well not really long say 40 years and they're considered really beautiful and well
functioning and all that's new here is that I think they can be useful outside of pure math
in a field like morphology so this sort of thing can account for everything from control
theory to deep learning but I think it can account for much more I think even though I don't have the
account it's an accounting system for for things I'm seeing in your guys work
so if it if that's right then it would let us talk coherently and precisely about the stuff I've
been saying like changing interfaces and dynamics and how things communicate and how those communication
patterns change as information is exchanged so I've heard some talk about anatomical compilers
the thing is that compilers aren't free right they're a ton of work you write something in a
high-level language and it's reduced into machine code and but yet you want to be able to debug
and you can because you can you can look deeply into the trouble spots you can kind of zoom in there
and that works because the code structure is really precise language like math like
python based on c based on assembly based on machine code
based on transistors is like all super well understood and the language is like mathematically
precise so everything has been composed modularly and so I think that polynomial
functions they can account for the stuff in computers but I'm aiming it at living systems
things that can change their wiring diagram where like I want to be able to offer this same
level of the same high fidelity language ability but to a more interesting case namely you know
protein folding and ways that things change based on what's going on like if I'm near hydrophobic
if I'm near this chaperone thingy my protein folds this way and if I'm near that enzyme my
protein folds that way how the interaction affects the positions of the protein so I'm
proposing this math as like some something like maybe it'll work as some kind of anatomical
programming language I don't have any idea what the program should be that would be more like the
account and I don't have a tool you can even use so it's really or at a very basic level here but
if it's interesting to you I'm claiming though that like I'm going to hold the position and be
able to convince you as we continue that the math is really elegant and articulate and my hope is
that one day it could be a ground I guess is a little stronger than I mean but I think it will
be but I'm betting that's what this talk is this talk is a bet that it will be could be a ground
for computational biology so to summarize applied category theory which is what I'm using in the
background here is for tracking interlocking structures like formalizing analogies it's not
about how much of something there is it's about how it's arranged what the structures are and this
sort of thing has been useful in quantum information theory so people use it in like the
in quantum compiler a state-of-the-art stuff computer science math material science linguistics
physics but in each case it's not focusing so much on the numerics or the analysis but more on
like the structural questions and I'm interested in the structure of interacting dynamical systems
how we interact right here on zoom how we can change how we're interacting you know by disconnecting
turning the speaker off based on on what's flowing between us and again I don't have these
specifics but I have this accounting system of polynomial functions that accounts for dynamic
arrangements and my claim is that I think it might be useful as a framework for morphology and
behavior and I'd like to prove that well it would be cool if one day we could prove that by
building an anatomical compiler I think that'd be a lot of fun so that's that's it thanks
very cool thank you for the presentation I guess oh I have a like a needier question
what I guess the benefit of something like this is your claim that it's it's beautiful and
mathematically pretty nice as compared to something like temporal network theory which already aims to
do something like talking about how networks of interactions change as a function of time
so like that I would say that field especially applied to biology is you know attempting to answer
I think similar questions than this is like what would be the the benefit of using something like
this rather than something like that or with or would network temporal network theory give you
the model that you would then put your thing on top that's what you're gonna say isn't it
yeah that's what I'm gonna say yeah I'm guessing that temporal network theory which I had not
heard of before you mentioned it would be the sort of like given some sort of account that you could
put on top of this okay what this is is um there might be some other theory that isn't temporal
network theory but that also explains how networks are formed I don't know uh but that both of them
would fit into this accounting system and is there any way this system you really need to have
an idea of how something is working ahead of time I couldn't use this for example to figure out
could you somehow use this backwards start from here to drive new hypotheses that I could
experimentally test or that we could computationally test yeah so what I do what I do is I um
I have certain guesses about you know about free will or something I don't know about about how
what could it mean that I'm able to take my experience and turn it into language and that
language can affect somebody what is it like what is this translation system or I have certain
ideas about something so let's suppose that we were hanging out and you had certain ideas about
something then what this would do is kind of keep you on guard rails so that like the things you
were saying I could like write them down and and I would have questions for you like wait
do these two things could they always happen at the same time or is there like it feels like
from what you're saying there should be or the math is saying that like something is missing right
here and you'd say oh that is a good point um and and so that that sort of thing is how it would help
more on like making sure that your ideas stay on the rails as you as you explain them okay
it's not generative it's except yeah it's not generating new hypotheses for you it's checking
that your hypotheses type check if you know what I mean by that yeah no that makes sense that that
tracks so one nice thing about this mathematical framework is that it could be used to understand
how the wiring can change right the how how the arrangements can change so in that perspective
it could be used as a nice tool to understand norphogenesis where we start again as a nice as a
way as a nice tool to understand norphogenesis right so like you start with this fixed set of
components and in biological norphogenesis things can rearrange themselves and this is a great tool
to understand such a phenomenon but I wonder if it could also be used to understand development
where things start from a single cell and it can grow into a very complicated structure so what changes
there is also the number of polynomials the numbers of p and q so I feel like there must be
to explain that kind of phenomenon you would also need a meta polynomial or a functional
of sorts it can generate a new polynomial itself like a new entity like a new variable do you think
it is mathematically possible or the mathematical tools to do something like this yeah so what this
gets to is when you which interface like where you draw your boundaries so what actually would be
happening there is that you would have this cell and you would also have um phosphates and calcium's
and uh what else sodiums and carbons in your environment and this cell would start to use
its little flippers to flap around and like start to eat these things and as it did um
like the number of of the amount of stuff in the world is not changing you're just not considering
you know the carbon atom over there to be another one of your polynomials but actually we need to
for that to work and so the things that you know the mother eats in order to have the baby
inside of her there's some arrangement happening that creates the baby and then there's this
separation event but that separation event is in terms of the amount of material there it's
actually the same it's where you draw the boundaries so you know the the like the abortion question
or something is like you know is asking where we draw the boundaries and when we draw those
boundaries and that that is not something the math tells you but I don't yet know of why
why we draw boundaries the way we do except that it helps us compute
approximations or guesses about how things will behave so in terms of the math you really can't
see the difference between a cell and a bunch of like when it divides it's really just a point of
view that you instead of grouping p1 and p2 together using the tensor product and thinking
of it as one thing we've thought of it as two different things um does that make sense yeah so
so I guess I guess uh there's a sort of constraint required that's something like conservation of
mass or something like that so your q should the square the outermost square should consider
something inside it yeah and there might be other things that are interacting with q and and why we
drew the boundary around q in terms of the ship of thesius we might uh if you know that parable
so like we we put a different plank in the ship and then a different plank and we change the steering
wheel or whatever um well is it still the same q I mean there might be like pq might have some
wire out to some other steering wheel over here and come back in because we didn't use we used to
not consider that steering wheel to be part of q and now we do and so the what you count as the
right um interface might change through time like you might say uh you know I've been tracking this
for a while and now what I was calling my interface is this all wrong a bunch of those
cells have left this the society and a bunch of new cells have entered and I want to regroup
and say this is my interface now um so that sort of activity of how you group things is not um
is something that feels like an open question to me let's see yeah I wonder how it um if you
talk to a physicist about it I'm not sure if you have how they might take it because their view of
life is it's like life is a non-equilibrium system which always exchange this matter of energy with
the environment so things are always in flux and things need not be conserved over time like even
mass or whatever so I think physicists view that as as a central part of what defines
of what characterizes life so yeah I don't know they allow themselves to like think of the body
they don't have to think of the body as like eating or maybe you're saying they do but I think like
there's a lot that they may be uh statistically defying if that's a word um making statistical
that this is like the statistics are not in this model yet the fact that like we have a million
things flowing in and a million things flowing out and statistically they're aggregated like this
um this is a much more kind of um simulation sort of model where you you actually have to
watch the things going in and out statistically yeah there could be a statistical theory on top
of this that like physics would be more something like a probabilistic category theory or something
like that and there is probabilistic category theory but it's not incorporated in this yet
I see let me continue this line of thing
I definitely see how this kind of view and theory is working well in neural network for example
on um mechanical systems are determined they are much much more deterministic
my my feeling again I'm not biologist I'm more computer scientist but my feeling
in biologists that there's some level of it and I'm not sure what caused to that kind of
phenomena but in some level things are not deterministic as they think they are they are
much more probabilistic manner to which process happened and which process not happened termed in
nuance in the brain or nervous system nuance can spontaneously spike and no one really know
why they trigger to be spiking and and they can spike to an input in one time and another
than doesn't spike to the same input and and so and again I'm not sure if it's really the
measurement issue or or there are or it's really a statistical probabilistic system
and not deterministic as it is and I think that something is missing here in order to
determine or to describe biology system in that in that ways yeah I don't think it is I think
this will work fine what's going on in in that is it so in the in let's talk about the neuron
quickly and then move on to just more general case the internal state of the neuron effects
whether it fires based on the input or not so that's certainly here we don't it's a feature of this
that these are dynamical systems which mean they're not completely just functions they're
functions with an internal state and so if I if you know the RNA and my neuron is different now
than it was or if something's going on in terms of how healthy the cell is or whatever's going on
some internal state of the cell which is a very complex living being that could easily affect
whether the inputs cause it to spike or not so that's in this model but then there's also just
the noise question about probability and so what that looks like is if you have some some
let's say you have a probability of one sixth there's something six six of those
you could imagine a limit cycle a dynamical system going in through a limit cycle
and it's going around and around and it's outputting one you know it's outputting
one two three four five six one two three or it's outputting some crazy you know take a
random number generator a pseudo random number generator and that's a dynamical system just
run that thing through time now now depending on where it is you might not have access because
it's going too fast it's like a dice running around but now now you hit it with an input and
the exact moment you hit oops the exact moment you hit it with the input it flows that way
so it's moving around and around and you hit boom it flows that way right so it would look
stochastic if you didn't have access to where you were in the limit cycle exactly so it looks
stochastic but even even diffusion reactions in simulation that they are stochastic you
cannot return to the same position every time so that's not stochastic in that sense and most
biology work exactly like that but I mean at least in the level that I'm I'm dealing with
my claim is that for any probabilistic or stochastic or random or noise field system
my claim that I would have to defend and I have not proven but my claim that I would try to defend
is that I could find some dynamical system where if you didn't have access to the internal state
you would see it as acting randomly or noisefully in that way and that the behavior of the total
system when you receive that noise input would be the one that you were expecting
you also mentioned that this framework is not generative is more for model checking
is that right because I feel like you could also use it as a generative model I mean it's really
it could be really powerful in that way well maybe you could tell me about that because I would
prefer to be able to say it's generative well like you mentioned you know there's rails so if I think
something is going to work like x and it I think it's going to work like y according to this you
know this operation should be possible and I should be able to look for that somehow it's
generated in that sense that it's making you triple check your theory and potentially building
no you're right you're right like a new experimental hypothesis like when you when you
make the constraints called basketball then you get to see basketball getting played
and you made no constraints there's just 10 guys or whatever on a on a field you wouldn't get to see
the interesting stuff so this does keep you on certain rails and gives you certain rules and
regulations that enables certain things and not others yeah yeah and it might be rules and regulations
that hadn't been considered right so in that sense it's generative okay yeah if that makes
Santosh is not what you're thinking yeah exactly it's not like small world graphs or whatever
networks where you know it's like here's how the internet gets formed or something there's
something in it that isn't producing hypotheses it's more because the rails are really you know
tightly because it's very articulate you can you get to move in certain ways and not others
that generates things and checks your new philosophy or whatever yeah there's something
that it doesn't do that I don't really know how to say yet I guess so at the end of the day
it is a mathematical model right and which means that you have a set of axioms and perhaps a set
of initial conditions and if you have these two you can always generate that prediction
by composing the the relations over and over you get an article I think that's what any
dynamical model would do and the way I understand it at least so far it looks to me it's it's like
a very general dynamical model with the general operations that's right yeah so from that perspective
the only thing is if we use such a such a model is is it learnable or is it evolvable that's I
think that's a very different kind of question traditional neural networks this could be a
special case of this and they are learnable slash evolvable because of the mathematical
properties of the arithmetic operators they are differentiable and that that kind of makes it
learnable in a specific sense yeah are these operators differentiable or these operators
learnable is something I think that's a very different question and that's maybe interesting
when you have research as well I don't know
yeah yeah I don't know where where the kind of gradient descent level
you know idea about how life could exist or something is going to come from
like how you're gonna how one would find something as you know that you can just run
like gradient descent algorithms but but yeah I think I mainly agree with what you said and
you know I feel like I've lost a bit of it by now an interesting thing for me if I can
continue to pester you is this slide is actually perfect and it reminded me of what I wanted to
say so you have the thing that's you know something is giving the arrangement correct
yeah it's a dynamical system that outputs arrangements and then given the arrangement
it sees what flows on this on throughout the thingy and uses that to update the arrangement
right so I guess another way this could be generative if you pick like some biological system
what the hell is keeping this arrangement like where does this sit can I find it uh
yeah you know we could there's a thousand things I can think of to where like I can very roughly
slap this picture on and think about how it could be working in biology but it you know
it might it could be interesting to to look for something like that like for example I don't know
if you ever heard of like coherence in the brain or oscillations but that was the first thing that
came to my head when you showed the slide because you have p plus q can switch between p mode and q
mode and there's a lot of work in neuroscience where despite the structure in your brain not
changing very quickly like you know your neurons don't rewire on the scale of seconds but you can
have different functional architectures so let's say you know you have you know 100 neurons and in
one instant you have some subset that are doing this wild and crazy thing and none of the connections
change but all of a sudden in the next instant boom you have a different subset they're doing
something entirely different um and a lot of people think that these larger scale oscillations are
somehow part of this kind of dynamical switching so like that this idea kind of fits nicely onto
here but now I'm you know it still begs the question of anytime you find a model you know
something you would explore in biology uh where should I look for the arrangement like who controls
like you know what controls it is the self-organizing you know like you know criticality or something
or should there be a theme that holds this um fascinating I don't know um yeah I was hoping
that like maybe just the way our universe works is that it's just one big arrangement and then it's
like kind of practically happening all the way down something something yeah like um uh yeah
there's something called the Construct a Law by Adrien Vijon there's something by Eric Smith
from Santa Fe Institute who talks about um non-equilibrium thermodynamics and how life evolved on
earth and things like this and like when I try to think about the question that I feel like you're
asking which is like what's controlling the arrangement what is it that like made it so that
I arranged into some bunch of neurons and cells and tissues and I'm able to talk to you right now
like that physics did that without you know help like it helped itself to to this and and like in
order to understand like what's controlling the arrangement I'm I'm like completely out of loss
but I have in other words I have like it's a philosophical question that can be translated
into math if we had good philosophical ideas about that okay okay still this is very very cool
and I don't know I think you probably know where my brain immediately went you know I have neurons
that are each a dynamical system uh so to describe the experiment that I'm doing because I think it
already arranged itself in a in a very specific topology yeah so I grow neurons on this dish
so you know I have like 30,000 cells chilling in this dish they have an arrangement there are
connections between them and those weights can change of course but interestingly I like personally
I'm very interested in how organisms interact with their environment so I receive a lot of
environmental signals but it's hard to know like which ones are important to what I'm doing now
in biology that's called the umvelts sometimes like what's the world what's the world to me
right and it's different from the world to you and so I have these neurons growing in a dish
and I can stimulate a lot of them if I want to in very specific ways if I needed to so it's
I immediately thought about trying to slap some of this ideology on the top to see if
that would help me understand kind of what's what's going on here so that could be a potential
application because it's it's uh it's not so simple as a you know a neural network and a
computer right um and it's not so complex as the brain because that's too hard and I quit
um but this is a nice in between yeah and you might hope that if you figured it out for 30,000
I forget what you said 30,000 cells and yeah what other 60,000 30,000 other cells and 30,000
other cells and then you kind of wired them together so like you know some part of of this
group was now connected to some part of this group you might hope that the analysis um of like how
your simulations from the outside affect what goes on in the network that those analyses could be
also composed yeah that would kind of be the sort of thing we would hope for here yeah so that was
kind of my kind of like a driving scientific question for me is that there's some kind of
fundamental like laws of engagement that you could find at this in a simplest system that I
can think of neurons in a dish uh that I could then apply to like ever more complicated systems
and figure out it's the same rules just kind of repeated in different ways yeah and my feeling
was like things sever and improve their connections where they flap their little flippers and move
away is seems kind of similar um based on like their fit so like we might we you know people say
evolution is survival the fittest and then they think of fit as a quantity but fit could also
be considered a quality which is like how much do you want to stay in this conversation right now
and how much I do is some something related to like how much it fits us how much you think you
have to contribute and how much you think this has to contribute to you and like I wouldn't be
surprised if somehow like that seems to be happening socially all over the place and social is like
the place that I'm have most access to as an intuitive being but I wouldn't be surprised if
like in in cell cultures or something if they were able to like move away from places where
they thought they weren't exchanging energy properly like the profile energy profile what
they're able to process was was incorrect for that area yeah um so so I was wondering kind of
is it possible that like everyone's trying to move into where they fit the best and fitting
is somehow that you are relevant to your scenario your surroundings and your surroundings are relevant
to you somehow yeah very one of us trans uh to point he actually has an active influence model
kind of illustrating exactly what he said where cells start from different positions and they
just click into their places based on their beliefs or of what where they have to be
yeah and then there's another guy here that does something where rather than saying fit you know
essentially cells or biology can feel stress you know so like if I have some kind of set point and
I'm far from it I'm very stressed and I distribute that stress to my neighbors to a certain degree
and their self-organization of stress in such a way that the goal is achieved or something like
yeah but there's also like this if if this was boring to you you'd also want to leave
so I'm kind of like thinking if the neurons just receiving no data maybe it dies or maybe it um
like if it just didn't get anything on its dendrites it just wouldn't wouldn't hang out anymore
but like if you're to sell at least as a person I kind of travel to a place where I think I can't
be energetically useful and I don't know whether that's um I don't know whether that's something
we find in other systems but it's something I would look for just because like I mean everything
that lives has to prove it's worth I feel like yeah things want to be relevant they want to be relevant
yeah I guess the active inference idea of that of the neuron cases if the neuron is receiving
something that it's not expecting to then it probably so everything has an internal expectation
and uh it this it would treat inputs based on what it wants to do with this expectation
that it wants to fit the inputs according to expectation or does it want to change the
expectations to fit the inputs right that's the active inference idea yeah and so all it can do is
you know paddle send things out send out positions you know move its legs or or yell something
and it's hoping that by doing that it can um it can start to expect things better or something
start start to be better at predicting um yeah all these ideas are very interesting and none of
them has quite none of them have I quite been able to encode and that my my feeling is like
the frist and stuff um there's a lot of kind of hand waving that I can't do in this in this
system yeah but it's promising nonetheless like there's something about it that feels right so
now I think the kind of frameworks that you're building is would be very useful to the field
because uh some of this I think at the end of the day if we have a good uh if you're able to
interpret the theories well that would be much much useful right and and I think category theory
obviously a logical basis it's a discrete sort of framework and uh I think it's more relatable
in that way uh more the continuous theories or the dynamical models and stuff like that are there
they're pretty they may be pretty good in but they're they could be very hard to interpret
and uh what's lacking is that it's a clear logical boolean logical basis and I think category
theory would offer that and so in that perspective it would be a very useful framework I think
cool I'm glad I don't know if there's some I don't know how a conversation like this will
continue but um uh if if at some point you feel like you have questions or if you think there's
some opportunity for a grant or something um I have no expectations but I think it would be I
would enjoy um working on something like this with someone so and you said you you're no I mean
I know you're still at MIT but you're now in central time zone which MIT is not oh I'm currently
in Austin at a retreat um okay so I should actually probably go back to that in a few minutes but
yeah um and I'm based in Berkeley now so I'm okay a research I was at MIT in the math department
for a little over 10 years and now I'm a research affiliate in their lids department
lids lab lids uh laboratory but uh I'm not paid by them anymore I'm at a place called
topos institute which is a category theory think tank or something like that in not cool in the
bay area okay I know Mike is interested in all the stuff so I'm pretty sure I'm sure he will
read yeah he will probably reach out to you after watching the rest of this recording so I would
expect things from him cool and then potentially us as well yeah yeah well thanks for your questions
it was really fun to hang out afterwards yeah yeah thank you for the thank you and feel free to email
if you have a oh can you can you put your the the best email in the chat um that way
I think Mike also sent an email yeah okay yeah that's that's all of them go to the same place so
whatever email he sent I think he sent the math.mit.edu one but this works okay perfect
all right thank you so much thank you take care great see you bye
