Okay, hopefully everyone can see that. Thank you so much for the opportunity to visit with
you all virtually and share some thoughts with you. If anybody wants to get in touch with me
or download the software, the primary data, any of those things, everything is here at this website.
So today what I want to talk about is this notion of agential materials and how we are
going to engineer with such materials. These are the main points that I would like to transmit
to you today. First, that most problems in biomedicine and also in synthetic bioengineering
boil down to the control of morphogenesis. And I'm going to frame this problem as the behavior
of a collective intelligence of a cellular swarm in a particular problem space we call anatomical
morpho space. I'm going to emphasize that biology uses a kind of multi-scale competency architecture
which consists of hierarchical problem solvers in various problem spaces. And we and evolution
and various parasites and so on can exploit this kind of architecture and the interface that cells
and tissues use to shape each other's behavior. I'm going to, in particular, tell you that
bioelectrical networks are a large part of the medium through which this collective agent
processes information and they're basically the ancestor of the nervous system and brain function.
And I'm going to tell you that tools now exist that we have created to read and write memories
into this software layer that sits between the genome on the one hand and the anatomy
and function on the other hand. And there are many, many applications here in birth defects,
regeneration, cancer, and synthetic bioengineering. So I want to start with this idea.
Most of the problems of biomedicine, so we're talking about birth defects, traumatic injury,
cancer, aging, degenerative disease, they all have one fundamental thing in common which is that
if we understood how to convince a collection of cells to build a particular structure,
these problems would be solved. So I see the end game of our field as something I call the
anatomical compiler. So let's have a vision of what success for us would look like.
Success means that if we knew what we were doing, we could have a system where you sit down at a
computer and you draw the animal or plant that you want to have at the level of anatomy. And then
what the system would do is compile that description down into a set of stimuli that would have to be
given to some kind of source cellular material to get it to build exactly what you want. So in this
case you might draw this three-headed planarian and there it would create that. So the crux of our
problem is how do we control the emergence and scaling of cellular activities towards your desired
complex three-dimensional outcome. Now of course we don't have anything remotely like this, we have
a very few examples where we can actually control shape in this way. And part of that is because
we are still largely thinking about engineering in this way. Now of course we're moving, but
we're moving from this position where for many, many, in fact thousands of years we've engineered
with passive materials. What's important about this kind of spectrum is that the question of
what can you expect the material to do when you are not around to micromanage it. So this traditional
material, pretty much the only thing it does is it maintains its shape. That's the autonomous
feature that it has. Once you've created it you put it in place and it maintains. Now of course
more recently there has been a lot of exciting work on active matter and computational materials.
And today we're going to talk about what I call agential materials, which is what happens when
you come to living cells. And that's why this anatomical compiler idea is not a 3D printer. The
idea isn't to micromanage and place every cell where you want it to go, but actually it's a
communications device. It's a way to transmit your desired target morphology to the computational
agent that is this collective of cells. Now that's a very weird way of thinking about this
problem, so let me try to explain how we got there. This here is a single cell. And so this is a
lacrimaria. And what you can see is that if you're into soft robotics or active matter you can see
the incredible control that this little guy has over his body shape. It manages to solve all of its
local goals, so metabolic needs, physiological needs and so on, at the level of a single cell
with there's no brain, there's no nervous system, everything is done within this one cell. And so
each of us has taken this incredible journey from being some kind of an unfertilized oocyte,
so a little collection of quiescent chemicals, to being something like this or perhaps even
something like this, a metacognitive human that's going to make statements about how distinct humans
are from mere matter that was here. And of course what developmental biology shows us is that this
process is extremely continuous. It's slow and gradual. There's no magical bright line that
you can draw at which you stop being a physical dynamical system and you start being a cognitive
system. This is a slow process. So that means that certain capacities that we recognize up here,
which are very common, we need to ask where did they come from and what other unconventional
systems might have those properties. And this is the field of basal cognition. So cells do many
interesting things. This is a cell. So cells have these interesting morphological capabilities.
This is also a cell. This thing can be up to 10 centimeters tall. This is an acetabularia.
It has a stalk. It has some roots down here. It has a cap. The whole thing is one cell. It has
one nucleus. The whole thing is one cell. So as you think about morphogenesis and this idea of
differentiation and different cell types, you can actually do all of this quite large in one cell.
This here also is one cell. This is a physarum polycephalum slime mold. The whole thing is one
cell. And so this is the work of Neurosia Murugan in my group. And what she's done is to place one
glass disc here, three glass discs here. They're just glass. They're completely inert. There's no
chemicals. There's no food gradient, nothing like that. And what you'll see is that for the first
few hours, it sort of grows in all directions like this. And you think it might just keep growing.
But what it's actually doing during this time is using biomechanics to pull out to pull on the
medium that it sits on and receive back the mechanical signals that allow it to measure
strain angle. And even though these glass discs are extremely tiny and light, what it will do is
reliably realize that there's more of them here than there is here. And this is quite a reliable
process. And so all of this time is spent acquiring information from the outside world, making a
decision. And at this point, boom, right here is where you see that it's already decided what it's
going to do. And you can play all kinds of interesting games about stacking these on top of
each other and tilting it and do various things. So even even very primitive single cell organisms
have these amazing morphological and behavioral capacities. And in fact, here, your your behavior
is the change of morphology. This animal sort of this this creature sort of straddles those two
problem spaces. So, so here's what we're looking at in biology, we're looking at a multi scale
competency architecture where every layer is not just the nested doll of structurally, but it's
actually a set of nested problem solvers that are able to have various capabilities, so not
passive materials, but various capabilities, including down to the level of protein networks
that solve problems in anatomical space, transcriptional space, physiological space,
and so on. And this enables some amazing capabilities. I just want to run through with
you some of the things that life is capable of that we don't hear a lot about in our standard
textbooks. So this is a flatworm, a planarian. And the amazing thing about planaria and they
have a true brain and all the neurotransmitters that you and I have and so on. And what you can
do with these planaries, you can cut them into pieces and every piece will give rise to an entire
perfect worm. So they're they regenerate. What McConnell learned in the 60s was that if you
train this animal to recognize some some kind of specific stimulus, you cut off the head,
the tail sits there doing nothing for about eight to 10 days, eventually it grows a brand
new brain. And then you find out that this animal actually remembers the original training.
So what you have here is the ability to store behavioral memories somewhere outside the brain,
and then to imprint that information onto the new brain as it develops. So the movement of this
of information throughout the body and a tight integration of morphological information. In
other words, how do we create this new head with behavioral information? What was the content of
the mind that this primitive animal had? And this is this kind of plasticity, this amazing
plasticity both of behavior and of morphology is not just for invertebrates. Here's something that
Doug Blackiston in my group did years ago. He created this tadpole, which has no primary eyes.
So this is the tadpole of the frog Xenopus lavas. Here's the mouth, the nostrils, the brain, the
gut. And so you'll see there's no eyes. But what he did do is to put some eye cells on the tail.
Now, these eye cells, first of all, had no trouble becoming an eye, even though they were sitting
next to muscle instead of where they belong next to the brain. But then what we found out but having
built a machine to automate the training and testing of these animals, they can see quite well.
And this eye confers vision. It doesn't connect to the brain, actually. In some cases, it connects
up here to the spinal cord. And you can sort of trace the optic nerve. It connects to the spinal
cord. And just think this animal, which had a very particular sensory motor architecture for
evolutionary time periods, all of a sudden in one generation has a totally different architecture.
So now there's this weird itchy patch of tissue on its back that gives some kind of electrical
signals. And this brain has no trouble recognizing that this is visual data and to behave accordingly.
So that ability to adjust to novel scenarios on the fly without needing eons of evolutionary
selection for it has massive implications. It has massive implications for evolution itself,
for biomedicine, and for our ability to use cells and tissues in engineering, because they are not
passive elements. They are actually problem solving, little problem solving engines. So
the thing is that now that probably sounds very strange to many people in the audience,
because we as many animals are very good at recognizing intelligent behavior in the three
dimensional world. So our sense organs, our cognitive apparatus is really tuned to pick up
a gentle behavior from middle sized objects moving at medium speeds in three dimensional space. So
when birds and mammals do clever things, it's very easy for us to know that. But there are other
spaces, including transcriptional spaces, morphological spaces and physiological spaces,
that where biological systems execute very similar kinds of intelligent behaviors. And if we had
imagined, for example, if you had an innate sense of your blood chemistry, the way that we do with
vision and smell and so on, if you could feel the different components of your blood chemistry,
you would have no trouble recognizing your liver and your kidneys and so on as intelligent agents
that were navigating that space with all kinds of interesting competencies. I'll give you a
simple example. Here are, again, these planaria, what we did, and this is this is the work of
Maya Emmons Bell and Angela Tong in our lab. And what they did was to take a planaria and put them
in the solution of barium. Barium is a nonspecific potassium channel blocker. What it does is it
makes it impossible for the cells in the head to exchange potassium. That makes the cells extremely
unhappy, of course, especially the neurons, and their heads explode, literally just overnight,
boom, their heads are gone. But the amazing thing is that if you leave these planaria in barium,
in fact, refreshing the barium as needed, they will soon build a brand new head, and the new head
is completely barium insensitive. Now, that seemed very strange to us. How could that be? And so
what we did was we did a very simple experiment, which was to compare the gene expression of barium
adapted heads with normal heads, and we found that there's only a small number of genes that are
different. So out of the whole genome, some tens of thousands of genes, it found exactly the right
transcripts to up and down regulate in order to make up for this really drastic environmental
stressor. Now, here's the most amazing part, which is that, of course, planaria never encounter
barium in the wild. There's no evolutionary pressure to know what to do when you encounter barium.
That just has never happened. So what we're looking at here is an amazing ability to navigate the
very large dimensional space of gene expression to find exactly the ones you need to solve your
problem. I often envision this as sort of being stuck in this nuclear reactor control room,
where the thing's melting down, you have 20,000 different buttons. How do you know what to do
if you've never seen the stressor before? And the key, of course, is that you don't have time to
simply start turning genes on and off to see what happens, and there's no time for that. And,
of course, most of that would make things worse, not better. So they have this really incredible
ability, which we still really don't understand, although I have a hypothesis about what's going
on here, that allows them to navigate competently this kind of space. This is a problem-solving
example. They are able to adapt to a new stressor that they've never seen before.
Now, this is transcriptional, and there are many such examples that I could give you,
but I want to, in particular, next focus on morphogenetic space, problem-solving in anatomical
morpho space. So we start life like this. This is a collection of embryonic blastomeres,
and then eventually, we get to something like this. This is a cross-section through a human
torso. Look at the amazing order. Look at all the organs, the structures. Everything is in the
right place, the right shape and size relative to each other. So you might ask, where is this
pattern encoded? It's got to be somewhere. And of course, one is tempted immediately to say DNA,
but we can read genomes now. We know what's in the DNA. What's in the DNA is the descriptions of
the micro-level hardware that every cell gets to have, the proteins. The genome doesn't say
anything directly about what the layout here is, what kind of symmetry it has, whether it's
regenerative, how many fingers does it have fingers. The DNA doesn't say anything like that
anymore than the DNA directly specifies the shape of termite colony nests or spider webs.
These are all the results of a physiological software layer that sits between the genome
and the anatomy. And so what we would like to understand is a few things. How do these cell
groups know what to make and when to stop? How, if something is missing, how do we repair it?
And as engineers, and this will be the last part of the talk, how far can we push this? So what
else can you build given a default genome? Does it have to be this or can you build something else?
Now you might think that, well, this problem really should have been solved a long time ago. We
have all kinds of genetic information, molecular biology and so on, genomics. Well, here's a very
simple example. These are baby axolotls, and baby axolotls have little tiny forelegs. This is
tadpoles of the frogs and a puslavus. They do not have legs at this stage. In our lab, we make
something known as a frogolotl, which is part frog, part axolotl. Okay, so now I ask a simple
question. If I were to make this frogolotl, is it going to have legs? After all, you have the
axolotl genome, you have the frog genome. Can you tell me if a frogolotl is going to have legs or not?
And if it is going to have legs, can you tell me whether those legs will be made only of axolotl
cells or whether the frog cells will somehow participate in this process? And by the way,
what will the shape of those legs be? Will they be like axolotl legs or like frog legs or what?
And of course, we have no ability to derive any of these things from genomic information.
So here's where we stand today. Biologists are very good at manipulating cells and molecules,
and of course, information about those cells and molecules and pathways. So we have a really
good handle on stuff like this. We are a very long way away from control of large-scale form and
function. If we wanted to change, you know, if you wanted to convert an axolotl to three-fold
symmetry instead of bilateral symmetry, what genes would you change? You know, we have absolutely
no idea how to do things like that. And so I think that both biomedicine and engineering are where
computer science was in the 40s and 50s. What she's doing here in order to program this computer is
she's physically rewiring it, right? She's having to interact with a bare metal, with a hardware.
And all of the most exciting kinds of advances in molecular medicine is this. It's a genome editing
protein engineering pathway rewiring. It's mostly focused at the hardware. And I think that we need
to complement that with the approaches that computer science took, which is to now understand, go up
and understand and take advantage of the software of the system. And I'm going to argue that biology
is reprogrammable in exactly the same way that universal kinds of computing devices are reprogrammable.
And in particular, what we're missing and what we are trying to work on is being able to
exploit higher level information processing, what we call agency memory, decision making,
problem solving, goal directed activity. Now, I'm going to use some terms from time to time as
things like intelligence and problem solving. And what I mean is not some sort of mystical
magic, magical feature that only humans have. So what I mean is a definition like one used
by William James, who said that intelligence is simply the degree of ability to reach the
same goal by different means. There's also a quantitative cybernetic version of this,
which is due to Wiener and colleagues, which basically looks like this. This is a spectrum
of competencies all the way from passive matter, all the way up through to let's say human level
metacognition and things like that. And so the point is to benefit from ideas and behavioral
science and cybernetics and computer science to understand how we deal with and how we engineer
with systems that are not necessarily down here, but might be actually at higher levels on this
hierarchy. And by the way, for many of them, we don't know where they are on the hierarchy,
which means we need to find out. So let's look at anatomical kinds of behavior or morphogenesis.
The first thing we know is that development is very reliable. So in the vast majority of cases,
an egg will give rise to this particular target morphology. So so far so good, very reliable.
But then we know that actually, it's reliable, but it isn't hardwired, because if you come along
and you cut this animal in half, right, or this embryo could take it apart into quarters, for
example, you will not get two half embryos, which you get are two normal monozygotic twins,
which means that we have something like this, the ability if this was morphospace, if this was,
you know, boiled down to two dimensions, the shape of all possible anatomies,
you would be able to get to the right ensemble of target states from different starting positions,
and you would avoid local minima and various other traps, and you would get there and we'll
talk more about this. So we're starting to understand that we can get to the same outcome.
This is again, William James's definition, we get to the same outcome, despite perturbations
from diverse starting positions. Here is another example of that in an adult organism. So this
is an axolotl. These guys regenerate their limbs, their eyes, their jaws, their spinal cords,
their ovaries, and so on. And what happens is that if you were to amputate anywhere along this limb,
the cells will very rapidly start to build, they will build exactly what's necessary, no more
and less, and then they stop. That's the most amazing part of this whole process is that
they stop. When do they stop? Well, they stop when a correct salamander arm has been completed.
So that now starts to suggest the process of anatomical homeostasis, meaning that this walk
in the space of possible morphologies that it does, the system not only ends up where it needs
to go, but then it actually can stop and stabilize where it needs to go. By the way,
regeneration isn't just for worms and amphibians. Humans have a highly regenerative liver,
even the ancient Greeks seem to have known that, I have no idea how they knew that.
Deer every year regenerate huge amounts of bone and vasculature and innervation, so these antlers
grow at a rate of a centimeter and a half per day of new bone, so remarkable regeneration of an adult
mammal, and human children are known to regenerate their fingertips up until a certain age. So if
they have a clean amputation and you don't close it up, you'll get a cosmetically a very nice
finger regenerate after that. So the other interesting issue about this is that, yes,
the systems get to the same point in morphospace, even from different starting positions,
but they don't all get there the same way. So this is worked on by Kelly Chang, a postdoc in my
group many years ago, showing how frog legs regenerate. And what you see here, we've induced,
so frog legs at this stage normally don't regenerate, we've induced them to do so,
but using a method I'll describe in a few minutes. And what you see is that while the
developmental path is to create a flat paddle and then sort of kill off some cells in between the
fingers by apoptosis, that isn't how the regenerate forms. The regenerate, and you can see here with
these little green arrowheads, you've got this middle stalk that creates the central axis with
a toenail at the end. You've got some toes that come off the sides. It looks a lot more like the
way a plant grows than the way the limb developed in the first place. So different paths through the
space, but reaching the same final shape. And this is perhaps my most sort of favorite example ever
of this creative problem solving process, which is this. This is a cross section through a
newt kidney tubule. So normally what you'll see is that there's eight to 10 cells that cooperate
together to build this kind of structure. Now one thing you can do is you can make polyploid
newts that have multiple times the amount of genetic material of a normal cell. So the first
amazing thing is that if you do that, these newts up to I think 6n or 8n are still perfectly normal
animals. Having multiple copies of your genome doesn't apparently hurt anything here. So that's
kind of amazing. Second amazing thing is that the cells in large in proportion to the amount of DNA
they have, so they become bigger. The third thing is that when that happens, the cells scale their
number to the right to the task, meaning that the bigger cells, there's now fewer of them,
that will come together to build the same size structure. And the most amazing thing of all
is that when you make the cells so gigantic, and I think these are the 6n newts, when you make the
cells so gigantic that they simply cannot fit with others to do this, what will happen is that
one cell will bend around itself and form the exact same anatomical structure. Now what's crazy
about this is that this is a different molecular mechanism. This is cell-to-cell communication
and some sort of tubulogenesis. This is cytoskeletal bending. So what you have here is an example of
top-down causation. In the service of maintaining a specific anatomical structure, meaning in order
to stay in that region of anatomical morpho space, or to reach it rather, you can call up different
low-level mechanisms. This of course is something we see in neuroscience all the time. When an animal
has a certain goal in behavioral space, it will often execute different specific behaviors,
different low-level modules will be activated to get to the final state and development is no
different in the morphogenesis process. So the final kind of example of this before we go on
and look at the mechanism is this. This is something we discovered a few years ago that
a normal tadpole becomes a normal frog by rearranging its face. So the eyes have to move,
the jaws have to move, the nostrils and so on. And so this used to be thought of as a hardwired
process. Every organ just moves in the right direction, the right amount and there you have
your frog. So we decided to test that and what we created was these so-called Picasso tadpoles.
Everything is in the wrong position. So the eye might be off to the side, the mouth might be on
top of the head, everything is scrambled. And what we found out is that these animals give rise to
basically normal frogs because each of these components doesn't just move in the same position
that's default for development, it actually will move in new ways and if it goes too far it'll
actually move backwards in order to give you the right frog face and then they stop. So what
the genetics does is not specify, even if it could specify some sort of specific motion,
what instead it does is gives you a error minimization machine. It gives you a system
that can flexibly take action to minimize some kind of error parameter and in this case the
error parameter is morphological distance from this from this target. So the way we think about
these things is like this, that this is the mainstream story of morphogenesis, that you have
some gene regulatory networks, some of them make proteins that do things, they diffuse or they're
sticky or they exert force or something. And then you have this process of emergence and this is the
dominant idea in this field. The idea is that when individual components act according to local
simple rules, out will come complex outcomes. And so the idea is that this notion of emergence
plus complexity science will be able to be able to explain these kinds of things. And this is true,
there are many simple systems in which following local rules, even though the rules are simple,
give you something quite complex at the end. Okay, so this is all true. But there's a big
problem here, there's a huge component missing. The thing that's missing here is that this is a
feedforward open loop kind of process, which means that if you want to make changes down here,
let's say convert this guy to threefold symmetry or make some other kind of change,
this process is not reversible. It is in general impossible to know which genes you're going to
tweak to do that. So this greatly limits the opportunities for let's say CRISPR, genomic
editing, because beyond some low hanging fruit, we're not going to have any idea of what genes
to tweak, right, to get a particular outcome. This is an inverse problem that is generally not
solvable. And we think biology doesn't work like this either. What exists on top of this emergent
dynamic is a set of feedback loops, which if this system is deviated from the correct shape,
these feedback loops, and so that could be through injury, mutation,
teratogens, whatever, these feedback loops kick in both at the level of physics, which is what
I'm going to show you next, and the level of transcription to try to get back to the correct
state. Now, on the one hand, well, biologists know all about feedback loops, right, and there are
many examples of homeostatic cycles. But on the other hand, there's something weird here, which is
that in this case, the set point of the homeostatic process is not a single number the way it would
be for pH or some metabolite level or something like that. The set point here is some kind of
anatomical descriptor. It's a complex data structure. It's not a scalar. It's not a single number.
And so this scheme, this way of thinking about it makes a very strong prediction. The prediction is
that if this is true, then your opportunity to make changes is not limited to down here. What you
could do is to take advantage of what's great about this architecture, which think about your
thermostat. The amazing thing about your thermostat is that you can change the temperature if you
understand where the set point is encoded, and you don't need to rewire the machine. In fact,
you don't actually even have to understand everything about how your thermostat works.
The only thing you have to do is recognize that it is in fact a homeostat, and you have to know how
to decode and encode the set points, and then the system takes care of it. So if this is all true,
what we ought to be able to do is to find, decode, and rewrite set points, anatomical set points,
and let the same standard wild type cells do what they do best. We don't need to rewire the hardware.
So is this possible? And if so, we spent the last couple of decades looking for this, and
how we started thinking about this was, okay, so if this is a goal, kind of a goal seeking
error minimization system, what inspirations for that do we have? And the obvious one, of course,
is the brain. In the nervous system and the brain, what we have is a collection of cells
which work together to allow flexible problem-solving towards specific goals. How do we do that?
Well, there's this hardware, which is a network of these neurons that has ion channels on its
surface. Thus, you have a voltage state, and that voltage state is communicated to the neighboring
cells. And that hardware underlies the cognitive software. So this is a zebrafish brain. You're
seeing all the electrical activity as this fish is thinking about whatever fish think about,
and the commitment of neuroscience is that if we understood how to decode these physiological
events, we could literally know what the animal was thinking, what memories it had, what preferences
it has, what behavioral repertoires. Everything is actually encoded in this electrical activity.
That's a very profound and bold claim. Well, it turns out that every cell has this. Every cell
has ion channels. Most cells have gap junction, these electrical synapses with their neighbors.
And this system is way older than neurons and brains. This was actually invented around
the time of bacterial biofilms. Evolution discovered this. And so you might say,
could we port from neuroscience all of the tools and concepts to basically do the neural
decoding that people do in the brain and do it during morphogenesis? To ask, what is the collective
whereas here what people are doing is asking, how does this electrophysiology help us understand
what the collective intelligence of these cells is doing? We ask exactly the same question here.
How is the electrophysiology of morphogenesis helping us to understand how that collective
behaves in morphospace? Because there is a very strong kind of invariant between these two fields,
whereas the results of these electrical networks, the computations that go on in these
electrical networks, control your muscles to move the animal through three-dimensional space.
Exactly the same system was the ancestral form. And what it used to do was make computations
to control cells to move your body configuration through morphospace. And what evolution did was
then simply pivot this thing from one space into the other. But all the mechanisms are the same,
and many of the algorithms are the same, although it's much slower. And so you have to make a couple
of changes, including speed. But otherwise, what we think is that neurons and synapses
basically just speed-optimized some things that cellular networks were doing long before
behavior showed up. So we developed some tools to try to read and write this information into
the collective computations of cells. So first, voltage-sensitive dyes. So this is
a voltage-sensitive reporter dye that helps you image what all the electrical states are in this
early frog embryo. This is a time lapse here. And then we do a lot of biophysical modeling to
understand how these gradients arise from different channels and pumps that all of these cells have.
So I want to show you two quick examples. And this is the work of Danny Adams in our group.
And what she did was make this video of this frog embryo that is putting its face together.
These are the early steps of craniofacial formation. And again, we're using this voltage-sensitive dye,
the light colors are depolarized, the dark are hyperpolarized. And what you see is that prior
to the gene expression that regionalizes the face, you already see, here's where the eye is going to
go, here's where the mouth is going to go, here are the lateral structures, these cells, this
tissue already has a pre-pattern, an energetic pre-pattern of where the different organs are
going to go. And we know this is instructive because if you alter this pre-pattern, then the
shape of the face is changed accordingly. And I'll show you that momentarily. So this is a natural
pre-pattern that is required for normal morphogenesis. This is a pathological pattern where we can inject
human oncogene into these tadpoles. What the oncogene does is cause them electrically to
disconnect from their neighbors and to depolarize. And at that point, they just become amoebas. The
boundary between self and world shifts, they scale down to the kinds of things individual cells know
how to do as opposed to large cellular networks, and they become a tumor, and they metastasize,
and they sort of treat the rest of the animals just external environment. So this is how we trace
and track these communications. Now, the more important thing, which is the functional tools.
Basically, what we do is we steal everything from neuroscience. We don't use any applied
electromagnetic fields. We don't use electrodes. What we do is we target using molecular tools,
such as pharmacology and optogenetics. We use molecular tools to target the natural interface
that these cells offer to us and to each other. That interface is, of course, the gap junctions that
determine the connectivity of the network and the ion channels that determine their electric
state at any moment in time. So we can open and close these things with drugs. We can use light,
in the case of light-gated ion channels. We can use neurotransmitter signaling directly.
All of the same tools that work in neuroscience work in every other tissue of the body.
And here are some examples of interesting things that you can get that way. I showed you a special
bioelectrical pattern that indicates where the eye is going to go. So what we decided was to
reproduce that pattern somewhere else. And this is the work of a graduate student at the time,
Sherry Au, in my lab, and Vypav Pai, who's a staff scientist. What they did was to introduce
an RNA encoding a particular potassium channel into some cells that are going to be
the various other parts of the embryo, for example, the gut. And what you find is that
even in tissues that were, according to the textbook, not competent to become eye,
you can still form an eye if you first establish this particular bioelectrical pattern
that says build an eye here. Now notice a couple of critical things. First of all,
these eyes have the same sort of internal components that normal eyes are supposed to have,
lens, retina, optic nerve, all that. But we didn't give them enough information to specify any of
that complexity. All we did was specify actually a very informationally poor stimulus that didn't
include all the details. This means it's a modular, almost subroutine call. It's a trigger
that all the cleverness is in the substrate. It's the cleverness isn't in what we put in.
That's just a simple trigger. All the intelligences in the rest of the tissue,
which can see that simple signal and interpret that at the scale of organs. We're not telling
individual cells that this stem cell should become a retinal cell. That's not the information.
The information is an organ level modular trigger. The second amazing thing is this.
Look here, this is a lens, an ectopic lens sitting out in the tail of a tadpole somewhere.
These blue cells, which are labeled with a beta galactosidase lineage label,
these are the ones that we injected with the potassium channel. But there's not enough of them
to make a proper lens. What do they do? They do exactly what another familiar kind of collective
intelligence does, which is ants. They recruit their neighbors to participate. While there's
not enough of these cells to build a proper lens, they take cells that are perfectly wild type that
were never directly modified by us, and they recruit them into this project to build an exactly
lens of the right size and shape. Not only the ability to specify organs at a high level,
but the ability to take care of all the morphogenesis and, in fact, the recruitment,
the scaling of agents to your task is done in an automatic way that we do not have to micromanage.
This is great for engineering, for bioregenerate medicine. This is great. These things have all
kinds of interesting capacities that we do not need to micromanage. We can take advantage of.
What else can you do this way? Well, we can build ectopic. We can ask for a topic,
otorcists or inner-ear organs. We can make extra hearts. We can make extra forebrains,
extra limbs. Here's our six-legged frog. Or we can make fins. Now, that's kind of weird.
Tadpoles aren't supposed to have fins. That's more of a fish thing. We'll get to that momentarily.
Of course, this is all potentially very useful for regenerative medicine. This is our project on
limb regeneration. Adult frogs at this stage do not regenerate their legs. We came up with a
bioelectric cocktail that triggers a build a leg here kind of cascade. What happens then is after
24 hours of exposure to this bioelectric stimulus, immediately the MSX1 blastema markers are turned
on. You've got this blastema forming. Within about 45 days, you get this nice leg and eventually
you get a pretty respectable leg out of it. At this point, I have to do a disclosure. Dave Kaplan
and I are co-founders of a company called Morphosuticals Inc. We're now taking the same thing into
mammals. The idea is using David's wearable bioreactor technology to stimulate the wound and
try to get back some sort of regeneration after injury. Remember, we are not micromanaging this
process. We're not putting in stem cells. We are not directing differentiation over that time period.
24 hours of stimulation gives a year and a half of leg growth in the frog. It is not controlling
that process. It is convincing those cells right at the beginning when they're trying to make a
decision between scarring and growth, which way they're going to go. After that, we take our hands
off. That's a key strategy from the perspective of engineering that you want to exploit the
autonomous capacities of your material. You do not want to try to have to micromanage it.
I want to shift gears to this organism and really think again about this notion of memory
and goal-directedness in morphogenesis. These planaria are immortal. They do not age. They're
such great regenerators that they regenerate everything continuously. One thing you can do
in these planaries is this amazing experiment. Here's one head, one tail. If I cut off the head
and the tail, this middle fragment reliably, 100% of the time, gives me a normal worm.
What we discovered was how does this piece know how many heads it's supposed to have?
We discovered that this is the work of Wendy Bean in my group, that there's actually an electric
circuit that tells these cells how many heads are supposed to be built. What we can do is,
here's the voltage pattern that represents their memory of what a correct planarian looks like.
What we can do is we can go ahead and edit that, again, by targeting specific ion channels
to look like this. It's messy. The technology is still being worked out, but you have now
clearly these patterns as two heads instead of one. When you do this, you get a two-headed
worm. This is not photoshopped. These are real animals. Here's the most amazing thing. Not only
is this electrical pattern instructive for how many heads you're supposed to have, this pattern
is the readout of this animal, not of this animal. A single-headed body with normal gene
expression, so anterior genes in the head, no anterior genes in the back, can have two different
representations of what to do if it gets injured. In other words, I claim to you at the very beginning
that morphogenesis is a homeostat because it stores an explicit target morphology. It stores
the information on what the correct pattern is going to be. Now, this is one of those cases
where we've decoded it. I can show you that. This is that pattern. This is the pattern that
determines it. It's there long before the situation actually comes up. In a way,
this is an interesting example of a counterfactual memory. This is not what's going on right now.
This is a stored data structure about what you're going to do if you get injured in the
future. That's a really primitive version of something that brains do very well, which is
this kind of mental time travel where you remember what happened before. You can predict what happens
next. It doesn't have to be happening right now. Now, why do I keep calling this a memory?
This is the work of Nestor Oviedo that what we did was we took these two-headed planaria
and we simply recut them again in plain water, no more manipulation of any kind,
and we found that you might think that, well, the genomics are wild type. We didn't do any genetic
editing here. There's nothing wrong with the genome. If we get rid of this ectopic primary head
and we get rid of this ectopic secondary head, get rid of the primary head, and this nice middle
gut fragment that has normal genetics, well, surely it should go on to be a normal worm.
That's not what happens. What happens is if you keep cutting these guys, this middle fragment
will continue to generate two-headed worms, and you can see them here. This fulfills the basic
criteria of memory in anatomical space. It's long-term stable. It's rewritable because we can set it
from here to here. Actually, we now also know how to take a two-headed worm and get it back to
a one-headed state. It has latency, conditional recall, what I just showed you a minute ago.
The question of what determines how many heads this animal has, and that's an important question
from the engineering perspective. If you want to engineer life, you need to know what the
determinants are. It's really interesting. The genetics only insofar as the genetics creates
the hardware where the default behavior of that circuit is to specify an electrical
pattern that says one head. That's the default pattern that happens when you turn on the juice
of this electrical circuit. The cool thing about this circuit is actually reprogrammable.
Experience, not genetic change, but experience in physiological space
will convert it to store a new piece of information, and that new piece of information
is stable. It will keep until you reset it. What we're doing now is trying to refine these
computational models that merge the state space of the electrical circuit that maintains this
information with existing thought-in-connectionist architectures where people are now working on
understanding how electrical networks store and encode information in a way that allows them to
regain that information when pieces of the material are gone. There's lots of work being
done on this in computer science and machine learning and things like that. Now, it gets even
more interesting than just head number, because that's what this is all about, the number of heads.
It gets more interesting than that. It's also about head shape. You can take this triangular
shape planarian, amputate the head, and perturb the electrical connectivity of the rest of the cells
as they are trying to figure out where the electric circuit should settle. Here's the
normal attractor. It gets confused, and sometimes you get these flat-headed pifilinas, and sometimes
you get round-headed S-mediterrania. It's not just the shape of the head, but it's also distribution
of the stem cells and the shape of the brain that's the same as these other species. These other
species are about 150 to 100 million years distant from this. Without genetic change, what you can
do physiologically is to explore the different attractors that are the standard outcome for
other species, but you can explore them with exactly the same hardware. Not only can you explore
those attractors, there's a huge latent space of possible shapes that you can make. These are all
wild-type planarian cells. This is some kind of crazy, spiky-shaped form. You can change the
symmetry type. You can make composite forms like this. This is not some weird feature of planaria.
This is ubiquitous. Look at this. Look at the example from the plant kingdom. These are galls.
This bizarre-looking thing is formed out of the plant's own cells because it's being hacked by
signals from a wasp embryo that's in there. These are not created from wasp cells. The wasp
is putting out signals that hijack the normal morphogenetic machinery of these cells that
normally make a nice, flat, green architecture. Instead, they make this round, red, spiky thing.
That's because morphogenesis from the beginning is reprogrammable. It is amenable to being hacked
and because the cells are normally doing that to each other to get them to undergo complex
morphogenesis. I'll show you some examples of that in a minute. A couple of quick medical things,
and then we'll get to the xenobots. I just want to say that the key to all of this is getting a
nice multi-scale view, a full-stack model of what's going on from the molecular networks that express
ion channels. Here's where your hardware is determined. Then, to understand the physiology
that gives you the bioelectric gradients, and we have a simulator that allows us to do all this,
written by Alexis Pytak. Then, to understand the logic and eventually get it down into an
algorithmic model of how regions make decisions about what they're going to be. To scale up the
decision-making progressively from the hardware all the way to anatomical level and decision-making
where the regenerative discovery of regenerative interventions is the easiest. This is just a
quick example of how we did that, just to show you that this whole thing is possible.
Here's a normal frog brain. Here's a forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain. When these guys are
exposed to various teratogens like nicotine, alcohol, or even mutations, the brain has all
kinds of defects. What we wanted to do was to build a model that would help us find
repair interventions. As engineers, we want to know what's the easiest thing we can do to get
this thing back to normal. We make this computational model that explains how the
bioelectrics of the early ectodermal cells dictate the shape and size of your brain.
We do this. We ask the model in a scenario where that bioelectric shape is wrong. Here,
for example, this is the hardest case. This is a mutation in a gene called notch.
Notch is a really critical neurogenesis gene. With a dominant notch mutation,
the forebrain is gone. The midbrain and hindbrain are a big bubble. These animals have no
behaviors. It's just a radical defect. We asked the model something very simple.
Which channel could we open and close to get the bioelectric state back to normal? The model
knows nothing about the pathways that are downstream of the bioelectrics, all the gene
expression. All we asked was how do we get back to the correct high-level pattern that tells these
cells what a normal brain looks like? The model said that under those conditions,
this is a good channel to open. I can tell you exactly why. It's a whole story here.
This is the HCN2i channel. Then we did something very simple. We either introduced extra HCN2
channels or we just used two known drugs to open the existing HCN2 channels. Lo and behold,
they get their brains back. They get brain structure back. They get gene expression,
and they get their behaviors back. They get their IQs become indistinguishable from controls.
Even though they're still bearing this really nasty notch mutation. This is an example, and I'm
not saying this will work in every case, but this is an example of fixing a really drastic
hardware defect in software. If you override, despite the fact that you've got some broken
signaling machinery, if you override it with a top-level signal that says,
this is what your brain should look like, you can rescue a very drastic fundamental kind of
defect. What we're working towards is this kind of computational environment for designing
electroseuticals. You should know what your desired electrical state is. You know what your
disease state is. You use the simulator to say, how do I turn the disease state into the healthy
state? Then you go to the drug bank and you pick out an existing ion channel drug. Many of them
already approved for human use. Then you do some filtering to make sure you don't hit the cardiac
rhythm circuit and all of that. A couple of things just to kind of end on a couple of quick things.
What we see in evolution is this amazing process of scaling up of goals. These individual cells
have very local homeostatic set points that they can pursue, so metabolic and various other things.
What evolution did is allow them to form electrical networks that communicate,
that merge these little homeostats into something that can pursue a much larger goal. They can
pursue navigation policies and anatomical morphospace, something that the individual cells cannot do.
But this has a failure mode. This is human glioblastoma. When this process breaks down,
the cells revert back to their unicellular single cell goals, which is every cell wants to become
two cells and eat as much as it can and go wherever life is good. That's metastasis.
If you have this kind of unusual view of cancer as a problem of a shrinking computational boundary
between self and world, this idea that when cells connect to each other, they have a bigger
perceptual kind of cognitive light cone that allows them to hold on to bigger goals, bigger
homeostatic set points, you can think about engineering a therapeutic like this. We put
in the human oncogene. Normally, it makes a tumor. What we'll do is we'll co-inject a specific ion
channel to keep these cells connected to their neighbors. This works for nasty K-RAS mutants,
P53 and so on. You can see the oncogene is labeled in red. It's still blazingly strong
expressed, but there's no tumor. This is the same animal. There's no tumor. Because what drives is
not the genetics, what drives is the physiology and in particular the scale at which these cells
make decisions. In this case, they're making individual cell decisions of what's good for them.
They're not more selfish than other cells. Their cells are much smaller. The embryo is just
external environment to them. In this case, they're making collective decisions. The collective
is looking to make a nice muscle, nice skin. It's navigating this different space that the individual
cells can't. When we start to think of it this way, we can ask, well, where do the goals of
these collectives come from? Furthermore, what kind of goals are they capable of pursuing,
and where do the specific set points come from? That leads me to the last quick bit,
which is this. This is the work of Doug Blackiston, did all the biology, Sam Kriegman,
the computer science. This is a project with Josh Bongard at the University of Vermont,
with whom we've started this institute. We asked a simple question. If we were to liberate cells
from the normal boundary condition, could they reboot their multicellularity? Do they like to
cooperate fundamentally, and what would they build if they were out of their normal environment?
What we did here is this. This is an early frog embryo. We take some cells up here that are going
to be epidermis, so skin. We dissociate these cells. We put them in a little pile and get rid of
everything else, so just skin. Now, what could they do? Well, they could do a number of things.
They could crawl away from each other. They could die. They could do nothing. They could form a
two-dimensional monolayer. Many things they could do. Instead, here's what they do.
They coalesce together into this little fragment, and they become this compact little round thing,
the flashes you see are calcium signaling. What it does is this. It becomes a xenobot.
Xenopus laevis is the name of the frog, biobots, so we call them xenobots.
They're using the little hairs that they normally have for pulling mucus down their bodies. They
use them to swim. The ones on this side row to the left, the ones on this side row to the right,
and this little patch of skin starts moving around. They can go in circles. They can go back
and forth. We can track collective motion like this, where they interact with each other when
they take various long journeys. We can make them into various shapes. Doug does all this.
He can, under the directions of this AI program that Josh and Sam have written,
they can make various shapes. Here's a xenobot doing a maze. Still water, no water movement,
so it takes the corner without having to bump into anything. At this point, it spontaneously
turns around and goes back where it came from. This is skin. There's no neurons here. There's
no brain, just skin. You're starting to see the novel behaviors and capabilities, both more for
genetic and behavioral, that are in this tissue. It regenerates. If you cut it in half, just about
here, look at this 180-degree hinge. Boom, it folds up like this. They have some really interesting
calcium signaling that we are in the process of analyzing to see if there's evidence of mutual
information and who knows how many of the tools from neuroscience will fit here. Then
I'll just end with this. This is the most amazing part of all. We have made it impossible for these
animals, for these creatures to reproduce the normal froggy fashion because they're just skin.
Turns out that if you provide them with loose skin cells, what they do is they run around and
they collect these skin cells and they shape them into little balls, and because they are working
within a gentle material, just like us, we were working with these skin cells, and so are they,
because of that, these little balls become xenobots overnight. They mature to become the
next generation of xenobots, and guess what they do? They run around and repeat the cycle,
and they do exactly the same thing. This is kinematic self-replication. This is von Neumann's
dream of a robot that goes around, finds parts in its environment, and makes a copy of itself.
Now, this is extremely primitive. There are many things missing. There's no hard heredity,
meaning that the offspring don't particularly look like their parents. They all sort of look
like the same thing, but it is kinematic replication, and so here's the most amazing
piece of this, which is that what did the Xenopus lavas genome actually learn during evolution?
You might think that while it learned to make this, it learned through eons of shaping, through
selection, it makes this developmental sequence, then it makes tadpoles, but actually we find out
that, well, that's what the, and so under this scenario, the skin cells have an invariant outcome.
They have this boring two-dimensional life being the outer layer of the embryo,
but that's not the only thing they know how to do. If you take away all of the other cells,
meaning we don't engineer by adding different trans genes or things like or circuits,
all we do is take away the other instructive influences that basically bully these cells into
being this boring two-dimensional layer. What you then find out is that in the absence of that
behavior shaping, this is what those cells actually know how to do, and this is what they do by
default. This is what they want to do, which is to form a Xenobot with its own bizarre developmental
sequence. This is several weeks of development. What the heck this is that nobody knows. This
never existed before. There's never been evolutionary pressure to be a good Xenobot,
to do kinematic replication. All of this is completely emergent in the latent space of
behaviors from the machine that this genome encodes. So I would argue that in some cases,
evolution is not creating specific solutions to specific problems. It makes general purpose
problem-solving machines that are able to navigate different kind of spaces in new ways.
And as engineers, this is what we need to learn to manipulate. And I think because of this, biology
is incredibly interoperable. So every combination of evolved material, meaning genetic sequences,
cells, tissues, organs, whatever, and some kind of designed matter and some kind of software,
every combination is going to be some kind of viable creature on this enormous option space.
So all of the natural, you know, all of Darwin's endless forms, most beautiful, they write the
natural forms on earth are here. And all of this hybrids, cyborgs, every kind of
combination of these things is here somewhere. And that has huge implications for trying to develop
not only a science but an ethics of relating to organisms that do not share any path on the
evolutionary tree with us and have potentially radically different embodiments and thus minds.
So I'll stop here and just to say that if anybody's interested in this stuff here are
kind of a variety of papers that you can take a look at. I want to thank the postdocs and the
students who did all the work that I showed you today, our funders here, all the illustrations
by Jeremy Gay and the two company disclosures and always most of the credit goes to the model
systems because they do all the happy lifting. So I'll stop here and thank you for listening.
