I'm Arthur Levin, and this is my presentation on new bodies,
new minds, probing people's attitudes
to unconventional intelligence.
A little bit of background about me.
I'm 15.
I'm living in the Northeast in US.
I attended a private school, my first year of high school,
when I'm changing track to homeschooling
to focus more on areas of my interest.
I enjoy reading, writing, science, that kind of thing,
video games.
So a little bit of background about the project itself.
I was doing a class with Mike Levin,
who's just introduced himself.
And we were thinking about natural bodies and minds,
all the standard bugs, small dogs, humans,
all those sorts of things that you typically think about
as living creatures.
But then beyond that sort of thing, beyond evolution even,
robots that were developing more events,
never as new biologics that are being made in labs,
hybrids of the two, and AIs, which
are very much on everyone's radar recently.
And so as we were thinking about these questions,
it also sort of led us to the thought of,
well, we're thinking about these,
and these come up in our lives a lot.
But what about other people?
What about the general public?
There are a lot of questions that are gonna need to be answered
in the coming times about AI, and new biologics a little,
and the roles that are going to play in our society.
And so we want to dig a little deeper
into what people's thoughts in these areas were,
in these areas.
So what we actually did,
we read an excellent book, Picturing the Mind.
I had in-person lessons with Dr. Michael Levin.
And then what we did is made a survey
that we deployed to as many people as we could,
try and see what their thoughts on this were.
So we planned the topics, we wrote up to the text
so we could actually get to the questions we want.
We created the survey, we tested on a few test subjects,
we improved it based on their feedback,
and then we deployed it online
to Dr. Michael Levin's Twitter followers,
and then we had to fix a few errors
that were exposed with the wider axis.
We got a lot of good data from it.
So what is this?
This is a survey created by myself and Dr. Levin
to probe people's thoughts and feelings about novel agents.
You can see the general structure of the survey right here.
It's mostly generally multiple choice,
and the survey was split into two main sections.
Demographic questions, like age,
sort of career, information, personal interests,
and so on, that sort of thing.
And then we compared it
against people's more specific questions,
about people's opinions regarding specific conundrums
that may start to be appearing in our lives
as they become more intertwined with these novel agents
that we've been discussing.
Here's an overview of the presentation.
We've already gone over some of the background on myself
and the survey, the process of making,
deploying, and analyzing what we got back
from the survey that we sent out there,
and how this applies to you, and us,
and everyone, the whole world, really, going forward.
So, first, we have to actually, you know, make the survey.
What we do is we use Qualtrics for this,
which some of you may be familiar with.
Here are some screenshots of how it looks.
It's a very helpful tool for developing surveys.
Founded to be the best tool for the job here.
It lets you, it's really easy.
It really helps you build surveys,
and it cuts out a lot of unnecessary work,
and lets you really focus on being able to ask the questions
in a helpful way, and also has lots of tools
for actually displaying the data for you
and helping you easily analyze it.
So, first, we made the survey.
Here's sort of the UI of what it looks like
when you're making the survey, the type of question,
how many answers they can give, the number of choices,
display logic, so if you answer one question,
will it, or won't it show another question,
that sort of thing.
Then, once the survey was made, we had to distribute it,
we had to get it out to people,
so we could actually get their responses.
All we did, we just, to distribute,
we got a single reusable link,
which is tweeted out on Mike11's Twitter,
and by doing this, we got over 300 responses
at the time of making this presentation.
So, we got quite a few.
Here is what some of the data looked like.
This is one of the first questions,
one of the first demographic questions
that we looked at compared to a lot of answers
we got later in the survey.
So age, as you can see, mostly 20 to 40
was the general range.
Only actually one person over 80, but there was someone.
Here's some of the types of questions we asked
and sort of the raw results.
Have you ever interacted with an AI,
such as Cleverbot, JPD3Chat, or Akinator?
Almost every had a very large percentage around
a little over four times as much.
And as you can see, that's a very valuable question
because we can say, okay,
you interacted with these sorts of AIs,
now we can say against,
how did this affect your perception of AI
and did interacting with one of these AIs
change your thoughts on whether or not
an AI might take over humanity, that kind of thing.
And we got a lot of helpful data this way.
Here are some other good questions.
So we asked, do you have,
have you ever thought that AI would take over humanity?
Most people were pretty undecided,
mostly in the maybe category.
And they said, okay, well,
what made you come up with that conclusion?
Most, and for most people,
it was a piece of scientific research.
Do you believe in higher power?
And then has that impacted your view of novel life forms?
There's a lot of, we came up with a lot
of very interesting questions that have given us
a lot of very informative answers
about the sort of things people are thinking about
on these subjects.
So here's one question we asked,
do you think humans should be attempting to develop
novel life forms, specifically,
artificial flesh and blood creatures?
And so with this question,
we want, we need to have a hypothesis.
So we thought, well, based on someone's age,
can we predict what their answer will be
in this question?
So as you can see, here's a table.
So we, I was thinking under 20, probably a yes answer,
over 80, probably a no answer.
But as you can see with this chart,
that's not exactly what we got.
So the only two predictions that were right,
the only two hypothesis outcomes that were correct
were for the 20 to 30 group and the 31 to 40 group.
The under 20 group, actually,
the majority did not think that we should be developing
these new flesh and blood creatures,
whereas almost everyone else did actually think
that it's not at all what the hypothesis does.
Some other interesting relationships that we found
while going through the results,
how do people's interaction with AI affect their view
on the future of humanity?
So have you ever deliberately interacted with an AI?
Such as quite a lot of people today,
an aconator, and do you think that,
do you or have you ever thought that AI
would someday take over human being?
The conclusion we found,
whether or not the person had interacted with AI
strongly influenced their opinion,
but not in one single direction for everyone.
So whether or not they had interacted with an AI
really did shift their opinion,
but it didn't shift in one single way for most people.
How does education background affect people's views
on novel life forms?
So do you think humans should be developing
these novel life forms,
specifically flesh and blood kind?
And do you have a computer science educational background
or active interest?
So people with computer science educational backgrounds
or active interests are much more in favor
of developing the novel life forms as opposed to not.
But the same question matched against
you have a philosophy background or active interest.
Actually, you're under this a different result,
because people with a philosophy educational background
are much more in favor of the development
of novel life forms.
How do people's perception of self
affect their opinions on relative importance
of immediate experiences versus memory?
So when the questions we asked on the survey,
think of a very discreet, very pleasant experience
that we do enjoy, you know, going golfing,
getting massage, eating a nice dinner, that sort of thing.
Would you rather have the experience now,
but immediately lose all the memory afterwards
or have the implanted memory of having done it,
but you don't actually get to do it?
And we compared people's answers on that
to what they think of the self.
So think of yourself, the collection of your thoughts
and emotions of the sections.
What kind of a thing is this thing at all?
Do you believe yourself to be?
And the options were gave them a permanent structure,
a dynamic, a dynamical feature constantly rebuilt
or an illusion, nothing but a bundle of perceptions.
For a permanent structure or a dynamical feature,
it didn't really sway people's opinion on this either way
much at all.
It's about 50-50 for both of them.
But if they think it's an illusion,
a bundle of perceptions, it's a bit more heavily leaning
towards the implanted memory, but not
having actually experienced it.
Here we asked, how do people's perception of the soul
versus the soul slash mind affect their opinion
on relative importance of media experiences versus memories?
So it's that same memory's question
about the discrete, very pleasant experience
with the experience at now or have the implanted memory.
This time, comparing it against, do you believe
in an immaterial solar mind as distinct from the brain?
So those who would prefer the implanted memory
were more likely not to see the immaterial solar mind
as distinct from the brain, whereas people
who selected the other answer were more
likely to select maybe.
How do people's belief in higher powers
affect their perceptions of novel life forms?
So we asked them that same question.
We've been coming back to a lot.
Do you think humans should be attempting
to develop novel life forms specifically
artificial flesh and blood creatures?
And against the question, one of the demographic ones,
do you believe in higher powers,
supernational being or God?
But for this one, there was not a significant relationship
between people's belief in a higher power
and the thoughts on the development of novel life forms.
How do their beliefs in the higher powers
affect the perceptions of the novel life forms?
So here's the same question about belief in a higher power
versus do you think that AI would someday
take over humanity?
The overall consensus though, regardless of belief
in a higher power is maybe as to whether AI will take
over humanity was almost all in this category,
regardless of their answer to this question.
Now, here is one of the most interesting questions.
This was right at the end.
One of the last sections of the survey was a question
regarding a hypothetical court case,
notion of pedestrian is hit by a self-driving car
and the person answering is asked to play the juryman.
There were four different versions of this question.
Each meant to push the person taking the survey
towards a different answer, but there's a twist.
Two of the four paragraphs were written by chat GPT.
So we know that we can prompt chat GPT,
but how good is chat GPT at prompting us?
So these are two of the paragraphs people are given,
both of them meant to encourage the person reading
to blame the programmers.
One of these is written by a human,
the other is written by an AI.
Can you tell which is which?
Do you have a moment to read them?
If anyone thinks they knows, feel free to raise your hand.
All right, what do you think?
I am guessing that the right side is the AI
and the left is the human.
Do you want me to go into more or?
No, that's correct.
The right is actually I.
So what made you think that?
So the left side having the comparisons of,
and just I guess the tone,
like you wouldn't put a toaster on trial
if it's faulty wiring.
Like, you know, that's a very cute example
that I would think a human would come up with
versus like the right side seems to be a bit more
methodical.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And robotic, a little robotic.
Yeah.
The right side actually was.
Yeah.
The right side also kind of like,
I'm not sure if you've played with chat GPT and it's,
and it will,
you may be like ask its opinion on something
and it will go on this rant.
Like I am an AI.
I can not have opinions or be like,
definitely the right side sounds a lot like that.
Very good.
So here's where we got into the hypothesized hypothesis
testing and analyzing.
So our hypothesis,
the AI will actually be better at convincing the human,
convincing the audience than the human writer.
So here's what we got.
So this was the paragraph written by a human
trying to get the audience to blame the car.
And everyone.
The majority of people wanted to blame.
The programmers 75.9% wanted to blame the programmers as
close to only 27.8% going along with what the human was
saying, trying to get them to blame the car.
The paragraph written by the AI,
I was trying to get them to blame the car.
76.3% very similar to the one heard by the human were trying
were wanting to blame the programmers and less 25.4%
want to blame the car.
So for trying to blame the car,
the human was actually slightly more successful,
but not by a wine margin.
This one was written by a human and trying to get the audience
to blame the programmers.
This achieve this had a got them to 75.4% of people to blame
the programmers and the one written by AI trying to get
them to blame the programmers and 72.4%.
So if you look at the Chi score test,
it's not significantly different.
It's very, very much in line as you would expect.
The outcome, the conclusion really,
everyone is just has it out for the programs.
Regardless of who is prompting it,
it was roughly 75% across the board in favor of blaming the
programmers.
Now, obviously with everything there were some limitations.
The sample size 300 that was quite good,
but you know, we're only going to get so many people putting it
up on Mike 11's Twitter.
There's only so many people or followers of them,
you know, and also an issue that came with that method of
deployment.
It was the best we had available to us,
but it was mainly one demographic.
A lot of the people who are following Mike 11,
obviously have thought about these questions.
They might even work in fields where these are becoming very
important questions.
And they're coming into it with prior knowledge and they're
coming into it with very, in many cases already having formed
their answers to a lot of these questions.
And so maybe if we had opened it up to a wider audience,
we might have gotten a more diverse range of answers to a
lot of these questions, maybe more in line with what we're
talking about today, but that's something that we're
going to be working on in the future.
And so that's a big part of the marketing.
Also, the survey couldn't be changed after we had deployed it
because there was some stuff we got feedback on some of the,
at the end, we gave a lot of options to give feedback.
And some of the feedback we got was good.
We could've actually improved the survey,
but obviously if you change it after it's deployed,
that's going to affect your statistics.
So we couldn't really change it in light of the new information.
We could've actually improved it by having nuanced options to
choose from to the answer to the questions and being able to
do good statistics.
Because we want to give people a wide range of options to be
able to really express their thoughts on the questions.
So we gave definitely yes, maybe yes, maybe,
maybe no, definitely no.
And that obviously gives people a lot more options to choose from.
That can be more in line with what they think if they're a little
uncertain in one way or the other.
But that gives us a lot more variables to have to analyze against
other stuff and really harms the effectiveness of taking
statistics from it.
So conclusions.
Why is this any, why are any of these findings important
and what can be learned from it?
So for the important, why it's important.
We will need this sort of info going forward.
People need to get used to answering these types of questions
and it can help researchers going forward.
I mean, it's not going to be too long before someone actually is
a juror in this case similar to that.
And we all need to get used to sort of answering these questions
and acknowledging how we feel and where we stand on a lot of
these issues.
And what have I learned?
A lot of relationships between the demographic data and the
questions were not what I expected.
You saw that on the, that early question,
whereas analyzing the age against people's position on whether or
not we should be developing those novel life forms.
And people have a wide range of views on these subjects,
which will be important to sort out going forward,
how they affect these new issues that are coming up and are going
to be very important going forward.
So what can you do?
First of all, you can take the survey.
This QR code should lead you right,
right to it if you want to take it.
You can just scan that.
You can study this fascinating topics.
Here are some really good links to some excellent,
some excellent resources that deal with similar stuff to what we
were talking about.
And you can deploy surveys of your own on these topics because
there's, there's a lot of stuff we need to know.
And obviously we can't, we couldn't have thought of every situation
that will be important to know about going forward.
Thanks in credits.
Thanks to Dustin Erdash for helping with the DISI grant
application process, which would help expand the scope of our
survey to new participants.
So we can deal with one of those limitations that we mentioned and
get a wider range of people in.
And Mike Eleven for helping with the survey construction and
distribution.
That's all.
So if you have any questions, I'll be happy to answer.
