Thank you so much.
Thank you for having me here.
It's a huge, huge pleasure to be able to share some ideas
with you all.
I've never been to this conference before
and I'm very gonna really enjoy saying some things
that are actually fairly, let's say not as radical
as some other things that probably people have said.
So that's a new experience for me.
And so if anybody's interested in the kinds of things I do,
you can find all of that here.
I want to say right up front to set expectations.
I don't particularly work on consciousness per se.
I work on cognition, agency, intelligence, things like that.
And I do think they have implications
and so I will kind of go out on the ledge here today.
But I'm gonna make a fairly modest claim.
I'm not going to try to produce a new theory
of consciousness, I'm not going to try to support
one specific theory of consciousness with data.
Here's what I'm going to try to do.
I'm gonna try to make a fairly simple argument
that if we use composition and behavior
as evidence of consciousness in other systems
when addressing the problem of other minds,
that is if our criteria include things like
what are you made of, what are your behavioral competencies
and so on, if that's how we address it,
then for the exact same reasons
that we tend to associate consciousness
with complex brains, we need to take very seriously
the possibility of consciousness in many body structures.
That's a very controversial claim in some audiences,
maybe it won't be particularly controversial here.
But what I'd really like to do is to widen
the set of systems about which we think
when we think about consciousness and related issues
beyond human brains, when we talk about AI,
I don't want to think specifically
about just is it human-like
because it's actually much more interesting than that.
So one of the key things is that I think
we have to move beyond these kind of conventional
intelligences, there's a famous painting of Adam
naming the animals in the Garden of Eden
and if you think that there are these
very sort of discreet natural kinds,
then one can have these binary categories
of which things do and do not have consciousness.
People are pretty sure about Adam,
not so sure about some of the stuff
that's not shown here, paramecia, slime molds,
they are various other things.
So the reason that we have to think about these things
is that the standard human,
which features prominently in philosophical accounts
of consciousness and so on,
is really just one point on two continua
or four, depending on how you want to count.
But this kind of conscious or agential glow is,
you have to sort of decide what happens to it
as you walk backwards from a modern adult human
all the way back to the oocyte that all of us once were.
You can also walk it back on an evolutionary timescale
and ask what happens all the way back
because all of these things are smooth and continuous.
And in fact, with modern bioengineering
and synthetic biology, it's now very clear
that both using biological means
and sort of hybrid technological means,
we can create hybrids and chimeras in every possible way
and really extend the typical embodiment
in very diverse directions.
And so we'll get back to this more towards the end of the talk.
And so what I've been working on is a framework,
which I call TAME,
or stands for technological approach for mind everywhere.
And the idea is to be able to recognize, create,
and ethically relate to truly diverse intelligences.
So regardless of composition,
meaning what you're made of or origin story,
meaning whether you were produced the natural way
or engineered or some combination thereof.
And I want to be able to handle all of these kinds of things.
And the familiar creatures, all kinds of weird colonial
and synthetic organisms,
AIs, whether software or hardware,
and potentially exobiological agents.
And so of course, people have tried before for these kinds of,
so this is a Rosenbluth et al from the 1940s,
trying for a scale of these kinds of things
that are not particularly bound to embodiments,
let's say brains and things like that,
very kind of cybernetic definition.
And I've been working on a model that has to do
with what I call a cognitive light cone,
which is this idea that all agents have one thing in common,
no matter what they're made of or how they got here,
which is the ability to pursue certain goals
in certain spaces and the size of those goals,
the literal spatial temporal size of the largest goal
that an agent can pursue,
is one way that we can classify
and compare very diverse intelligences.
And the critical thing is that,
as I'm primarily a developmental biologist,
the thing that always just astounds me
is that all of us were once,
what people call, quote unquote, just physics.
We were all a quiescent oocyte, a little blob of chemicals,
and slowly, gradually, without any magical lightning flash
that comes in at any particular point during development,
we become one of these things,
or perhaps even something like this
that can reason back and make comments
about not being a machine
or being more than physics and something like that.
So this process is very slow and gradual,
and what we're interested in
is that process and the scaling of competencies
of very simple, minimal matter,
chemical signals, systems and cells and tissues,
the scaling up of the tiny little goals of single cells,
so metabolic and transcriptional goals
and things like this,
into collective systems that have very large goals,
I'll talk about this momentarily,
and the kinds of failure modes that the system has,
which is a breakdown of that collectivity into cancer,
back down to cells that have little tiny goals
about proliferation and migration,
and that's it,
and they no longer care about the rest of the system.
So the meat of our research program
has to do with understanding the scaling,
understanding that cognitive light cone
and how it actually scales up from that of a single cell,
and in fact, below that in some other work
that we've done with Chris Fields and Carl Friston,
and up, up and up.
And one of the things that happens in development,
which is kind of interesting,
is the auto-poeses or self-construction
of a single individual from a kind of a pool of potentiality,
and it looks like this,
this is an early blastoderm,
let's say of a human or a chicken or many other animals.
We see, let's say 50,000 cells,
and we say there's an embryo.
What are we counting when we say that's one embryo?
I mean, there really isn't one of anything physical,
there are many, many cells.
What is there one of?
And this is gonna become an individual.
Well, what there's one of is alignment,
both physical alignment and kind of functional alignment
towards a particular goal.
That alignment is the creation of a particular target
morphology, a particular anatomical structure.
As I'll show you momentarily, if you try to deviate it,
it will find new ways to get there.
So it's definitely this kind of homeostatic system.
But there doesn't have to be just one.
And if you make temporary scratches in this blastoderm,
what you end up with, each of these regions
not being able to feel the other self-organizes
into an embryo.
And eventually you end up with twins, triplets,
and many other cells.
So the question of how many individuals are in an embryo
is actually not clear.
It's not set up by the genetics,
it's a physiological self-organizational process.
And what it means is that each one of these individuals
has to, on the fly, every single time
that they arise in this physical world,
they have to solve this important problem.
Where do I end, and where does the environment begin?
Every cell is some other cell's environment.
How do these cells know what they belong to?
And so as I think Turing actually recognized,
this question of how bodies self-organize
is probably fundamentally the same
as the question of how minds self-organize.
And we see these kinds of dynamics in split-brain patients
and dissociative disorders and so on.
This question of how many individuals
are present within a particular amount of medium
that underlies it.
And so then people who think about these things
often think, well, okay, we have these,
what we call collective intelligences,
colonies of ants and termites and so on.
But at least we are a true unified intelligence, right?
We sort of, many people think that there's
a fundamental difference between these cases.
But of course, and for example,
Descartes really liked the pineal gland
because it's an unpaired structure,
and he felt that was suitable to the unified
human experience.
But if he had had access to good microscopy,
he would have noticed that there isn't one
of anything here either.
This is what the pineal gland tissues look like
inside of each one of these cells.
You get all of this stuff.
So there's an incredible multi-scale organization.
And so the fact of the matter is, I think,
that we are all collective intelligences.
We are made of this kind of agential material.
So this is a lacrimary, it's a single cell.
It has no brain, it has no nervous system.
It's very good at taking care of local goals
in terms of its anatomical structure,
in terms of metabolism and so on.
And when we talk about machines and living organisms
and consciousness, we have to remember
that whatever theories we make,
have to make a ruling on things like this.
What happens here?
I mean, certainly people have a very chemistry-based
views of these things, but this is
what we are actually made of.
We may not feel like a collective of competent,
tiny little cells that are managing perception,
action, loops towards emergent goals
and weird problem spaces.
But in fact, I think that is exactly
what it feels like to be that kind of a system.
So I think we do, in fact, feel like exactly that.
And so the research program that we and others
are embarked upon is to discover the scaling rules.
How do we go from the individual competencies
of our components to rotating those goals and competencies
into novel spaces?
And so in bodies, not just human, but all bodies,
biology uses this kind of multi-scale competency
architecture, this idea that we are not only nested dolls
structurally, cells, molecular networks,
made of making up cells and tissues and organs and so on.
But actually, each one of these layers
has its own problem-solving capacity.
They are all solving problems in different spaces,
anatomical morpho space, the space of gene expression,
the space of physiological states,
and of course, familiar old three-dimensional behavioral
space.
And so that, I really like William James's definition
of intelligence, which is the ability
to reach the same end by different means
using some degree of sophistication.
So it's very good because it's, again, substrate invariant.
It really talks about the idea of a spectrum of competencies,
and it's kind of agnostic about what space we're working.
And that becomes important because, for example,
in conversations about AIs and other things,
when we say they're not embodied,
I think we really need to expand our understanding of what
spaces we could be embodied in.
And so we and many other animals are
pretty good at recognizing intelligence
in familiar three-dimensional space, so good old behavior.
And this medium-sized objects moving
at medium speeds in three-dimensional space
were kind of familiar with birds and primates
and other things doing that.
But biology does the same thing in other spaces.
So there are transcriptional spaces
where cells are able to solve very interesting problems.
Same thing with physiological space.
I don't have time today, but I could give you
some amazing examples of cells exerting
novel problem-solving behaviors by navigating these spaces.
What I will focus on for a few minutes
is this anatomical morphospace.
So this is basically the space of all possible configurations
of a group of cells.
So Darcy Thompson in the 40s was, I think, the first
to really get an idea of this idea of embryos
and other morphogenetic systems navigating that morphospace.
And I think we really have to get into the idea
that beings can be embodied and can have consciousness
in these other spaces.
I think that while we're very good at this,
if you could imagine if you had an innate, immediate sense
of your blood chemistry, let's say,
I think you would have no problem recognizing
that you live in a higher-dimensional space
and that your liver, your kidneys, and other organs
are, in fact, problem-solving intelligent agents
that are navigating that space exactly the way
you navigate three-dimensional space.
So let's focus on morphospace and talk for a few minutes
about what the competencies are of this.
What we argue is that, actually, morphogenesis
is the behavior of a collective intelligence.
It's the collective intelligence of cells
trying to achieve a particular anatomical structure.
One thing we know is that development
is incredibly robust and reliable,
but it is not hardwired.
So if I cut an early embryo in half,
I don't get two half bodies.
I get two perfectly normal monosygotic twins.
And so there's this notion of different starting states
being able to lead to the same goal state,
this ensemble in morphospace that we equate
to a normal target morphology,
and they can avoid certain local minimum.
Here's an example that we discovered some years ago.
This is a tappel here, the eyes, the nostrils, the brain.
And tappels need to become frogs.
And in order to become frogs, they
have to rearrange their face.
So the eyes, the nostrils, everything has to move around.
And so it was thought that this was a hardwired process,
that every organ just moves in the right direction
the right amount.
What we decided to test that and to see
how much intelligence actually is there.
And so we created what we call Picasso tappels.
Everything is scrambled.
The eyes on the back of the head, the jaws are off
to the side, everything is kind of mixed around.
And what we found is that these tappels
become largely normal frogs.
Because in fact, genetics does not specify
hardwired rearrangements.
What it gives you is a problem-solving machine
where every organ now moves in novel, unexpected paths
to get to where it's going.
Sometimes it actually overshoots and has to come back.
But it'll stop when it's done.
So what you really have here is a machine
that can do a kind of error minimization scheme
and start off in different configurations,
but always get to that same place in morphospace.
And this is of course what happens in regeneration.
This guy is an axolotl.
They regenerate their legs, their eyes, their jaws,
and so on.
And you can amputate the limb anywhere.
And these cells will build exactly what's needed
until they get to a correct salamander limb
and then they stop.
This, of course, is the most amazing thing about this.
This process is that it stops.
When does it stop when a correct limb has been formed?
Individual cells don't know anything about what a limb is
or how many fingers you're supposed to have,
but the collective absolutely does.
And it can stop when you get there,
no matter where you started.
It goes beyond this process of problem-solving
goes beyond damage to an existing structure
to what I think of as a good example of really
basal, creative problem-solving.
And it looks like this.
This is a cross-section of a kidney tubule in a nut.
And so usually about eight to 10 cells work together
to create these little tubules.
But if you artificially make the cells very large,
so this is different than damage.
This is not something that normally happens in evolution.
Nuts lose their arms all the time,
but this is quite different.
We've artificially made these cells to be gigantic.
And so what happens is then fewer of them get together
and they make the exact same size lumen.
And the most remarkable thing is that you can make these cells
truly enormous, and the way you do this, by the way,
is you make them polyploid.
So they have multiple copies of their genetic material,
and so the cells get bigger and bigger.
And in that case, one single cell will wrap around itself
and give you the whole lumen.
What's amazing about this example is a couple of things.
Number one, scaling of number to size,
so you can wrap your head around that.
But what's happening here is a completely different molecular
mechanism.
Instead of cell to cell communication,
you're now using cytoskeletal bending.
So this is a good example of top-down causation,
where in the service of a particular anatomical goal,
different molecular mechanisms will
get called up to solve the problem,
to give you the same outcome.
And the second cool thing about this
is that this is really an example of unreliable hardware.
As an embryo, you can't count on how many
copies of your genetic material you have.
You can't count on what the size of your cells are going to be.
You have to figure out how to get the job done,
despite massive amounts of novelty, injuries, uncertainty,
and your own parts and in the environment.
So this is very basal kind of collective problem solving.
And how does all this happen?
How can they do this?
And so amazingly, or maybe looking backwards,
not so amazingly, it happens using the same mechanisms
that the nervous system uses to perform these functions.
So I don't have to tell anybody here
what the hardware and software looks like,
but this idea of ion channels setting up various states
that then drive the physiology that
is thought to underlie various aspects of cognition
and consciousness.
And neuroscience has this project of neural decoding,
where we're going to try to read all of these things
and infer what the creature is thinking,
remembering, experiencing, and so on.
So the kind of salient effect here
is that this system did not arise when brains and neurons came
on the scene.
This is evolutionarily ancient.
And even back at the time of bacterial biofilms,
through the work of Goral Sol, we now
know that even back then, already evolution
was using electrically-based computations
to coordinate across space and time
and to drive specific goal states from collective systems.
And so what we've done is now develop
some of the first tools that are able to read and write
this kind of electrical information out
of non-neural tissues.
So we want to do exactly what neuroscientists try
to do in the brain, but we look at other unconventional
intelligences solving problems in anatomical morphospace.
And so this is a voltage map of a time lapse of a frog embryo
organizing its primary axes.
And we can literally, using these voltage-sensitive dyes,
we can see, interpret, and modify
all of the integrated information
and all the communication that goes on
to enable them to reach collective goals.
And so it's a very parallel system, very much the way
that the bioelectrical events in the brain
are controlling muscles to move you
through three-dimensional space.
This more ancient system is using
bioelectrical events elsewhere in the body, right,
from the moment of fertilization to control all of the cells
to move the configuration of the body through morphospace.
It's the same thing.
And what we think evolution does is basically pivot
the same set of tricks across various spaces.
And so what we can do is we can, of course, we can image this.
And so this is, again, voltage-sensitive fluorescent dyes.
This is a video of a frog embryo putting its face together.
And this is one frame.
And long before the genes and the anatomical rearrangements
of the cells begin to form the frog face,
you can already read out this pre-pattern.
Here's you, and I'm showing you this one
because it's the easiest one to decode.
We have others that are a real bear to make sense of.
But this one is pretty obvious.
Here's the animal's right eye.
Here's the mouth.
Here are the placodes.
You can already read the pattern memory in this tissue
that is going to guide the collective activity of the cells
to be able to reach that normal frog target morphology.
And so this is the normal pattern.
This pattern is required for development.
If I perturb this memory, I'll show you in a minute
what you get.
This is a pathological example.
So this is a human oncogene that's
going to basically cause the cells ultimately
to electrically disconnect from their neighbors,
roll back to a unicellular lifestyle,
and their cognitive light cone shrinks
from that of a large organ down to individual cells.
And now, as far as they're concerned,
the rest of the body is just external environment.
They're no longer part of this collective,
and that's tumor genesis and metastasis.
And you can detect this quite readily, this shift.
You can actually see it happening now.
So the way we manipulate these things,
we don't use any kind of electrodes
or applied magnetic fields or anything like that.
We use the native interface that the cells are normally
using to control each other's behavior
and link up into this larger scale intelligence that's
able to move in morphospace and other spaces like that.
So what that means is we can target these gap junctions,
these electrical synapses.
We can control the voltage states directly
using optogenetics, using drugs that
open and close these channels.
We can control the neurotransmitter movement
through these networks.
All the same familiar tools of neuroscience
really do not distinguish between neural tissue
and other tissues.
Everything works.
The tools work, the concepts work.
Everything is readily portable, and so that's what we do.
So I want to show you an example,
and this is just one of many examples of what happens.
I showed you that electric face picture,
and one of the things there was an eye spot.
It was a particular pattern of voltage
that corresponds to an eye.
And we said, what happens if we recreate that same pattern
memory somewhere else in the body?
And so what we did was we injected ion channel RNA
encoding a potassium channel that
sets that particular voltage state.
We encoded it.
We stuck it in some cells that are normally
going to be gut here.
So this is endoderm.
And when you do that, those cells
are happily enough make an eye.
And this eye has all the right lens, and retina,
and optic nerve, and all of that stuff.
Many things we could say about that.
One of the most interesting things about it
is that very much like the kind of scaling
that you see in other collective intelligences,
it has the following property.
This is a lens sitting out in the tail of a tadpole somewhere.
The blue cells are the ones that we actually injected.
But there's not enough of them to make a proper eye.
And they know this.
And what they've done is they've recruited
a bunch of their neighbors, these unmarked,
because they were not directly modified by us,
cells to participate in this eye building project.
So what's happening here is these are all
native competencies of the tissue.
We didn't have to do size control.
We didn't have to tell them how to build an eye,
what all the different gene expressions and cell types.
We have to do any of that.
We put in a very simple prompt or stimulus,
build an eye here.
And all the stuff that's downstream of that,
including the way ants recruit their neighbors
when they have a task that's too big for them,
all of that works.
And so we're starting to see some of these properties
and how to interface with them in the body.
And one of the most important things
is the ability to literally rewrite these pattern memories.
So this is a planarian, these flatworms.
The most amazing thing about them
is that you can cut them into pieces.
And if I cut off the head and the tail,
this middle fragment 100% of the time
regenerates into a nice one-headed worm.
So you can ask the question,
how does it know how many heads it's supposed to have?
And if you actually look at the bioelectrical pattern,
you see this interesting pattern that says one head, one tail.
And what we can do now is we can rewrite that pattern.
This is kind of messy.
The technology is still being worked on.
But you can see what we've done is we've said two heads.
And if you cut this animal, now you get a two-headed worm.
And this is not Photoshop.
These are real animals.
Now, notice something very interesting.
This bioelectrical map that is the map of this
perfectly normal anatomical structure, one-headed creature.
The gene expression is in the right place.
The anatomy is in the right place.
What we've changed is the internal representation
of what a correct planarian looks like.
And they stay normal until you injure them.
If you injure them, then all the cells consult this pattern
and they end up building this different pattern.
So that question that I asked at the very beginning,
how do the regenerating cells know what to make?
They literally store a memory of where in morphospace
they're supposed to go.
That memory is rewritable.
And you can think of this as a very primitive precursor
to our amazing mental time travel capacities
being able to imagine things that haven't happened yet
and remember things that are not happening now.
Because this bioelectrical pattern
is not a map of this two-headed creature.
This is a map of this perfectly normal one-headed animal.
So a single planarian body is able to store at least
two different representations of what
a correct planarian is supposed to look like.
And I'm sure there's lots more.
But this is the one we've nailed down.
So it's a very primitive example of a counterfactual memory.
What would I build if I were to be cut at a future time?
Not what's going on right now.
What's going on right now is this, one head, one tail.
Now, I keep calling it a memory.
Why is that?
Because it has all the properties of memory.
So if I take these two-headed animals, which, by the way,
are genetically perfectly normal.
So the question of what sets the number of heads
in the planarium is not very simple.
It's not that the answer is non-genetics.
Because if I take this two-headed animal
with a perfectly wild type genome,
I can cut him again and again.
And in perpetuity, he will continue
to regenerate as two-headed forms until we set him back.
We know how to rewrite it back to the one-headed state.
And so this question of how many heads
are supposed to be formed, that memory of where do you
go in morphospace to the one-headed region
or the two-headed region, is stored physiologically,
not genetically.
It is long-term stable.
It is rewritable.
I showed you the latency a minute ago, conditional recall,
and it has discrete behaviors.
And here you can see what these two-headed guys do
in terms of when they're hanging out.
So not only can we control head shape this way
by putting these literally false memories
into this collective agent, we can actually think about,
as well, we can actually think about head shape.
So whereas normally, the species would
make a triangular head shape, if we
perturb the network topology, while it's
regenerating just for 48 hours, they can make these normal heads.
But they can also make round heads like an S-Mediterranean
or flat heads like a Pifelina.
These are other species of planaria.
They are, again, genetically untouched,
but there's about 100 million years of genetic distance
between these animals.
And so this, of course, includes the shape of the brain,
the distribution of stem cells.
They become just like these other animals.
And so the same exact hardware can be pushed
to visit other regions of that morphospace.
This is very much like behavior in three-dimensional space.
The hardware can learn many different things.
It doesn't always do the same thing.
And of course, you can get them to hallucinate
kinds of morphologies that are not even
typical for any species of planaria,
such as the spiky forms, cylindrical forms,
and sort of combinations.
So the exact same hardware can be pushed
into lots of different domains.
And so for the last couple of minutes,
I just want to show you one thing.
We were just talking about this anatomical morphospace
and the different shapes that are there and the species that
naturally know how to get to particular regions
and then how you push other types of implementations
into those regions.
But what does the space of possibilities
look like for totally new beings?
So let's make something that has not existed on Earth
before and see what happens.
So this is a project that we did with Josh Bongard's lab
at the University of Vermont.
And Doug Blackeston did all the biology
that I'm showing you here.
So this is an early frog embryo.
At this stage, we take the animal-cap ectoderm.
This is skin.
These are all of these cells are going to become skin.
We dissociate them, cut them away from the embryo,
dissociate them, and put them on their own.
They could do many things.
They could die.
They could spread out.
They could form a two-dimensional monolayer.
They could do nothing.
Instead, what they do is they gather together.
And over the next 24 hours, they're going to come together
and they're going to make this little interesting thing,
which we call a xenobot.
Xenobot because Xenopus laevis is the name of the frog,
and it's a biorebotics platform.
So the interesting thing is that the frog genome certainly
knows how to make this.
This is what we typically see, and this
is what we typically think the frog genome encodes,
a set of developmental stages, and then some behaviors.
But they can also encode this.
This is a xenobot, and it has its own interesting
developmental sequence.
It's never been seen before, and it has interesting behaviors.
What are the behaviors?
Well, the first thing these things do
is they repurpose their little cilia, the little hairs that
normally redistribute mucus down the body of the frog,
and they start to swim.
And they can go in circles.
They can go back and forth like this.
They have collective behaviors.
They have individual behaviors.
Here's one navigating a maze.
So you can see here, remember, there's no nervous system.
This is just skin.
It takes the corner without having
to bump into the opposite wall.
And then here, for no reason that we understand yet,
it has the spontaneous change of heart,
and it turns around and goes back where it comes from.
So these are spontaneously, motile organisms
that have different behaviors.
Here's one amazing behavior.
If you provide them with loose skin cells,
they will run around and collect those skin cells
into little piles.
They will compact them like this.
And because they're dealing with an agential material that
is not passive particles but cells,
these little piles mature into xenobots themselves,
and that's the next generation.
And guess what they do?
They go on and they do the exact same thing,
producing the next generation than the next.
This is called kinematic self-replication.
No other animal on Earth, to our knowledge, does this.
This is completely novel with this kind of construction.
And so they don't have neurons, but they
do have a lot of calcium spiking.
And you can imagine doing all of the things
that neuroscientists do with looking
for transferentropy and mutual information,
all these kinds of things.
So we can ask, what do the cells say to each other?
What do two xenobots say to each other?
We don't know their cognitive capacities.
We're investigating that now.
What can they learn?
What are their preferences?
Really important that we can't make armchair claims about this.
This has to be empirical studies.
So I'm just going to end here with two slides
to say that because biology has to solve all these problems
every time that a being arises into the swirl.
It has to set its boundaries, figure out
what the effectors are, what the sensors are.
And nothing can really be assumed.
It's so interoperable that pretty much
any combination of evolved material at any scale,
designed material, and software, is some kind of agent.
And people are already making cyborgs and hybrids
and every possible combination, which has implications.
We are going to be living in the next few decades
in a huge option space of new bodies and new minds.
Darwin said endless forms are the most beautiful
about the natural forms.
They're a tiny corner of this space.
We're going to have to come up with ways
to relate to beings that are nowhere on our tree of life.
So these old criteria of what do you look like
and how did you get here are not going to be useful anymore.
And all of these binary categories
are going to wash away as well.
Because when people make claims about machines and robots
and organisms, it's just very difficult to support
any kind of clean separation.
I'm going to stop here and just summarize what I've
tried to say is that biological systems solve and operate
in all kinds of spaces.
They have behavioral competencies that
include memory and learning and problem solving,
navigation, representation, perceptible by stability,
active inference, and so on.
The underlying mechanisms are also the same.
They use ion channels, electrical synapses, neurotransmitters,
microtubules, electric fields.
All of that is present in all of the structures
of bodies.
And if these are the kinds of things
that we think are associated with consciousness,
we have to take very seriously the possibility
that there are other unconventional
consciousnesses in our bodies and increasingly
being made by engineering kinds of efforts.
And to me, just taking a step back of how
we think about these things, all agency claims
are really protocol claims for how you can optimally relate
to that system.
And so as an engineer, I want to guess correctly
for various systems is where I am on this spectrum.
But of course, it's not just about engineering.
It's also about relationships.
And people are trying to develop sort of proof of humanity
certificates and so on.
And the question then becomes, what do you really
want when you have proof of humanity?
Are you looking for proof of native DNA?
Are you looking for proof of native anatomical structure
or something that we explore here, which is really
a kind of competency for compassion that maybe that's
the more important thing?
And this is an example.
Midjourney is an AI system that I
asked to draw its vision of two synthetic organisms in love.
And this is what it drew.
So if anybody's interested, especially these two papers
are relevant, but there's a whole bunch of work on this.
And I want to thank all the people who
did the work that I showed you today
and all our many collaborators, of course, and our funders.
And I thank you for listening.
Thank you.
