Well, good morning, everyone. Welcome to today's Harley Hotchkiss lecture. As you know, the Harley
Hotchkiss Memorial Lecture is organized by the Canadian Center for Behavioral Neuroscience at
the University of Lethbridge since 2013. The series was designed to bring in neuroscientists
from all over the world, southern Alberta, to present their research and need department.
The series honors Harley Hotchkiss, Canadian businessman and philanthropist that supported
scientific research. In the ten years of existence, it has brought in over 100 renowned scientists
to Lethbridge, making possible a most valuable exchange of ideas and information.
Today, we have with us Dr. Michael Levin from the University of Tofts University,
and telling us a little bit about his career and his accomplishments. We have Dr. Arthur Luxac.
Yes, so it is a great pleasure to have Dr. Levin here. He got a Bachelor's Degree in
Computer Science and in Biology, and he got a PhD from Harvard University. Among many, many awards
he received. He's a Distinguished Professor in Biology at Tofts. He's Endowed Chair and he's
Director of Allen Discovery Center in Tofts and Tofts Center for Regenerative and Developmental
Biology. And today, he will talk about how intelligence can emerge from cellular swarms.
And here, I would like to add my personal note that his work really inspired me how I think about
brain, but it is just a collection of smart intelligence and neurons interacting with each
other to create our behavior. And it is not only me. When I spoke with Brian Kolb, what he would do
if he would be just starting his career, he told me about one of the videos of Dr. Levin.
So pay attention because this is really exciting work. Welcome very much and thank you for coming
to join us, Dr. Levin. Thank you so much. Thank you for that kind introduction and thank you
for the opportunity to discuss these ideas with all of you. Afterwards, if anybody is interested
in downloading the primary papers, the datasets, the software, everything is here at this site.
So today, I would like to transmit the following main points. We will first talk about this idea
that intelligence and in particular navigation of arbitrary problem spaces applies well beyond
conventional brain-y animals moving in three-dimensional space. I'm going to stress this
idea that we are all collective intelligences and try to stretch some aspects of neuroscience
beyond neurons. And I think neuroscience has a lot to tell us about things that are not neurons.
To you, for a detailed example of this kind of thinking, I'm going to use morphogenesis
and I'm going to frame it as the behavior of a cellular collective intelligence in anatomical
space. Now, in order to have a collective intelligence, you need something binding the pieces
towards goals in other problem spaces. And that kind of is exactly the same as it is for neurons
in the brain, bioelectricity or electrophysiology is another way of putting it. And I'm going to
talk about how this is what I think is the evolutionary precursor of the central nervous
system and its functions. And I'm going to show you that we now have the tools to read and write
memories into this unconventional collective intelligence. And that gives us applications
and birth defects, regeneration, and cancer. And towards the end, we'll talk about this idea that
there are interesting symmetries across fields, in particular developmental biology and neuroscience,
which mean that tools and concepts can be ported in both directions. And I think that's really
going to enrich both fields. So the talk comes in three main sections. First, we will talk about
some introductions and really some ideas to broaden the usual kind of focus on conventional
animals, conventional brains, and so on. The first thing I would like to us all to remember
is that we all started life as a single cell. So we all start life as a piece of what people
call just physics. I really don't like that term, but a lot of people will look at something like
this and they will say, well, it's a little blob of chemistry and physics. This is an unfertilized
quiescent oocyte. And then there's this amazing process of embryonic development, which results
in one of these complex creatures or even maybe something like this. And all of us take this
journey, all of us go from physics to having a complex metacognitive mind. And it is important
to realize that during this process, there is no magic, kind of a bright red line at which point
you go from from being a physical chemical system to having goals and memories and preferences and
so on. This is something that has to develop slowly and gradually. So I'm interested in continuous
views of this process. And in particular, because if we take both developmental biology,
evolution, and in fact, bioengineering and augmentation and things like that seriously,
we realize that it's really a continuum in many ways that there is no such thing as a standard,
pure cognitive system, such as, for example, a human which people study. And so that means that
we need frameworks for what is now called diverse intelligence. And so I work in this field and
I'm trying to develop a framework that will allow us to recognize, create, and relate to truly
diverse intelligences. And this means not just primates and birds and things like that, and maybe
an octopus or a whale, but also really strange creatures, colonial organisms, swarms, synthetic
organisms that have never existed before, artificial intelligence is both embodied and
software, and maybe even someday exobiological agents. You know, after all, the Earth is an
end of one example of a lineage. Maybe there are very alien kinds of life out there. So what I'm
interested in is a kind of framework that allows us to think about all of these kinds of things
together. And of course, I'm not the first person to try for this. For example, here is
an attempt by Rosenbluth, Wiener, and Bigelow back in the 40s to come up with some general
waypoints along a continuum all the way from passive matter using kind of a cybernetic
kinds of notions all the way up to the kinds of things that humans enjoy. And so our work
in our lab spans from very basic kind of philosophy of mind and things like that,
to conceptual frameworks, to software implementations and bench work to try to test these ideas
and develop applications. And so I really like it when these philosophical ideas actually give us
new ways to move experimental work forward. And I will show you some of those.
So if we think about something I call the axis of persuadability, this is just a kind of continuum
all the way from very simple machines all the way through to human and up. What we find is that
different kinds of systems on this continuum are amenable to different kinds of interactions.
So here, really, it's just rewiring. There's nothing else. You're not going to convince
a reward, a clock or anything like that. Then you have some systems that are kind of cybernetic
sorts of systems where you can reset the set point and you don't really need to know all
the details of how they work. But if you reset the set point, then they will do interesting things.
And then we move up to systems that can learn. So various types of reinforcement strategies,
inference and so on, and eventually very, very complex systems that can be greatly
motivated by very low energy stimuli that encode reasons to do things. And so
there's this whole kind of continuum that is amenable to different tools. So we use different
tools down here than we use down here. And that means that we should really try to get it right.
For any novel system, we should try to figure out where it lands on this continuum. And a lot of
folks have assumptions, sort of philosophical commitments to things like they will look at
some cells and say, there's no way that cells are anywhere over here. Cells have to be simple,
physical, chemical machines and so on. And I really think that that is an empirical question.
In other words, it's not something you can have armchair commitments to. You have to make a hypothesis
as far as the problem space that these operate in and what kind of tools are going to let you have
optimal control. And then you can do experiments and then we can find out. And so there are all
sorts of different techniques for doing that. So given that we arise from a single cell through
this process of complex development, at least some people say, at least we are a true unified
intelligence. We're not really a collective intelligence like ants and beehives and things
like that. Maybe those can be called the collective intelligence, but they're not like us. We're a
true unified intelligence. And I want to stress the fact that this is really not a good way of
thinking about it. For example, Rene Descartes really liked the pineal gland because there was
one of them in the brain and he felt that the unified human experience should have a single,
not a duplicated, but a single point of contact in the brain. But if he had had access to good
microscopy, he would see that there isn't one of anything. This pineal gland, in fact, is made up
of many, many cells. Each one of these cells has all of this stuff inside of it. And so it really
becomes clear that we are all collective intelligences. We are all made of parts. There
is no such thing, to my knowledge, as a kind of indivisible sort of diamond of intelligence. We
all have parts. And this is the sort of thing that we are made of. This is a single cell.
And this happens to be a lacrimaria. It's a free living organism. It has no brain. It has no
nervous system. It handles all of its anatomical, metabolic, physiological, and behavioral needs
at the one cell level. So here it is. And it's a rather amazing little creature.
This is the material that we are made of. We're not made of passive matter. We're made of this
kind of agential material that used to be independent organisms and have all sorts of
competencies and agendas and so on. Now, one interesting that happens is that, for example,
when you train a rat for something like when I press a lever, I get a reward. You might ask,
who is the owner of this amazing associative memory that it formed? I mean, the cells at
the bottom of the feet were the ones that interacted with the lever. The cells in the
gut are the ones that received the sugar reward. Who owns this association between this and this?
And so here you need to start thinking about the whole animal. It's the rat. There is no single
cell that had both experiences. So no individual cell had both experiences in a way that would
allow it to form this association. So now we have to bind these cells in some functional way
so that you can have this emergent creature, this rat, which knows things that none of the
individual components know. And so this is what we want to talk about. We want to talk about that
cognitive glue that enables the subunits to form emergent beings that have memories and preferences
and behavioral repertoires in different problem spaces. I want to talk briefly about a couple
of unusual examples just to warm up because many people spend their lives studying, let's say,
mammalian brains or something like that. And I want to talk about some unusual scenarios that
can help us think in broader directions. So first of all, there's this idea that we have
significant metamorphosis in certain creatures that really helps us to think about how behavior
and bodies come together and how they intersect. So this is a caterpillar. A caterpillar is a soft
bodied kind of creature that requires a very specific kind of controller when there are no hard
elements on which to push. So running a caterpillar type of body is quite a specific task. And so
it has a brain that's well-suited for that process and it eats leaves and it lives in a two-dimensional
world. What it has to turn into is this, a butterfly that's a hard bodied creature, a completely
different controller. It lives in a three-dimensional world, flies around and drinks nectar, doesn't
care anything about leaves. During this process, the brain is mostly taken apart. Many of the cells
are killed. Most of the connections are broken. Really radical reorganization of the brain to
get from here to there. But the amazing thing is that if you test butterflies and moths,
they still have the memories that you trained the original caterpillar on. So this work has
been done and it's reviewed here. They keep the memories and not only does memory persist this
remarkable reorganization of the substrate. You know, when I talk about this to computer science
audiences, this is a huge challenge. We don't have any substrate for computation that could do this.
So not only have the memories persisted, but in an important way they're generalized because when
you've trained the caterpillar to find leaves on a particular, let's say the particular type of disc,
the color disc, when the butterfly goes there, it's not because it remembers the leaves. It
doesn't care about leaves. It doesn't want leaves. What it's generalized is the concept of food.
So both leaves and nectar are now food. So there's this generalization that happens and
all of that happens through a complete reorganization of the brain and the body.
It gets even more impressive in animals like this. These are planaria. These are flatworms that
regenerate every part of their body, including their brain. And so what McConnell discovered in
the 60s, and then we later showed using modern techniques about 10 years ago, is that if you
train them to, for example, to find food on this particular little substrate, this bumpy
substrate, so it's place conditioning, you can remove their heads. The tail end here sits and
does nothing. It has no behavior until the brain is formed. So they form a centralized brain in
their head and everything is reformed. And at that point, you can show that they've retained the
original information. So here you have information presumably encoded somewhere outside of their
brain imprinted onto the new brain as it develops so that it can run behavior. And so all of that
is discussed here. And that actually brings up all kinds of interesting philosophical
questions in the sense that if you chop them into pieces and these pieces keep the original
information, then have you really created multiple individuals which are, in a sense,
identical to the original? This is kind of the old malfunctioning transporter experiment from
Philosophy of Mind 101. And then I want to show you another example of cognitive plasticity this
time in a vertebrate model. So this is a tadpole. So here's the brain, here are the nostrils, the
mouth. And what you'll find is that there are no eyes here. We've prevented the eyes from forming,
but what we've done is put an eye on its tail. And I'll show you in a few minutes how we do that.
So when you put an eye on its tail, it makes one optic nerve. That optic nerve comes out. It in
fact does not go to the brain. It synapses sometimes on the spinal cord here, sometimes it actually
in the gut, sometimes out here somewhere. But in these cases, the amazing thing is that these
animals can see perfectly well. We've created a machine that tests them on visual assays,
so visual learning cues. And it turns out they perform quite well. There is no evolutionary
adaptation needed. So we create these animals. Their sensory motor architecture is completely
novel. So instead of having the eyes here where they belong connected to the brain,
there's this weird patch of tissue on their back that is light sensitive and feeds information
somewhere into the central bus. And then this brain can use that in its behavioral
repertoire. So no problem. So this plasticity and the ability of the body to change both in the
developmental time scale and an evolutionary time scale is something that's really important
we really need to understand. And we think that it is intimately tied to our fundamental
multi-scale competency architecture. This is the idea that our body from the lowest molecular
level up through actually the level of multiple individuals and various swarms, every layer
is competent in its own space. In fact, sometimes it may be in multiple spaces. They all solve
problems. They're not merely structural nested dolls, but actually all of these things solve
interesting problems. And in particular, and we'll get to this towards the end, I really like this
quote from Fabrizio Benedetti who studies the molecular mechanisms of placebo and nocebo effect.
He says, words and drugs have the same mechanism of action. The idea that this multi-scale architecture,
these levels are not independent. They are functionally linked. And so things that happen
at the high cognitive level eventually filter down to the molecular level and vice versa.
There's a constant flow of information up and down. Now, when I say intelligence in various
spaces, what I'm referring to is the idea that we as humans are pretty good, actually not great,
but pretty good at detecting intelligence in medium-sized objects moving at medium speeds
through three-dimensional space. So birds and mammals and things like that. And that's because
most of our sense organs face outwards and we have a very characteristic spatiotemporal scale
on which we are able to perceive intelligent behavior. Now, there are other spaces. There's
the space of gene expression. There are the space of physiological states. There's anatomical morpher
space, which is the space of possible anatomical configurations. And you can think that if we had,
if we had evolved with a sense organ facing inwards, let's say able to test, I don't know,
20 different parameters or a blood chemistry, we would have evolved with a primary intuitive feeling
that we live in a 23-dimensional space that our liver and our kidneys are intelligent agents
navigating that space in a way to solve various problems and so on. But this is very alien thinking
to us because we do not perceive any of these spaces directly. And our various body components,
in fact, solve problems in these various spaces. So for example, it turns out that even molecular
networks, so something as simple as a deterministic gene regulatory network or a chemical pathway,
can have six different kinds of learning, including a sort of Pavlovian conditioning
and so on. So even from the lowest forms of our components of the body, already some of the
components that are tractable to techniques of behavioral science and neuroscience are already
there with us. And in fact, one hypothesis that we've been working on is this idea that
what evolution basically does is pivot some of the same tricks. And there's this fundamental
trick about navigating various spaces, but it pivots this through different spaces, maybe making
some specializations, but basically all the way from metabolic spaces at the beginning of life,
all the way through to eventually linguistic spaces, and then the need to keep a straight
narrative in a complex linguistic space. And of course, this is the traditional behavior is what
most people in the field study. So what we just talked about is this idea that we really need to
broaden some of our ideas around what implementations might support different kinds of intelligence
and this plasticity that is underlined by the fact that all of the components are actually solving
problems as well. So what I want to do next is talk about this example of a really unconventional
agent. And this is a collective intelligence that lives in morphospace. And just very briefly,
I'll mention evolution, but we could talk for a long time about that. But so this is going to
be our example of how do we use techniques and concepts from both bench techniques and
concepts from neural and behavioral science to understand really a field that is mostly
considered to be quite a different field. Now, Alan Turing, of course, needs no introduction,
but he was very interested in minds broadly conceived. He was interested in intelligence,
in fact, in minds in unconventional substrates and computation, and what is the essential
element of being a mind and being able to solve problems and so on. So he specifically was interested
in problem solving machines and intelligence through reprogrammability. Now, it turns out that
he also wrote this paper, which is really interesting. He wrote a paper on the chemical
basis of morphogenesis, which is a very early mathematical model of the kinds of processes
that might organize a living body from scratch. So this idea of symmetry breaking,
emergence of complexity and regulation of patterns. Now, you might wonder why would somebody who is
interested in computer science and fundamental mathematics be looking at models of diffusion
and things like that. And I think it's because he saw something very profound, which is that there is
a really strong symmetry between these two fields. This idea that the processes by which the body
comes to be are really an important mirror of the processes by which minds come to be. And the idea
understanding intelligence and understanding the scaling of cognition in the universe may be quite
similar to how we understand where bodies actually come from. And I think that's very
profound. Unfortunately, he didn't talk about this directly as far as I know in any of his
writings. He didn't live to really explore it, but I think he was really on to something.
So let's just ask ourselves, where do bodies come from? So this is a cross-section through a human
torso, quite reliable in most births. And you can see this incredible complexity, this order,
everything is in the right place, the right shape and size relative to the right stuff.
And so you might wonder, where is this pattern encoded? Where does this pattern come from? If it's
so reliable, where is it? And of course, we all start life here as a bunch of embryonic
blastomers, and eventually you get this. So where is this pattern? And a lot of people will say, well,
it's in the DNA, right? It's in the human genome, but we can read genomes now. We know what's in the
genome, and what's in the genome is nothing directly related to this. It doesn't specify
anything like this. The genome specifies the micro-level hardware that every cell gets to have,
and so the proteins is what the genome specifies. And so now we need to understand
how this works. And so now we know the genome doesn't directly specify this
anymore than the termite genome specifies directly the shape of the termite mound,
or the spider genome specifies the geometry of the web that it's going to build.
These are all emergent features from the computations, the physiological computations
that that hardware performs. And so now we need to understand, how do these cells know what to make?
How do they know when to stop? And in particular, though, we won't talk about that much in this
talk, but what else can these cells build? How far can you push them? Could you make them build
something completely different? And then Regenerative Medicine asks, what would you have to do to
repair it? In other words, how do you convince cells if something is missing or damaged? How do
you convince cells to go back to the normal pattern? We're very interested in this thing,
which I call the anatomical compiler. And I thought of this when I was thinking about the end game of
our whole field, like what are we going for such that when it's done, we can all go home.
And the idea is that at some point in the future, you'll be able to sit down in front of a computer
system and draw the plant or animal that you want, or the organ or the weird biological robot. It
doesn't matter. You should be able to draw some biological structure. And if we knew what we
were doing, the compiler would convert that anatomical description into a set of stimuli that
would have to be given to cells to cause them to build that particular structure. Now, why do we
need this? Well, first of all, most biomedical problems would go away. So everything related to
birth defects, traumatic injury, cancer, aging, degenerative diseases, all of that would go away
if we had the ability to tell a collection of cells what to build, because then you could build and
rebuild organs and other structures at will. Now, the important thing about this is that
this is not meant to be a 3D printer. The point isn't to micromanage and put cells where you want
them to be. It's really a more of a communications device. It's really a translator between your
anatomical goals and the set points that guide cell behavior. Now, why don't we have this? Why are we
so far away from this? I mean, molecular biology and genetics have been cranking really hard for
decades. Now, why don't we have this? I just want to point out a very simple example. So this is a
baby axolotl. Axolotls have little four legs. At this stage, here's a frog larva. They do not
have legs at this stage. We make something in my lab called a frog-olotl. So this is just a chimera
of an axolotl and a Xenopus embryo. And both of these are sequenced. So you've got the axolotl
genome. You've got the frog genome. Now, I ask a simple question. Are frog-olotls going to have
legs or not? And the fact is, we have no idea. Of course, we can look empirically, but nobody
can make a prediction. There are no models despite the availability of genetic information.
There are no models that will make a prediction on an experiment like that. In fact, the genomic
data can't even be used to guess what the actual shape of the organism is going to be unless you
cheat by comparing that genome to something else that you already know what it is. So here's where
we are today. The field is very good at manipulating cells and molecules so we can get information
like this. We're really quite a long way away from large-scale form and function control.
And I'm going to argue that that is because we are currently where computer science was in the 40s
and 50s. This is what programming looked like in the 40s and 50s. You literally had to interact
with the hardware. You had to physically rewire it. But the reason that nowadays you don't get
out your soldering iron and start rewiring your laptop when you want to go from Microsoft Word
to PowerPoint is because we have figured out that there's a ton of power in high-level interventions
that reprogram and take advantage of certain kind of hardware. And I'm going to argue that biology
is exactly that kind of hardware, which again, for neuroscience, this is not exactly news.
But for molecular and developmental biology, this is a different way of thinking.
And this idea that we've only begun to scratch the surface of what's actually possible.
We have not really understood the amount and the type and the attractability of
information processing and intelligence or problem solving at different levels of biology.
And what do I mean by intelligence? Well, I like William James' definition.
William James said that intelligence is the ability to reach the same goal by different means.
It's a cybernetic definition. It doesn't talk about brains or whether you were
engineered or evolved or anything like that. It talks about the difference between two magnets
trying to get together, which if faced with a barrier will simply stand there pressed up against
the barrier. They're unable to walk around temporarily, get further from their goal in
order to finally reach it. They have no delay gratification ability, very simple system.
Romeo and Juliet, on the other hand, and this is James' example, have all kinds of complex
abilities, including planning and everything else to try to get their goals met. In between,
you have all sorts of things, cells and tissues and self-driving vehicles and animals of different
types. And so this ability to reach the same goal despite novelty, despite novel scenarios and so on
is a kind of measure of this intelligence. And it's important because these competencies,
these capabilities can be taken advantage of in therapeutic contexts if we understood how to deal
with them. So what kind of collective intelligence is due cellular swarms have? I'm going to show
you a few examples. One is that while development is very reliable, so it almost always you start
with a human egg and you end up with a human organism. Actually, it's not hardwired because
what you can do is take early embryos, cut them in half or in fact in many pieces, and you don't
get half bodies, you get perfectly normal monozygotic twins. And so there's this ability to
navigate to the ensemble of gold states corresponding to some kind of a normal human
target morphology from different states. And so of course, I'm collapsing a very complex
entomomorphous space onto just two dimensions to show how they all navigate to that set point,
avoiding various local maxima along the way and so on. That kind of regulative development is not
just for embryogenesis. It also works in some animals, it works during their whole lifespan.
So this is a salamander. So they regenerate their limbs, their eyes, their jaws, their ovaries,
their spinal cords and so on. And what's interesting about this process is that if you cut it anywhere
along, for example, this limb, they grow exactly what's needed, no more, no less, and then they
stop. That's the most amazing thing about regeneration is that it knows when to stop.
When does it stop? Well, it stops when a correct salamander arm has formed. And so this is a kind
of anatomical homeostasis. You can start off at any configuration and it will keep going in the
right way until you get to the right thing. By the way, humans can do this a little bit. This isn't
just for worms and salamanders. Humans regenerate their liver. Even the ancient Greeks knew that.
I don't know how they knew that, but they did. Human children will regenerate their fingertips
up to a certain age and deer regenerate huge amounts of bone, vasculature,
innervation and skin every year. So up to a centimeter and a half of new bone growth per
day when they're growing back their racks. And I don't have time to talk a lot about this, but this
idea that what evolution is working with is a kind of a competent material where cells will
really correct all kinds of defects and so on results in a very interesting intelligence ratchet
because that competency makes it hard for selection to see whether the fitness of the animal
comes from the quality of the genome or from the fact that the actually structural genome wasn't
great, but the competency made up for it. And the more that happens, the more effort from evolution
actually goes into ratcheting the competency mechanisms. It's a very interesting thing.
We can maybe talk about that afterwards. So now that we've seen that
collectives of cells can solve various problems, remember the problem that they solve is how to
walk a particular path through anatomical morphospace that starts out as a single cell,
for example, or a healthy organ, in the case of regeneration, and then is deviated from that to
a different location and then knows how to come back despite various perturbations. And they're
actually remarkable examples of this that I don't have time to go through here, but they're all
discussed in our papers. So now that we see that that ability to navigate morphospace is the thing
we want to explain, now there's an obvious thing we want to look for, which is what is the cognitive
flu? How are the cells all bound together to the same construction project? No individual cell
knows what a finger is or how many fingers you're supposed to have, but the collective clearly does.
And so we need to understand how the individual cells are bound. And so we're going to talk about
bioelectricity. Now, just to remind you of a simple experiment that forces that kind of question is
this. This is something that we discovered a few years ago. So here's a tappel, two normal eyes
at this point, brain nostrils, mouth right here. These tappels have to become frogs. In order to
become frogs, they have to rearrange their face. So everything has to move, the eyes have to move
the jaws, the nostrils, everything has to move around. And it was thought that this is a very
hardwired, meaning low intelligence process, because all tappels look the same, all frogs look the
same. So as long as you somehow encode specific movements, in other words, direction and amount
for each of these organs, you will end up from a normal tappel to a normal frog. So we decided
to test that. And the way you test the competency of these kinds of systems is by perturbative
experiments. You cannot do it just by observation. You cannot do it by only modeling. You have to
perturb them by, as William James said, putting various obstacles in their way and seeing what
they do to respond. And so what we did was we created so-called Picasso tappels. Everything is
in the wrong place. The eyes on the back of the head, the mouth is off to the side. I mean, the
whole thing is scrambled. And what we found out is that these animals actually end up being pretty
normal frogs, because all of these organs do not just go in the same path that they do in
normal animals. They will go in novel, abnormal paths. In fact, sometimes they go too far and
they have to double back until they get to the correct frog face, and then they stop. So what
the genetics actually gives you is an error minimization scheme, a system that can recognize
that it's in the wrong state and take corrective action to get where it needs to go to complete
that journey in morphospace, despite being started in a very abnormal configuration.
And again, this configuration is at the large scale. So it's not that the individual eye cells
are sprinkled throughout the whole head. It's the eye as a whole has to move in the mouth and
everything else. This is truly a collective decision-making problem. But it raises a fundamental
question. How does it know what the correct pattern is? What is the set point? How does it
know what the what the frog face is supposed to look like? And so to try to formalize it a little
bit, you can think of it as, first of all, this is the standard kind of story that you're told in
developmental biology textbooks, which is that there are gene regulatory networks. They make
proteins, they interact with each other in various ways. There is this process of emergence and
it's a very complex process, because lots of actually simple local rules are being carried
out again and again, and outcomes something complex like this. So this is a feed forward,
open loop kind of process. And this certainly does happen. And there are many simple processes
that give rise to complexity. I mean, this is true. But this is only part of the story and
I don't think even the most important part, because what happens here is something very
interesting. If you deviate from this state by injury, mutation, teratogens, many other ways,
what happens is that activity kicks in both at the level of physics and at the level of
genetics that actually tries to reduce the air and get you back where you need to go. So this
is not really an open loop process. This is a process of anatomical homeostasis. And on the
one hand, this is maybe not so surprising. I mean, of course, biologists know all about homeostatic
loops. On the other hand, there's a couple of weird things here. One is that typical homeostatic
loops have a scalar as a set point, a single number. So maybe hunger or level or pH or something
like that. In this case, the set point is basically a complex anatomical structure, not to the individual
cell level or anything like that. But really a fairly complex data structure here. That's first.
And second, certainly in behavioral science, you can talk about at least some kinds of animals
having goals and doing things for reasons. But typically in cell and molecular biology,
we are told to avoid that. You're not supposed to think about systems having any kind of a future
goal, or you know, you're supposed to sort of feed forward from chemistry and see what happens.
So this is kind of a weird way of thinking about it, but it makes a very strong prediction.
The prediction is that as a good homeostatic system, you ought to be able to make changes
by rewriting the set point. In other words, you should be able to find the biophysical mechanism
of the set point. How does the system know what the correct pattern is? You should be able to
decode it. You should be able to rewrite it. And those three things are important in applications,
because currently, the only game in town is down here. If you want to make changes up here, we
are told that, well, you'll somehow have to work out what changes in the lowest level rules are
going to give you system level changes that you want. And this process is fundamentally
irreversible. It's a really terrible inverse problem. There's no real way to reverse it back.
So that limits the applicability of things like CRISPR and genomic editing, because with the exception
of some low-hanging fruit, it's really completely unclear what genes you would edit to make large
scale changes here. So could we actually find the set point? And this is where we've been looking.
Now, in thinking about where to find the set point, we said, well, what's the one example,
the one non-controversial example of a biological system that really encodes goals
and the pursuit of goals? And that, of course, occurs in neuroscience. So we know what the
hardware is. The hardware are these networks of cells that achieve a certain voltage potential
by means of ions moving through the ion channels. They may or may not communicate that voltage
to their neighbors through these electrical synapse known as gap junctions. And so that's the
hardware. The software here, and that's mediated by this, it can be read out. So this group made
this amazing video of a living zebrafish brain, and you can see all the electrical signaling.
And it's the commitment of a lot of neuroscience that this is really the encoding of the cognitive
content of this individual. So there's this process of neural decoding that if we were to record all
the electrical activity, and if we knew how to decode it, you would be able to read the animal's
memories, preferences, goals, potential behaviors, and so on. That's the process of neural decoding.
This physiology is where we think all of that is sitting. The amazing thing is that actually every
cell in your body does this. So every cell in your body has ion channels. Most cells have gap
junctions to their neighbors. And from the earliest time of development, your tissues are an electrical
network that is processing information. Now, we can then try the same kind of decoding
research program. Could we decode the bioelectrical signals in non-neural tissues
and ask, what are they thinking about? What problems are they solving? And in particular,
and so this is much like here, we're tracking the voltage with a voltage reporter. This is an
early frog embryo. In time lapse, of course, again, reporting the voltage so we can see all the
electrical conversations that these cells are having with each other as they sort out who's
going to be head, tail, and so on. And so there's this basic kind of diagram where
what the bioelectric networks in your nervous system are doing is controlling your muscles to
move your body through three-dimensional space. And this can be decoded and modeled and so on.
And my argument is that this amazing trick is really an elaboration of a much earlier,
evolutionarily, a much earlier system in which all of the cells were running an electrical network
to move the configuration of your body through morpho space. And what evolution has done here
is a couple of things. One is greatly speed optimized the process. So we're talking milliseconds in
neuroscience as opposed to minutes or hours in developmental bioelectricity and it pivoted
space for time, where this is mostly about the control of space. One can argue that nervous
systems are mostly about the control of behavior as a function of time. Okay, so there is this,
and by the way, evolution caught on to this system as early as bacterial biofilms. This is
incredibly ancient and long predates nerves and muscles and things like that. So we then went
on to try to develop some of the first tools, the first molecular tools to read and write
this cognitive information out of non neural cells. Now, no surprise, we took most things from
neuroscience, because as it turns out, the tools cannot tell the difference. We try to maintain
that difference through different different journals and different funding bodies and different
educational materials and courses and departments. But actually, all of the tools, both the bench
tools and the and the concepts poured over very nicely. So it's interesting, some of that distinction
might actually be quite artificial. So we developed some tools to noninvasively read the
bioelectric pattern. We also do a lot of computational modeling to try to understand how
these bioelectric patterns result from the activities of channels and pumps and band
gap junctions and so on. So let me show you a couple of such patterns. This is an early frog embryo
putting its face together. And so you can see again, this is a voltage sensitive fluorescent dye
and time lapse. This is one frame out of that video. It's we call it the electric face. And you
can see here that in that frame, you can already see. So here's the animal's right eye, here's the
mouth, here are the placodes. The major structures of the face are already laid out in this subtle
bio electrical pre pattern before the genes come on to regionalize that face and before the anatomy
actually starts to form. So as it turns out, this is absolutely an essential pattern memory
that is required for forming a normal face. If you just if you move this around, as I'll show you in
a minute, the genes and the anatomy will faithfully follow. So that's it. That's an endogenous pattern
that you might use for monitoring defects. Now, here's a we'll come back to cancer a little bit
at the end. But but but here's a here's a pathological pattern. When you inject a human
oncogene, eventually you'll get a tumor eventually it'll start to metastasize like this. But before
that you can already tell where it's going to be. And in fact, you can tell what where the regions
are that are going to go off of the the plan here and revert back to an amoeba like environment where
they're unplugged electrically from the rest of the network. They're not receiving the signals about
how to build various organs. They're just amoebas, as far as they're concerned, the rest of the body
is external environment. Okay, so these are just some examples. And I show you this, by the way,
because this is the the easiest pattern to decode. We have many other patterns that are actually
quite quite hard. But this is pretty obvious what you're looking at. So in addition to the imaging,
of course, the most important thing is functional, right? So can we manipulate these these bioelectrical
patterns and and show that they're functionally critical for what the morphogenetic collective
does next. And here I have to stress, we do not use any applied fields, there are no magnets,
there are no frequencies, no electromagnetic waves, no electrodes, nothing like that.
We use all the tools of molecular neuroscience and physiology. So we use pharmacology to open
and close channels and gap junctions, we can mutate the channels to change their properties in a
known way, we can use optogenetics and so on. And so the idea is to take any kind of a region
in the in the animal, and use these tools to really just alter the topology and the activity
of the bioelectrical network in a very specific way to try to change its decision making as it
navigates the anatomical morpho space, right? So so so whereas the neural decoding was the part
with the dyes that I just showed you a minute ago, this is equivalent to the the inception of
false memories, for example, and people have done this and mice and so on. So I want to show you
what happens when you actually do this. So the first thing that happens is, remember remember
that that little eye spot that I showed you in the bioelectric phase. Well, you might ask what
happens if you introduce that same kind of spot somewhere else, you take a memory of eye formation
and you falsely reproduce it in other regions of the body that are actually supposed to be
doing something else. Well, if we inject specific ion channels that can induce that that same type
of eye spot that I just showed you a minute ago, in fact, and so you introduce it into cells that
are precursors of things like the gut, those cells will happily build an eye and these eyes can contain
all of the right layers, so lens, optic nerve, retina, all that stuff. So they all have them.
So, so this tells you a couple of different things. First of all, it tells you that the
bioelectric pattern is actually instructive. This is not about messing up the the pattern
and making monsters. This is about making showing that those patterns can cause specific organ level
changes in morphogenesis. So not individual cells, we're not telling just individual cells to
differentiate a different way. We're telling the whole region to make an eye. So this is extremely
modular. We don't have to provide all the information about how to make an eye. We don't
know how to make an eye. This is very high level subroutine call, and this only works with high
level competent systems, because in very simple machines, you have to be in charge of every aspect
of the of the functionality, you have to program every aspect of what it does.
Here we don't need to do that because the system has built in competencies. In fact,
now the interesting thing about these competencies is that when you're analyzing a system, any system,
to make an assessment over what it can do, you're really taking an IQ test yourself,
because it is not obvious. And if you don't prompt it in the right way, you don't know.
So for example, the textbook will tell you that only the anterior norectoderm up here
is competent to make eye. And the reason they say that is because the classic experiments
were done with a master, what they call a master IG in PAC-6. And it's true, if you miss express PAC-6,
only these cells are competent to make eye, but that isn't the actual best master regulator.
And if you do it with a voltage state, in fact, you find out that the competencies much more
than you thought it was. Every cell in the body is able to participate in this, including endoderm.
Endoderm is not supposed to make eyes. So it's important to actually be humble about
when the limitations that we see are really a result of our own lack of knowledge about what
really is a meaningful signal to the surrounding tissues. And the final thing I want to just point
out is that this is a lens sitting in the tail of a tadpole somewhere, an extra lens.
The blue cells are the lineage label of the cells that we actually injected with our channel.
All of this other stuff here was never manipulated by us. Why does it participate? Well, that's
because these cells can do what many collective intelligences do, like ants and termites.
When there's not enough of them to do the job, they recruit their neighbors. So there's literally
a secondary instruction event that's taking place where these cells tell these other cells,
hey, you need to work with us to make this eye. We don't have to program that in both the eye
induction and the scaling to the task. All of that is a native competency of these
collectives if you know how to activate them. And so we can make many things. We can make
ectopic forebrain and ectopic hearts and ectopic odysses and extra legs. So this is actually an
optogenetic frog that has an extra leg growing out of its mouth. We can make fins. That's kind
of weird. Tadpoles aren't supposed to have fins. That's more of a fish thing, but we'll get to that.
So what you can see is that it is possible to rewrite these bioelectric pattern memories
in ways that make the collective navigate to different regions of that anatomical morpheus
space. And we're applying this in our regenerative medicine program. So
frogs normally, unlike salamanders, do not regenerate their limbs. 45 days later, there's
nothing. But we came up with a cocktail that immediately within about 24 to 48 hours triggers
pro-regenerative genes like this MSX1 in this blastema. And by 45 days, they've got toes,
they've got a toenail, and eventually a pretty respectable frog leg that's both touch sensitive
and motile. And the thing about this is that this is not micromanagement. We're not 3D printing
anything. We're not controlling stem cells. We're not interacting with this thing at all.
24 hours of stimulation. And then for a year and a half, this leg will actually grow. And so
it's the decision making of the collective very early on. It's not trying to micromanage it.
And here, of course, I have to do a disclosure because Dave Kaplan and I have a company called
Morphosuticals, Inc., where we're trying to apply the same technology, so a wearable bioreactor,
and then a payload of modulators that convince the cells that they need to rebuild. And we're
now moving into rodents. Okay. The next story I want to tell you has to do with planaria because
I really want to hammer this idea of bioelectrical pattern memories being literal representations
of navigation in this anatomical space. So these planaria have this amazing capacity that you can
cut them into pieces. I think 276 is the record, something like that. And every piece makes a
perfect little worm. So we asked a very specific question. Once you've cut this piece like this,
how does it know how many heads it's supposed to have? And so what we found out is that, in fact,
there's an electrical circuit that sets a voltage gradient in these pieces that determines how many
heads it's supposed to have. And so if you take a normal one-headed worm and you have this body,
this worm has anterior genes in the head, not in the tail, like it should, and it very reliably
makes this one-headed worm. But that's because it has this bioelectrical pre-pattern that says
one head. And so what we were able to do is take an animal, give it a different bioelectrical
pre-pattern. This is kind of a mess. The technology is still being worked out, but you can see here
now it's very clear there's now these two regions. And this animal still has its anterior genes in
the head, not in the tail. But if you cut him, he gives you a two-headed worm. And this is not
Photoshop. This is real. And something important to stress here is that this bioelectrical pattern
is not a map of this two-headed animal. This is a readout of this one-headed animal,
which is anatomically and transcriptionally normal. And it will be that way, will stay normally one
headed until you injure him. So this is a readout of a kind of counterfactual memory. It's what I
will do if I get injured is what does a correct planarian look like, aka the set point of that
anatomical homeostatic cycle. So I promised you at the very beginning that if we are to understand
how these systems solve problems in anatomical space, we have to know how do they remember what
is the correct pattern. And what you're looking at is one simple example of how they encode
gold state information. This is literally a kind of a precursor to, I think, I think this is a
precursor to this amazing ability of human brains to do, well, and other animals to time travel,
to think about things that are not true right now, things that used to be true or that will be
true in the future, things that are not true right now. So that's it. This bioelectrical state
does not describe the anatomy at this moment. It describes a gold state that will be pursued
if the animal is injured. Now, I keep calling it a memory-wide because if you take these
two-headed animals, you can cut them again in plain water. So you cut off the ectopic primary head,
you cut off the secondary head, and with no more perturbation, they will continue to generate
two-headed animals in perpetuity. Now, remember, the genome is normal. There's no genomic change here.
This is a very sort of counterintuitive result because it was thought that if you cut off the
extra head, this genetically normal fragment, well, of course, it's going to regenerate the
normal thing, what the genome says. And so this is why two-headed worms were first seen in 1903.
As far as I know, nobody cut them until we did it in 2008 because it was too obvious what would
happen. I mean, of course, they'll go back to normal. And in fact, that's not what happens.
And so what you see here is that the number of heads is not directly nailed down by the genome.
The genome gives you a machine that, by default, generates a memory of one head,
but you can rewrite it. It's reprogrammable. Without, in fact, editing the genome,
you can physiologically give them a new memory, and they will continue to be two-headed.
It's long-term stable, it's rewritable, and it has conditional recall, which I showed you a minute ago.
And so this is, you can see here this video of these guys hanging around.
So what we are doing now is we are trying to put together different ways of thinking about
systems that have different attractors. So the bioelectrical, the state space of the
bioelectrical circuit that corresponds to one head, no head, two head, and so on.
And lots of thought in connectionist AI and neuroscience about how electrical networks
can store memories of patterns and regenerate those patterns upon damaged or partial inputs.
And there's a lot of work to be done to integrate these, but we think they're both
different views on the same set of processes. Amazingly, it's not just the number of heads,
it's also the shape of the head. So this triangular-shaped planarian can be, by manipulating
these bioelectrical patterns, can be made to make a flathead like a Pifolina or a roundhead like an S
Mediterranean. Again, no genomic change, about 100 to 150 million years evolutionary distance
between this and this. It also changes correctly the shape of their brain and the distribution
of stem cells like these other species. So what they're doing is this same hardware is perfectly
able to visit the attractors in morphospace belonging to these other species. That's normally
where these other species go, but this hardware can go there too, if properly guided in morphospace.
In fact, you can go way beyond things that even look remotely like planaria. And we've seen planaria
make things like this, this spiky form, these kind of cylindrical shapes and this kind of like
combination hybrid shape. And so I think this is what we're looking at here is what Darcy Thompson
in 1917 saw as a latent morphospace around each animal in plant form. And he drew these axes and
it was entirely unclear what these axes were, but I actually think he's representing the internal
encoded map of the collective intelligence of these cells. And then we now have the ability to
actually stretch and deform that internal representation. So what we're trying to do
is basically the same thing that multiscale neuroscience wants to do, which is to go all
the way from the molecular level where different channels and pumps are expressed to the different
bioelectrical, the spatial bioelectrical patterns to the organ level and a whole animal level type
of anatomical order. And ultimately, to algorithmic models that describe this behavior so that we
can actually rationally understand and manipulate what's going on. So a kind of a full stack approach
here. And I'm going to show you one example where we've been able to do that, which is this in the
frog brain. So here's the normal frog brain, forebrain, midbrain, hindbrain. There are a variety
of teratogens, both chemical and genetic, that screw up the brain. And we decided to check whether
we could use a computational approach to try to repair this very complex structure. So we made a
computational model of the bioelectrics around the pre pattern that tells this brain the shape
and the size that it should be, having characterized this pre pattern years before that. And what we
were able to do is to create a model that in the case of, and I want to show you kind of the most
extreme case. So we've done nicotine and alcohol and different things. But here's the most extreme
case. I think most of you will know the notch gene, which is a very important neurogenesis gene.
And when not just mutated to a dominant active form, what you see is that there is no forebrain.
The midbrain and hindbrain basically are a big bubble. These animals have no behavior,
profoundly disabled. And what we did was we created a computational model of this. And we asked the
model, what channel could we open or close to get back to the correct bioelectrical state?
And so it focused in on this. It's a very interesting channel with some specific properties,
this thing called HCN2. And we found that when we upregulated HCN2, either by injecting RNA and
coding it or with HCN2 openers, you basically get back to a normal brain, anatomically normal in
terms of gene expression, and they get their IQs back. So indistinguishable learning rates from
control animals, all of this while still having that notch mutation. So at least some types of
genetic defects, meaning hardware defects, can be fixed in software. I'm not saying they all will be
like that. There will be many that are not like that. But it really is amazing how much control
you can have at the software level and override what really is a pretty profound hardware defect.
And so what we're doing now is we're trying to create this platform, and you can play with an
early version of it here online, that ultimately is going to have different tissues and organs,
both normal and transformed. And you can go on and say, okay, I have an abnormal bioelectric
pattern in some region, and this thing will computationally model it, and then it will
give you a list of channels and pumps that are expressed in that region, which we know from
scraping transcriptomics profiles. And it will give you targets to try to get the
incorrect pattern into the correct pattern. And of course, then you can pick drugs because
something like 20% of all drugs are ion channel drugs. This is a huge toolkit of potential
electroseuticals, if we understood the modeling. But the idea, again, is not to micromanage the
state of any one cell, the idea is to communicate with the collective and try to get it to
move to different regions of that morphospace and exploit the different competencies that it has
for repair, for scaling of activity, and so on. And so kind of now pulling back, so I'm almost
down here. And so pulling back all the details, by the way, are in these papers. I want to put
forward a view of biomedical interventions as fundamentally in two categories. There are all
the bottom up ones that seek to really interact with the hardware and micromanage the symptoms
and the functionality. And then there are all of this stuff, which is really just beginning to
be exploited. And the idea is that top down, you can actually take advantage of the many
competencies of your material. And so there's something very special here for this because
neuroscience brings something extremely important. It's really a unique field for
all of this. And we've been doing these applications in birth defects and normalizing
cancer and regeneration and so on. Because in neuroscience, it's basically the only field
where you can see how electrophysiology mediates from reasons, so from high level cognitive intent
to molecular causes. And what I mean is just simply that, if I told you that with the power of my
mind alone, I could depolarize 30% of my body cells, you might think that's crazy or you might
think that that's some special mind body medicine kind of thing, maybe some biofeedback or something.
But of course, it's absolutely normal 24 seven event that happens during voluntary movement.
So in the morning, when you make this high level executive decision that you're going to go to work,
that information flow has to trickle down to the opening and closing of ion channels in your
muscle cells to get them to fire so that you can get out of bed and go to work. That incredible
architecture that our bodies have that link all the way from a high level cognition through all
the circuits that you all study and everything else and down into the molecular control of cells
is a unique multi scale understanding that really is still missing in other fields and can really
be imported to great use. So my gut feeling is that all of this means that future medicine in these
areas, there's a regenerative medicine is going to look more like a kind of somatic psychiatry
where you're literally communicating with a collective and manipulating its prior memories,
its measurements, its beliefs about the landscape, the energy landscape that it's in and these different
spaces and so on. And we have a lot to learn from how multi scale neuroscience does this.
So what I've told you today is that intelligence and navigation of problem spaces
is I think a kind of generic concept that's applicable far outside of standard behavioral
science. We're all collective intelligences and that's why I think that neuroscience and the deep
insight and the fact that its tools really can be broadly applicable and its concepts. We use
everything from active inference and perceptual control theory and
by stability and all this kind of stuff is multi scale processing in the retina. All of these things
we use outside of the nervous system to help us achieve better control in regenerative medicine.
And I've talked about the behavior of a collective intelligence of cells in morpho space
as underlying these amazing properties of development of regeneration and so on.
And I really think that this is where the brain learned its amazing tricks.
And so the last thing I just want to show you very briefly is this idea that
there's this really interesting invariance across fields that can enrich both developmental
biology and neuroscience. And for many years I was saying to my students that you can take
almost any neuroscience paper and just do a find replace and every time it says neuron you just say
cell and every time it says millisecond you say minute per hour. And then you've got yourself a
nice potential developmental biology paper full of hypotheses to explore. And so we finally with
two collaborators Thomas O'Brien and Joel Stremel we actually made an AI tool and you can all play
with it here that does this in a very smart way by just by mapping a few terms to each other
and you can take any abstract in a neuroscience paper and see what the corresponding developmental
biology paper looks like. So you can see here this is a this is a beautiful paper by Pinotius and
Miller. And so you go on here and you feed this abstract and what it gives you here is a very
plausible set of claims that is testable in developmental biology. And so we are developing
these kinds of tools to help exploit the invariances between fields to really enrich both sides of
this equation. And the final thing I just want to show you is that I think that because of
this amazing interoperability of life and the fact that cells and tissues are a kind of material
that are happy to work with all sorts of novel configurations and and new materials and so on
all of existing biology everything that Darwin meant when he said endless forms most beautiful
is like this tiny corner of option space and the future meaning the next couple of decades
we're going to be surrounded by all of these things that already exist especially in neuroscience
cyborgs, hybrids, different kinds of chimeras and combinations all kinds of bodies and minds
that we've never seen before that have never been on the tree of life with us. And we are really
going to be looking for insights from diverse intelligence research to expand the way that
neuroscience and behavioral science thinks about agency cognition memory and and how we are going
to ethically relate to these creatures that actually don't look anything like us and you
can't use the familiar kinds of things we use when talking about brain organoids in the dish or
something you know what does the brain look like is it like a human it doesn't need to be like a
human there are going to be all sorts of really wild combinations that we need to think about.
So all of this is discussed in these various in these various papers and I just want to thank the
postdocs and the students that did all the work our many collaborators and and and all of our
technical support again here are three companies that support our work and many many other funders
here and most of all the model systems because the animals do all the heavy lifting. So thank you
so much and I'm happy to discuss.
