a massive amount to talk about. But the basic outline is or was that we'd have these three
papers and the first one I think is really focused on integrating a lot of what you're doing with
you know morphoceuticals, electroceuticals, somatic psychiatry, multi-scale competence
architecture, all this fantastic work that you've been doing with chemical ecology,
broadly speaking. And my you know real area of specialization is even toxinology, so is in
the study of animal toxins and particularly venomous organisms. But there are of course a lot
of resonances between what you have been doing and just chemical ecology more broadly, not just
toxins. And so one of the things that I actually teach is a pharmacology subject,
it's sort of on the human relationship with drugs. But I take it all the way from
chemical ecology basically, and then to the way that organisms find molecular tools in their
environment, including in processes like toxin sequestration, but also various symbiotic processes.
And there's if we can talk about morphogenesis perhaps in a minute, because there's there are
all these fascinating examples of chemically, well chemically mediated morphogenesis of course,
but between organisms, right. So the involvement of say symbiotic microbes in morphogenesis,
that's seemingly really, really common for marine invertebrates in the in the larval transition
from a pelagic phase. So when they just you know, floating around on currents to the benthic phase,
where they become attached to a surface, it's very, very common for some symbiotic bacteria
to be involved in that transition. And there's a lot of a lot of work on attempting to
to identify the relevant molecules that are involved there.
Well, that's that's super cool. And I think I think some some sort of low hanging fruit there
is is a is a paper on that, particularly in the context of the the kind of synthetic morphology
idea, right, that, that, you know, nature hacks each other itself all the time in every direction,
and that we as engineers should be doing that too. I mean, I've been getting into plant gulls,
and it's, you know, these these amazing ways that that life takes advantage of the competencies of
the things around it. And so I think I think just that I mean, I'd love to I actually I would
just love to hear you talk about the stuff because I don't know all of these examples.
Yeah, I think would be amazing. Yeah, gulls are another really cool example. And I've seen you
talk about them. And, you know, as you as you know, right, gulls are in another incredibly
widespread thing, you know, it's not just that there are these sinipid wasps that inflict gulls.
I mean, there's a whole fun fascinating thing with just with those wasps, though, where you've
got the so-called iniquiline species, which are they are essentially hyper parasites, in a sense,
they don't make gulls themselves. But they steal gulls or appropriate the gulls of other species.
So there's all of that there's all of that cool stuff going on. But then, you know, you've got
aphids that make gulls and beetles that make gulls. And I think there's estimated to be tens of maybe
even over 100,000 species of insect that are involved in gull formation. And then there's
there are fungi that induce gulls and all sorts of stuff. So there's, again, a very what turn what
initially looks to be really kind of exotic in a certain sense, which is one organism influencing
the morphogenesis of another through some chemical mediator turns out to be a very, very common process.
And that's another thing with venom, you know, we're not necessarily talking about morphogenesis
there, although there can be very subtle things going on like the influence of the immune system
and that sort of thing. You know, venom is not necessarily all just about killing.
Although people differ in their in their definition of venom as well. But toxins are
certainly not necessarily all about killing. But again, we tend to think, oh, you know,
venom is this exotic thing. And I've got these snakes and scorpions and spiders and whatever
come to mind when people think of venomous organisms. And there this very particular
thing going on. But again, there's probably over 200,000, maybe more venomous organisms in the world.
Venom has evolved over 100 times independently. And it's just a particularly
specialized form of chemical ecology. And that's just ubiquitous, right? So organisms
mediating their interactions with other organisms through chemical means is just,
you know, just a thing that organisms do in general. And then we get these really cool,
specific examples of it. And so when I when I teach the human relationship with drugs
pharmacology students here at the University of Melbourne, I try to initially demonstrate to
them that pharmacology is really, you know, could be thought of as a subset of biology,
they don't get any biology necessarily really in the pharmacology stream, or they don't get an
integration of pharmacology with biology, which always is kind of mind boggling to me.
But so I just start from basic principles of chemical ecology, organisms mediating
interactions with each other, you know, in cooperative ways, sometimes, of course,
in antagonistic ways, when we're talking about toxins. And also one of the really fascinating
things is the way relationships can so readily flip the valences of relationships can flip from,
say, you know, commensals become parasites, or, you know, commensals become mutualists,
or sometimes parasites become mutualists, all of these sorts of fun things where a certain shift
in the context of the relationship, we might say a shift in the reference frames of the relationship
actually, you know, has this has this profound shift in its valence. But, you know, I go from
I go from some of these examples to speaking of the chemical ecology of the human basically,
and just saying that pharmacology is essentially a, you know, it's, you know, humans do things in
refined and specialized ways. But it's really something that, you know, organisms do in general,
which is search out useful molecular tools in their environment, and appropriate them,
and just vivid examples that I use are things like toxin sequestration. So, you know, one organism
appropriating the defensive toxins of another organism is the most common way this happens
for their own defense. And I'm wearing this, you know, chemical ecology t-shirt, and the molecule
here is the backbone of a cardiac glycoside, and it's just an interesting molecule because
it's one of these things that's often involved or is involved in a number of different, you know,
cool examples of toxin sequestration. So like wanderer butterflies, the caterpillars feed on
milkweed, and they take these cardiac glycosides that the plant produces, and they sequester them
in their own tissues. And then the butterfly, which of course only feeds on nectar, but retains
these stored toxins, and then is itself a toxic butterfly. But then in completely different
sets of interactions, like we've got poisonous toads, which have been a major issue here in
Australia, of course, since they were introduced, the cane toad here. Most of our frog eating critters
here in Australia are toad naive, because we don't have native toads. So they are sensitive to
these cardiac glycoside toxins that the toads make. But elsewhere in the world where there are
specialist snakes that feed on toads, you get these things like tiger keelbacks, which have
specialized glands in their neck called neutral glands, and they feed on the toads, and they
actually sequester the toad toxins into these specialized defensive glands, and then they have
bright orange and black bands on their necks, aqueosomatic coloration to warn of the toxicity
that they've basically stolen from their environment. So there's all those kinds of things.
And then some of these examples of influence of chemical ecology or symbiosis on morphogenesis
in these transitions is sort of from pelagic to benthic for marine invertebrates. That's again
observed in like a long list of different taxa, sponges, primoflagellates, acidians, worms.
So it seems like another common thing, arthropods or barnacles that I think this is involved with.
And in some cases, it seems like there's a direct appropriation in the sense that the
bacteria are being preyed upon. And then something that the bacteria is producing is being appropriated
as part of that process of predation. So in these coanoflagellates that have both single-celled
and multicellular life stages. And I don't think they're even obligatory in terms of their transition
to multicellular. So they can actually live out their lives and reproduce as single-celled organisms.
But there's this rosette inducing factor that certain bacteria produce and the coanoflagellates
feed on these bacteria. And then as a result of that and getting this RIF1, they end up forming
these rosette-like colonies of multicellular colonies. So you get this. So that's been studied
as a potential model system for the origins of multicellularity in some sort of symbiotic
interaction. And in a number of cases, there are sponges which get
key molecules that they can't make themselves from bacteria that they're symbiotic with.
And then they maybe digest them at some point in the process. Initially, they're living with them
once they've got enough of whatever it is they need, they digest them. But we know that this has
been a really important process in the origin of eukaryotic cells and things as well. So you can
see how some of these sorts of interactions, we've got predation and you've got full phagocytosis
and then actual digestion and breakdown that we believe. Lin-Margulis sort of gave us that idea
which we, of course, understand to be true, that this has been an incredibly important
process in the origin of complex life and eukaryotic cells. So it's just a fascinating example
of influences on morphogenesis and on these other major evolutionary transitions.
Yeah, amazing. Does anybody use these bacteria as a vector to manipulate,
scientists? I mean, to manipulate. We had a story about some commensal bacteria in our
plant area that if you mess with the relative proportions of the species, you get worms with
two heads with different visual systems, you get all sorts of stuff. It seems like that might
be a cool vector for implementing some of these changes. Yeah, I'm not aware of any work like
that. That's a really incredible example though. And was that something that you just sort of
was an accident initially? You weren't culturing those bacteria? The bacteria are hard to culture.
This was some work with Ben Wolf, who's a microbiologist in our department, and it started
by just asking the question of what kind of microbiome lives on these guys and we identified
a few major types. And then we just said, okay, what happens if you over-represent
some of them in one particular kind that just made all these changes in the plant area that
was harvesting them? Yeah, no, that's it. That's incredible stuff. Yeah, I'm not aware of any work
of that kind, but we could definitely delve into literature and see if we can find anything that's
similar. I mean, my understanding is that we don't necessarily know in a lot of cases, again, what
are the actual functional molecules that are involved? A lot of these have been difficult
systems to study in the lab. So most of what we know is, again, based on just culturing,
just basic studies of the microbiome of these organisms, and there is this
identification of an obligate relationship, but not necessarily what molecules are involved.
And similarly with the Gauls, as you know, there are lots of ideas about what's actually going
on there and some really, really fascinating stuff. It's essentially, in some cases, at least,
there's the induction of meristem tissue, like transition of leaf tissue into meristem tissue,
which is basically stem cells, right? So it's pluripotent tissue that can
take on various different configurations, but kind of similar things that are going on when
the plant is engaged in either fruit formation or flower formation, or the formation of basically
of reproductive organs. So in some cases, you've got invertebrates, which are expressing things
which look a lot like plant hormones, and they look a lot like plant reproductive hormones.
But then in other cases, it looks like, and maybe these are perhaps the same process
viewed at different timescales or at different stages of evolution, but there is at least one
in an eighth, is it in an eighth or under wasp? Sorry. They have shown that, well, they believe
that it's a wasp, actually. It's a hormone that's involved in ovum formation within the wasp
lineage itself, right? So it's a repurposed, obviously similar enough to whatever is what the
plant hormones, these wasp hormones, they can induce a similar effect with a few different,
a few small modifications. And I mean, that's what we see all the time with toxins, which are
again, more my area of specialization, is that you get what I call an endophysiologically active
molecule, something that's got some key regulatory function in the body of the organism that produces
it, but it has a particular kind of activity that can readily be repurposed as a toxin.
So like a really straightforward example is a coagulation factor. So certain snakes have
directly recruited coagulation factors into their venom, modified them a little bit.
And then so now they're kind of like hyper coagulation factors. And when they inject them
into target organisms, it just starts popping the blood and chewing up the organism's endogenous
coagulation factors at a very increased rate. But something similar probably going on basically
is what I'm saying with the Gauls in the sense that you've got something that's involved in the
induction of specific forms of tissue or in morphogenetic processes in the producing organism,
and then it's repurposed to do something very similar in the target organism.
Yeah. Are you aware of any, is there any overlap between the examples that you gave the kind of
developmental control and compounds that are known to be psychoactive? Is there any intersection there?
Not to my knowledge yet. It's a really interesting question, though. And maybe you'd be specifically
thinking of things that are sort of plastogenic, so neuroplastogens. For example, in plastogens,
just a lot of our work has been around treating the development of morphogenesis more broadly as
the behavior of a collective intelligence and morphosomes. And once you view it as behavior,
you can start to use all the tools from neuroscience. And so we've done all kinds of things, but one of
the things that I really would like to do, and we're still, we don't have the reagents yet because
a lot of these are scheduled substances. But I would like to, I want the collective
intelligence to hallucinate. And so we've tried SSRIs and quite interesting, actually,
serotonergic modulators. We've done some other drugs that aren't scheduled that are kind of a
little bit in that category. It's pretty cool. I mean, I've seen embryos that aren't quite sure
what species they're supposed to be, and they make some things that belong to an entirely different
species and things like that. And we haven't even gotten to the good stuff, really, great. We don't
have any. Yeah. So are you seeking approval to work with some of the more tightly controlled
substances? I haven't started the process yet. I need to figure out exactly what that entails,
and how much of that we're actually able to do. But I wonder, I mean, and another thing I'd love
to hear you talk about is this issue of like, isn't it amazing that it's always struck me as
interesting, and maybe you can say a little bit about it, how life forms that are very
split off from us a really long time ago. So, you know, like, like, you know,
matting mushrooms, you know, and things like this, that they just, they happen to have these
molecules that are a very nice fit into some receptors in a vertebrate brain, and they don't
kill you, but they do make, like, what's up with that? Why is it that these fungi have
such a subtle effect on an animal that didn't exist for the longest time?
Yeah, it's a really fascinating question. And I mean, I think the broader question about the
prevalence of psychoactive molecules in plants and fungi in particular, it's still a little bit
mysterious on one level. Like, in many cases, we just don't know what these molecules do in the
plants or fungi's normal ecology, or whether they have regulatory functions in, in, you know, again,
in the, in the molecular economy of the organisms that produce them, or they are specialized, I
say exochemicals, right, they have an exo like outside special function that's directed outside.
I mean, a lot of them might make sense. And not everybody likes this just connection,
and it may trivialize them in some sense, but as toxins, in the sense that they might serve to,
you know, disorient or confuse or, you know, a toxin, again, doesn't necessarily, it's just
a chemical that's mediating an antagonistic interaction. It doesn't necessarily have to kill,
or even make sick, it just could be a deterrent. And so it is possible that some of these molecules
are just, you know, deterrents for certain kinds of potential predators. And I mean,
there are obvious examples not necessarily psychoactive, but something like capsaicin and chilies,
which is specifically a deterrent for mammals, because they have, you know, these tripthe 1
pain receptors in their, in their mouths, whereas birds don't have them. So birds are,
you know, so the hypothesis goes, birds are better dispersers for chili for the fruit and the seeds.
Mammals on the other hand, like maybe destroy whole plants and just aren't good dispersers
for chilies. So they specifically are a defensive toxin for mammals. But weird things happen,
right? When a certain, you know, mammal, a certain naked ape decides that they enjoy a little bit
of pain and starts to cultivate chilies. And you get this, this is the kind of flipping of the
valence of a, you know, chemical ecological interaction from something that's antagonistic.
So a defensive toxin becomes now a target molecule that humans are cultivating and now
chilies are all over the, all over the planet. You know, so it turns out that this positive
relationship with a particular mammal has, has been very good for the evolutionary history of
the chili. And that's something that we see with a lot of plants, well, a number of plants and
fungi that make psychoactive molecules as well, right? You know, cannabis has a global distribution.
And, you know, some people claim that there's no, there are no cannabis sativa plants in the world
that are descended from, you know, genuinely wild stock. So it's all, you know, the product of a
history of, of domestication, you know, poppies, even philosophy producing fungi, you know, are
found everywhere in the world. And some of that at least is, is humans having spread it either,
you know, intentionally or accidentally. But yeah, what the, what these, they might be secondary
metabolites, which essentially just means we don't know what they do in the, they're not part of the,
of the, you know, they don't have a core regulatory function. So they probably have some
externally oriented function, maybe in deterrence, some form of signaling. So they are signaling
molecules, perhaps, and a toxin is a kind of signaling molecule, right? And often toxins target
signaling pathways. And so, you know, you get neurotoxins of all sorts in all sorts of enemas
and poisonous animals that target very specific receptors in invertebrates or invertebrates.
And obviously, you can understand in, in a kind of antagonistic co-evolutionary or,
or indeed a mutualist situation, why there would be this tight relationship between, say, toxin and
target or, or, you know, just any molecule and its target molecule, it's sort of selected
interaction partner. But why we get these apparently contingent effects? Well, again,
it may be that we are just the, the, the bycatch or the, you know, we're caught in the crossfire of
some interaction. So maybe there's been a kind of an evolutionary arms race between, you know,
fungi that produce molecules like psilocybin and certain invertebrates for a long time. And
certainly invertebrates have, you know, serotonin and, and, you know, very, and similar receptors
to us. Because a lot of these, these, as you know very well, you know, a lot of these core
signaling pathways and other molecular pathways are just incredibly conserved. They've been around
for hundreds of millions of years. And so maybe, you know, it's, it's aiming to have one effect
on a common predator, say, of, of the fruiting bodies of the mushroom, something that, you know,
maybe disrupts the, the, the spore distribution of mushrooms. Maybe it's mammals, you know,
maybe specifically they're trying to deter mammals who eat entire fruiting bodies and
take all the spores with them so they don't get dispersed properly. And then, you know,
that basic, you know, function of disorienting and confusing and all of that sort of stuff
turns out to be something that under certain circumstances is actually, I don't know,
insight generating, you know, because it's breaking your frames of reference, right,
which is potentially terrifying. Suddenly, you know, all of your, your, you know,
meaningful information is all turned upside down. That's very potentially alarming,
but it could also be very, very useful, right. So that's pretty vague and hand wavy, all that
I'm saying, but I don't think we have a really good understanding of, of what
selection pressures have really led to the shaping of these things beyond the fact that
there are these just incredibly conserved pathways across the tree of life.
Yeah. Yeah. So yeah, that's really interesting. I mean, it always seemed to me, you know,
mushrooms, it's very easy for them to kill you in the way through microtubule or, you know,
disrupting age, right? And those things are conserved like wise, right? Extremely wide.
So that's pretty, that's pretty trivial. You know, if you wanted to kill the, kill the,
the predator easy enough, the question is like, you know, how do you get these super subtle
kinds of things, which, you know, you've spoken to, I think, yeah, I think, I think it's, I think
it's really, really interesting. And yeah, we'll see, we'll see what, what we can, what we can get
hold of, you know, in terms of experimental. I think in terms, in terms of killing versus teaching,
let's say, you know, that's been a persistent discussion in, you know, toxinology circles,
studying just defensive toxins in general, you know, and even, you know, including defensive
venoms, you know, and it gets into discussions of mimicry amongst like snake complexes, you know,
where you have snakes that are obvious mimics of each other, and one has a potentially fatal,
but not particularly painful bite. And the other one has a highly painful, you know,
both enemas, but the other one has a highly painful, but not as likely to be fatal bite
to something like a human or a large mammalian predator. You know, some people argue, which,
which is the actual model and which is the mimic, you know, where does more, where does more learning
occur in terms of how, what's, what's the best deterrence? Is it just killing the animal that,
that interferes with you? I mean, there's going to be lineage level learning, obviously, if you,
if you just kill organisms that interact with whatever the, you know, the, the poisonous organism
is. But it actually might be, it's an alternate pathway, and we can't say one is better than the
other, but it might be equally as good to not kill, but to induce some profound learning in
that organism. And I mean, you could even speculate, especially if you were targeting a social organism
in some way, you know, if you can teach an individual, they can go and teach all the others,
hey, you know, better avoid those. We don't, I mean, there are so many things that can be
going on, and there are so many contingencies in why different organisms are, you know,
ultimately developing different functions for their toxins, that it's, it's going to be really,
really hard to disentangle all of those sorts of things, right? Yeah, interesting. Well, I think,
I mean, just, just right there with nothing else, I think we have a very interesting set of stories
to tell people about this, this, this notion of, you know, broader, but also specifically
developmental and morphogenetic hacking via, you know, and how, and how it is that, that in nature,
these things get explored and picked up and, and so on. You know, and then I could, I could talk
about the, you know, some of the implications for, for morphogenic engineering and things like that.
Yeah, I mean, I think it would be cool for, for the paper to go through just a bunch of different,
you know, chemical ecology type interactions from, again, these mutualisms to, to, to various
forms of, of antagonism, etc., and then how these things can shift over. And just basically how
organisms disrupt or manipulate each other's physiology or metabolism, and sort of reorient
the attracting set, essentially. I mean, that's where it gets really fine and elegant, right,
where we're not just killing, we're not just disrupting the thing to, you know, spiral it out
of control and, you know, unto death, but actually installing new set points. So shifting the organisms,
you know, by molecular economy, the way it's managed, the, the attractors that various homeoretic
flows are under the influence of, like actually shifting them somewhere else. And what makes
that cool is that that just immediately brings us into line with what we're intending to do with any
molecular tool, like a drug, right? We're basically saying that this system is under the influence
of some pathological set of attractors. And this become very clear in a kind of, you know,
dynamical systems treatment of, of mental health disorders, like dynamical systems perspective
on mental health disorders. It's under the influence of some, you know, a barren set of
attractors, i.e. stuck in a rut. And we are trying to, with a targeted pharmacological intervention,
trying to shift it out of, out of that rut. And then you have a comparison there at that level
between things like, sort of, you know, psychotropic medications, things like SSRIs, which you mentioned,
and maybe ADHD medication, and things like that, where there's chronic medication, where the underlying
principle is that we, we, you know, again, we've got this pathological state, and we're going to slowly
and force the whole system into what we think is a, is a healthy normal state.
Or you've got disruptive pharmacology, where when you speak of things like psychedelic therapies
and that sort of stuff, really, the only idea there is to, is to just, you know, disrupt that
habitual pattern, that habitual pathological pattern, and give the system an opportunity to
reconstitute itself, to recalilize itself in relation to some, you know, healthier set of
attractor states, right? So there are two fundamentally different paradigms there about
the way that we, that we use drugs. And one, one is, it's not really micromanaging to use some of
the, you know, the terms that you, that you, that you often use. It's not really micromanaging, but
it is kind of assuming with psychotropic medication that we know that it's, you know, we're going to
be able to force this system, you know, under the constant influence of the, of the exogenous
chemical of the drug into a healthier state. Whereas with the disruptive mode, there's none
of that micromanaging, there's giving the thing an opportunity, it's just giving it a leg up in
some sense, giving it an opportunity to reconstitute itself. And obviously that's where the importance
of psychotherapy and, and, you know, setting the, the rails in a different way becomes, becomes so
important. But you know, one of the things to go all, you know, kind of right back to the beginning,
you know, one of the things where I think we can, we can start with, with, with this thirst
paper is talking about, so kind of mapping your multi-scale competence architecture
against what I have been thinking about for a long time as sort of a layered ecology of molecules.
So you've got, we've got chemical ecology, and that describes interactions kind of at one level,
like that's between organisms, mediating each other's, you know, mediating their interactions
with, with, with molecular means as we discussed. But you've also got all these other levels, you've
also, I mean, in terms of ecology, in terms of context specificity, you've got everything from,
from, you know, protein folding right at the bottom to protein protein or just, you know,
molecular interactions, not necessarily proteins, but often proteins, protein-protein interactions,
which take place in a certain ecology of the molecules themselves, you know,
molecules need to encounter appropriate interaction partners to have activities
at all and to have selectable functions. And then you've got, you get into cell-cell interactions.
And so those can be within the bodies of organisms, so the ecology of the organism itself,
or the internal ecology of the organism, the cellular ecology there. And then you've got,
you know, organism as ecosystem in an extended manner with, with the holobion, so you can bring
the symbiotic story in, and all of these other, you know, non, in our case, non-human cells that
are contributing their molecules, their, their chemicals to our internal molecular economy or
ecology. And then you've got organism-organism, like whole organism, whole organism interactions.
So you're at the traditional level of chemical ecology then, but you've already built up
three or four levels before you get to that. And then, of course, you've got really fascinating
things like the way cultures can set contexts for the usage of drugs and have a huge impact on
the effect that drugs have. So even getting into sort of leery's set and setting, but, you know,
mindset, but also cultural context has a big impact on, on, you know, what a drug ends up doing,
for somebody. And that can actually take you into, I know you like to quote Fabrizio Benedetti,
and, you know, drugs and words having the same mechanisms of action. You can get into the way
that the words or the narrative surrounding a particular drug actually have a very significant
effect on, on, on what it does to, what it does to people. And that, that takes us into discussion
of addiction and all sorts of things, you know, relationship between, you know, stigmatization
of a certain subject and the likelihood that people develop unhealthy relationships with it
and all of that sort of thing. I think, you know, for the, for the, if we're doing the, the, the,
the multiple paper outline that we originally had, if we nested in this multi-layered, you know,
introduce that initially, and then focus on chemical ecology in that first paper, and then we can
discuss other levels and, you know, some of your interests in neuropharmacology and, and, you know,
drug-assisted psychotherapy and that sort of stuff a little bit later on. But the other thing we
were going to discuss in the middle is the origins of novelty. And that's another area that these
things dovetail in really interesting ways because, well, we can, we can get into it, but there are
similarities between the way an organism discovers and appropriates a molecular tool and actually
changes, again, balances of relationships change, but actual functions change. There's a form of
exaptation going on there in which, you know, a molecule which has a particular selective history
for a particular function is appropriated for some other function in the life history of a
completely different organism. But there are, there are, because of the, the connection with
exaptation, but also lots of other fun things, which we can connect maybe to xenobots and
anthropots if you want to go there. There are similarities between that change of context
being related to a change of activity and function with origins of novelty at the molecular level
in general and maybe again even the origins of novelty in terms of things like the xenobots.
Yeah, fantastic. I love that outline. It just occurred to me as you were saying and I wonder,
I wonder if we could get the, the bots to appropriate some toxins from something else,
right? Could we, could we, could we, you know, would they, would they take some of this stuff?
Interesting. Another, you know, another, another concept that we've been playing with more recently
is this idea of agential interventions. So this notion that there has to be a kind of
impedance match between the tool you're using and the complexity of what you're trying to change.
So if you really want to hit these high level kinds of system, the decisions that the physiological
networks make and so on, that maybe what you want is something also that's a little bit complex
and context sensitive. So we've been looking at, you know, anthropots as, as, as treatments and
because, you know, in the theory that they, they, they share a lot of priors with the bot itself,
they have the ability to do complex things that individual molecules may not be able to do.
And, and they, you know, they come with all these sensors and amplification machinery and all this
other stuff. So that's, that also I think is something that we can talk about is all in all
of the different examples that you show how much basically to look at it from the perspective
of the different elements of the system, including the compounds and asking what does the, you know,
what, what does the world look like if you're the, and, and, and what are you able to do, right?
Do you, you know, how much, you know, how much action are you able to, you know, to do by yourself?
Yeah. Well, when I was out, when I think of this multi-level ecology, which I sort of very briefly
outlined then, I am thinking about, you know, something we also talked about, you know, a couple
of years ago now, I suppose, and we talked very briefly, I had a chat with Maxwell Ramsted about
it, and we briefly, there was an email exchange with Carl, is that at each of these levels,
we're speaking, when we're speaking of ecology, we're speaking of this context-specific
interactions, there is a, there is a potentially a free energy principle account of what's going on
at each of those levels that can then be, that can then be built up. And I think that would be a
really potentially, it's probably a separate thing from the papers that we're talking about.
But it might be something that we can gesture towards in, in those papers, and then maybe,
you know, bring those guys in if they're still interested and, and do a more detailed account
of it. Yeah, so one of the things that I want to have a quick chat about, which this origins of
novelty discussion, because we had it a couple of times via email, but in terms of the Xenobots or
anthropons, and your, your notion that they are, they're essentially escaping from the constraints
of, of the, you know, of the cellular networks that they're normally involved in when they're
becoming a normal skin cell. And they're, they're liberated from those constraint functions. And
so suddenly they are, they have the capacity to, to embody a phenotype, which is never
before seen in the history of evolution. And I think that they're, they're a really vivid
example of that. But I actually think that that's kind of a generic process in the sense that, you
know, we have these models in, you know, so in organism, in organismal evolution, we have
escape and radios. And in molecular evolution, we have escape from adaptive conflict. And there
are ways that these, I mean, obviously, they sound very similar, but they are very similar,
although these analogies haven't been made all that much, I've made them a bit. But,
so, you know, escape and radiate very briefly is, you know, an organism in the environment that
it's involved in, that it has a long history of selection in is involved in all of these
different interactions. And it's occupying a fairly, you know, a defined niche base. And then
when the, when the environment changes, so when its context changes, all of its contextual
constraint changes, well, obviously, if the environment changes too much, or if it's niche
base is too narrow, if it's too specialized, it might just die, right? If everything changes too
dramatically. But we do see these cases often and invasive species just happen to be a really good
model system for this. When you take, say, a toad out of a context where it's got a bunch of, you
know, evolved interactions with, say, predators that have toxin resistance, all of that kind of
stuff, and you take them to a new place, all of the constraint functions have changed, and there
aren't so many predators that can eat them, etc. They can radiate, right? That lineage is suddenly
has a reduction of constraint pressure on it and is able to diversify more rapidly.
And that's, again, a very brief and not very articulate way of talking about escape and radiate
co-evolution, but it's a common mechanism that is pointed to in diversification of organisms.
With escape from adaptive conflict, the basic idea there is the gene duplication. So it's one of
the theories for speaking about how gene duplication is involved in the origins of novel functions at
the molecular level. Gene duplication results in redundancy, and you've got one of those genes
holding down the fort, so to speak, like carrying on the ancestral function. So it's still under the
same selection pressure, the same constraints associated with the function that it's had a
long evolutionary history with, but because you've now got redundancy, you've got another copy,
or maybe many copies in some cases, we see these incredibly huge redundant arrays of genes sometimes,
and this is really common with toxins, and there are reasons why toxins are often recruited from
these multi-gene families, which is essentially this reason, which is that there's a reduction
of constraint on the function of each individual member, and so there's a transformation of the
fitness landscape, essentially, you can think of it. So think something that was rugged for that
individual gene becomes smooth for an array of redundant genes, and then where it gets really
cool for me, or where I've extended, I think, a little bit, brought these escape and radiate and
escape from adaptive conflict into just more direct contact, is that when a gene product
is then, so you've got these redundant genes, and you've got some reduction of constraint there,
but when a gene product is then directed outside the body of the organism that produces it,
again, its constraints are completely different there. So for example, you go from not wanting to
poison yourself by producing too much of this gene product to, well, actually maybe producing
large quantities of it in very particular tissues, so there's a gene expression, there's a regulatory
discussion to have here as well, could be something that is positively selected, because
for a toxin, sometimes more is just better, whereas for something that has a tightly constrained
gene dosage requirements within the body of the organism that produces it, obviously, you can't
just, well, there you maybe can't just accumulate duplicates without suppressing the expression
levels of each of them, otherwise you just end up getting far too much of the gene product,
but basically, all of that is just to say that it seems like kind of a similar thing,
like with your frog skin cells or your human the lung cells, right, for the antropods,
not that one would ever have predicted that they would have this particular response to that escape
from adaptive conflict or whatever, but it seems like kind of the same thing, basically,
they had an ancestral function, they were tightly constrained by their context, their environment,
and then having left that context, having been taken out of that context by you guys,
they have suddenly been freed up to explore other competencies they had that were previously
suppressed, and so that almost gets mapped onto a kind of exaptation story, but
change of context equals change of constraint equals change of phenotype ultimately.
Yeah, I agree with that, I think all that makes a lot of sense. Well, two things, one is in the
standard escape and radiate story, it takes multiple generations to get out, right, and so I think
this is interesting, because what it tells us is that there's actually a tremendous amount that
can be done in one, you know, basically in one, it's like with the tadpoles that we had where we
put the eyes on the tail, and they could see fine from those eyes, even though the eye was connected
to the spinal cord not to the brain, you didn't need multiple rounds of selection to get into
this new sensory motor system architecture, like one generation, like a spine, they can see.
So that plasticity, I'm gonna assume that that plasticity really potentiates this escape and
radiate thing, if you're already capable of doing that out of the box, then of course, put that
together with rounds of generations, like that's the other thing. Well, just to say that because
it's a particularly vivid example of a plasticity, whereas maybe with something like a toad,
you're not seeing this morphological change, although there are changes in morphology
in some of the Australian populations of toads, for example, but you're not necessarily seeing
that immediately, but you are seeing a total change of behavior straight away, like straight away.
So instead of being more cryptic, because you're worried that, you know, your environment is full
of predators that might feed on you, well, suddenly there can be selection on boldness,
now you might be foraging at different times of the day.
Juvenile toads in Australia can be diurnal, and that's really helpful for them because they're
avoiding predation from adult toads, which are nocturnal, which now have become the most significant
toxin-resistant predator in their environment, whereas in an environment where there are tons of
potentially diurnal predators that could feed on juvenile toads, they might be constrained in that
way. So you would see, and we could tell similar stories at the molecular level in terms of, you
know, now you can suddenly bind and, you know, occlude a certain receptor, which if you did too
much of that within the body, you know, of the organism that produces it, it would have this
autotoxic effect. So I think that there are similarities with immediate shifts in at least
behavioral phenotypes when you're talking about organisms. It may not seem as vivid,
but I think it's still similar. Like, it's not necessarily something that takes dozens of generations
or whatever to happen, but sorry I interrupted you. No, no, that's great. Yeah, that's very
interesting. The only other thing I was going to say is, which I didn't know this the last time we
talked, so this is kind of new data, which is that we asked, and we're in the process of writing
this up, so there'll be a pre-print on it, I don't know, in a month or so, but we asked the question
of what genes do xenobots express and antelots express that the normal cells don't express.
So what new genes are they turning on that normal embryos in the one hand, the normal lung tissue
in the other hand doesn't express? Hundreds and hundreds of new genes for their new lifestyle,
you know, that are really being triggered. And again, so no trans genes we didn't put, we had no
drugs, no nothing, just a slightly new lifestyle. Say, even the medium is the same, you know,
there's literally very little in the environment that's different, but they are in a different
configuration now, and their behavior is different, and now they're dipping into the genome to pull
out a whole other transcriptional, you know, set of transcriptional programs, some very interesting
stuff there. Yeah, that's incredible. And I mean, you have that other example with the barium exposure
of the planaria, right, where they did something, I mean, it's different, but similar in the sense
that they very rapidly changed their gene expression. And I think this is the way that you
would frame it, you are revealing a plasticity which might be much more generic than we normally
imagine it to be. And there are going to be other examples which we get, and we're talking about
drugs and toxins. So we can look at the way that an exogenous molecule dramatically and
rapidly changes the gene expression of the target organism. And, you know, you can talk about that
in the great examples from like parasites and things like that. And obviously, you know, we
can talk about zombie ants and all sorts of fun things like that, you know, but you can talk about
parasitoid wasps that inject eggs and various, you know, toxins or effector molecules that change
the immune, like immediately change the immune system and change patterns of gene expression in
the immune system of the organisms that they're injected into, or you can just talk about like
drinking alcohol, and how that affects patterns of gene expression over a 12-hour period or something,
right? So they're absolutely not undermining the uniqueness of the xenobots and the
antrobots. But I think what they're pointing to, just an incredibly vivid example of processes
which actually turn out to be much more generic. And so people don't necessarily think about a
hangover as associated with changes of gene expression in the brain, but it is, you know.
Partly, that's part of what's going on there. Why are you so sensitive to light and all of that when
you, you know, you wake up and why can't you get back to sleep, you know? You pass out. I mean,
not you, Mike. Not us sensible, you know, mature adults, but, you know, one who has drunk too much
and passes out and then wakes up early in the morning feeling really wired and can't go to sleep.
Well, you know, you've had a sort of glutamate suppression effect when you've drunk too much
alcohol and you've had a change in gene expression in so, in glutamaturgic pathways in order to
compensate for that effect on gene expression. And now suddenly, when your glutamate suppression,
well, the alcohol is gone, so glutamate suppression is over, but you've up-regulated,
say, glutamate receptors. Suddenly, you've got an excess. You've got, you know, your glutamaturgic
activity is peaking in an unhealthy way. And that's because there's been this compensatory
swing in your gene expression. So, and I mean, those sorts of things, that's just another vivid
example of something that's just going on all the time, you know, like the way that things we put
in our body or behaviors we engage in, things we perceive are changing our gene expression,
you know, from, you know, very fine-grain levels to quite profound ones.
So, yeah, they just feel like incredible model systems that you've got for uncovering those
sort of underlying generic mechanisms. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, I see it. Yeah, super cool. Well, I
think, yeah, I mean, this content that we've outlined is amazing. I guess the question is,
do we already, do we already have a specific outline of all this, or should we, or should we
make one? I mean, I haven't taken notes yet. Yeah, we have an outline, but it's an old one.
And I think, I mean, I think it's certainly, you know, enough and suitable for us to work from.
But if you've got more notes, and obviously we've got this recording that we can that we can refer
to, there's any particular thoughts that have come up on the basis of this, we should just
incorporate them. And, but yeah, I kind of see it as the original outline was just,
you know, chemical ecology and your framework and how they like sort of classic chemical ecology
and your framework and how they are, you know, conceptually, they're all of these,
these fantastic resonances and this, you know, layered ecology, layered ecologies that molecules,
you know, that we can use to understand the molecules through, like, we need to have this
layered perspective in order to understand even why a molecule looks the way it is in evolutionary
terms. That's kind of something we haven't really talked about. But I think we can introduce that
and maybe the potential for energy principle connections there in the initial article whilst
making these analogy, well, just showing the resonances between chemical ecology and the
work that you've been doing. And then the next article was going to be more focused on origins
of novel functions. So, so one of the things we just talk about in passing in the first article is,
you know, molecular tools and how molecular tools are discovered, you know, and derived.
And then the second paper can be talking about origins of novelty, kind of broadly,
but using molecular tools and things like toxin sequestration and just change of context,
equaling, you know, these kinds of analogies between escape and radiate, escape from adaptive
conflict and things that are going on with xenobots and anterobots could be the second paper.
And then the third paper was going to be more on the way these things,
the way the rubber might hit the road in terms of integrating this somatic psychiatry
perspective, you know, or take how, how is this interaction between chemical ecology and your
work and your work is defined as, you know, somatic psychiatry, feeding back into actual
psychiatry to some extent, you know, what are we learning about some of these mechanisms from
recognizing the resonances at these different levels of description that could potentially
be useful for a treatment of, well, a treatment in both senses, I suppose, like for taking a
perspective on mental health disorders, but also thinking about the way that we actually treat
them. I like that a lot. Yeah.
