Okay.
Hello. Good evening all. Welcome back to the last talk of the conference.
Professor Michael Delinis-Ribble, and he is a professor of biology, University of Duff, USA.
And he also holds one year push there.
He's also the director of the lab.
And also the director of discovery center at the University of Duff, USA.
And he's the co-founder and principal investigator of the Institute for Computational Design for Organisms from 2020 onwards.
And he's also a senior research investigator.
Forces Institute Harvard of the Department of Molecular Engineering, Establish.
From 2018%.
He is going to deliver a lecture titled as Diverse Intelligent, Understanding and Relating to Unconventional Biological Engineering and Hybrid Agents.
Thank you so much.
Thank you so much.
And I appreciate the opportunity to share some thoughts with you. I will do my best. It's 5am here this morning. I will, I will try to be a coherent.
If anybody is interested in the details of the things I will talk about today, you can find me and all of the primary papers, the data sets, the software, everything is here at this, at this website.
So please, please do get in touch if you're interested in any of this.
And the traditional picture is shown here. This is a famous painting of Adam naming the animals. And it's this, this old idea which is really prevalent in a lot of thinking today, even among scientists that
are humans and human kind of minds and then there are many other, many other creatures, and that these are distinct, discrete natural kinds, they're just, they're just sharply different from each other and humans have all sorts of cognitive capacities and if you try to look for these
aspects where in the natural world, this is often called anthropomorphism. And so some sort of inappropriate attribution of this of these magical qualities outside of the human organism.
But if we take developmental biology and evolution seriously, we realize that both on long phylogenetic timescales as well as developmental timescales, we all share a continuity of much, much different kinds of beings.
And so, so, so this is, this is really a slow, a slow continuum and any sort of special properties that we have, you have to ask, where did these properties come from.
And to what extent did they exist in our various ancestors and when did they begin or end if you think that these are but discrete categories and so on.
And actually, even much worse than that, which is that now, because we now have the ability to replace components of a living system at all scales. So at the cellular scale tissue organism and so on, we can replace biologically evolved
components with all kinds of chimeric engineered materials. So whether this be a nano nano materials or edited DNA or various inorganic components, we can we can make very novel organisms and so
laterally you can see that there's a potential chain of beings, which are an increasingly will be realized, where not only through through biological changes but also technological hybridization.
There are a very wide range of different types of creatures and then once again you have to ask what kind of minds do they have.
I have this this framework that I've been working on it's called tame TAME stands for technological approach to mind everywhere. And the idea is simply this we need to be able to create and relate to truly diverse intelligences regardless of what they're
doing or how they got here. And so that means that we would like this a single framework on which we can compare and and understand the kinds of cognitive systems that exist in familiar creatures so we so humans primates,
birds octopus or these kinds of things, but also really unusual creatures colonial organisms swarms and in synthetic biology so new engineered life forms software artificial intelligences, and maybe someday exobiological agents
realizing that the earth, the all of the examples on earth are just an end of one.
We really have to we really have to understand broader than that.
Now, a number of people have have tried for such a thing and so, so this was a very nice beginning by Rosenbluth Wiener and Bigelow, who created this kind of scale that that shows you through some examples of great transitions, all the way from passive behaviors,
all the way up to what we would call human level cognition with, you know, a second order of metacognitive kinds of processes and so on.
And what's interesting about the scale it's very cybernetic it's doesn't say anything about neurons or brains or, or really embodiments what it what it talks about is, is functionality and ways in of processing information, and that makes it compatible with all of these
things and I think that's a that's a that's a that's the right approach.
So, what what I'm interested in is developing a framework like this, that really is picks out what are the symmetries what are the invariance among all of these different kinds of agents to give us new capabilities in the laboratory and to move experimental
forward. Now, this is this is a nice quote from Searle which says that that we have to allow ourselves to really examine things that that that are generally taken for granted and this is the most common one.
It's a really magical process in in in science it's it's developmental biology, all of us take this amazing journey across through the Cartesian cut we start as just physics so this is an oversight.
So this is a, yes, an Excel prior to fertilization, it's a sort of a blob of a blob of chemicals, and you know you would look at it then you would say that it's it's basically just physics there's not there's not any or not much cognition going on there.
Eventually, we become one of these organisms and maybe something like this this this human organism that will make statements about being a unique and and and having a kind of inner perspective and so on.
And the important thing to realize is that this process is extremely slow and gradual. So step by step developmental biology offers no sharp line at which boom prior to that it was just chemistry and physics.
Without now you're a cognitive being that there are no sharp lines in developmental biology. So everything is continuous and somehow this process results in mind, emerging from matter and so this is this is maybe one of the most interesting questions that that that that that exists.
And there have been a variety of ways to think about this. In particular, there's this idea of collective intelligence and so people will sometimes say, well, ants and colonies of bees and the birds and things like that are perhaps a collective intelligence.
But, but we, we are a unified intelligence we're not like a swarm of events we are a collective intelligence like we have we have a we have a brain and then centralized, and Descartes wanted to find a center in the brain that was was was was specifically specifically connected to this unified
experience that we had. But of course, we are also made of parts and in fact all intelligence is collective intelligence. So let's see so so so here we are here's the brain. And of course, the brain is also made of parts it's made of cells these neurons inside of each cell is an incredible
number of things that that are that are all operating under various rules to give rise to the collective behavior. And so, the real trick to all of this is to understand the scaling to understand how the physics and computation of lower level
components gives rise to a cognition that appears to be unified. So, so we are also collective intelligences and so and so how does collective intelligence work.
Well, let's just take a look at what what our pieces are. So, this is a this is a cell. This happens to be a free living organism but all of us were once free living organisms.
This is a lacrimaria. So there's no brain, there's no nervous system.
There's no cell to cell communication there are no stem cells this is just a single cell doing everything it needs on its own. So you can see it's handling it's physiological it's metabolic its behavioral goals at the level of a single cell.
So if you look at the the the ability to to it's feeding it's eating a bit bacteria and other things in its environment. This is, you know, the envy of soft soft soft robotics and other kinds of engineering we have nothing that's of this level of sophistication.
Each one of our cells was an independent organism. And this this this makes it really important to understand how these capacities these competencies of of our subunits add up together to give us what feels like a unified cognitive experience.
One very interesting thing is that so Alan Turing needs no introduction of course was really interested in intelligence in different embodiments for intelligence in computation these very fundamental things that he wanted to understand the mind and it's in its most general case.
But one other thing that he did which some some people are not aware of is that he was also interested in developmental biology he he he wrote a very, very early paper on morphogenesis the appearance of order the spontaneous generation of order in chemical in chemical systems.
You might wonder why somebody who was interested in intelligence would also be interested in in morphogenesis and in chemical models of developmental biology.
And I think Turing although to my knowledge he didn't write much about this I think that he saw quite clearly being the genius that he was I think he saw quite clearly that these are fundamentally the same problem.
Deep way this is true. I think the secret of developmental biology and morphogenesis is really if we understood it properly would would would really open up all of the mysteries that we're interested in for for cognition I think I think it is the same problem.
So today what what I'd like to tell you today is this. First of all, I would like to tell you that biology uses this kind of multi scale competency architecture, I'll show you what that is of nested problem solvers in diverse problem spaces, and navigating
problem spaces is a central concept and I think it's a concept that binds together diverse fields from engineering and autonomous of autonomous vehicles, all the way through to cognitive science and developmental biology and
I use the notion of goal directedness and I will define that shortly as a kind of invariant to recognize, create and control or communicate with agents and unconventional embodiments and I'm going to show you this this cognitive boundary model for the scaling of cognition.
I'm going to spend some time talking about a specific example I want to take apart and detail a specific example of an unconventional intelligence and how do we work with something like this.
I'm going to talk about the collective intelligence of morphogenesis of cells groups of cells navigating anatomical space.
I want to show you that bio electric networks are a kind of protocognitive medium, which is also the ancestor of brain function, and this has this has huge impact on on biomedicine that I think is going to allow us to do something very different than today's molecular medicine approaches.
And then a close with pointing out again that synthetic bioengineering is giving us an enormously large option space of new bodies and new minds which are going to exist and some of them already do.
These have no standard evolutionary backstories and this has many implications for not only understanding evolution and biomedicine but also AI robotics and ethics are very importantly.
So in my, in my framework, one of the things we focus on this is a very engineering based approach because I want to be close to experiments I want all of these philosophical ideas to be testable empirically I want them to generate new work and so this is, this is an engineering approach
is simply this, that we can place all these, all these diverse beings on a continuum that exists with respect to persuadability, meaning what technology or approaches or techniques or strategies would you use to control the system right so
that's that's the engineering approach. And so you can see immediately that all kinds of diverse systems land on this on the spectrum so you can have very simple mechanical systems like like a like a mechanical clock that are sort of on the left of that continuum and the thing is that if you want it to control this system.
You will not program it to you will not convince it of anything all you can do is modify the hardware.
And then you have more interesting systems like like homie static systems where actually you don't need to rewire the hardware but you can reset the set point, and then this thing will will have different behaviors.
And then you can move from that to systems whether living or non living that are able to learn, and you can train them with rewards and punishments and various behavioral paradigms and then eventually you get the systems that you don't even need to reward and punish directly you can communicate with with with reasoning and and
perhaps get them to do things and so you can see as as we move from from this idea that that that here's hard that here's modification at the level of hardware to eventually you get to something that that sure it's hardware but but really the most efficient way of dealing
with it is basically through some something that in the human terms looks like psychotherapy which is just very very high level of communication to try and try and control what happens.
Okay, so the first thing I'm going to do here for the next few minutes is try to show you some unusual biology to really reinforce this idea that that that everything lives on a continuum, and that we have to understand how agents change along that along that
So the first thing I want to talk about is this so.
So here is a is a creature this is a caterpillar caterpillars live in a two dimensional world of surfaces they crawl on on these these flat structures and they eat, they eat the leaves, and they have a particular brain that's highly specialized for doing that.
So let's turn into this this kind of creature which is completely different this this one lives in a three dimensional world. It doesn't care about the leaves at all it drinks nectar and it has a different life and it has a different brain.
That's the well well suited for its for its environment.
So what we get from here to there is through a process of metamorphosis and during this process. This guy basically dissolves its brain so so most of the connections are broken many of the cells die.
The brain is then reassembled from this state to this state and to two interesting things from from from this process. The first is that, you know, in philosophy one on one you might be challenged to ask what's it like to be a butterfly or what's it like to be a caterpillar.
So this is the next sort of meta question which is, what's it like to be a caterpillar slowly changing into a butterfly. Right so this is a this is a radical change of your embodiment of your existence in the physical world that occurs during your lifetime not during evolutionary
scales but literally during your, your, your lifetime. So, so that's that's kind of an interesting question what happens to you. But now the other important point because you might be tempted to say well you disappear and then there's a new creature so basically there is no transition.
I think that's that's not the case because under the most common criterion for personal identity which is memories to retain retaining your personal memories.
It turns out that memories are retained through this process so there's there's pretty good evidence that that caterpillars that learn something that are trained the the the moth or butterfly remembers the original information.
So to some extent and this is this raises interesting philosophical puzzles. So to some extent it is in fact the same organism in a new body so this is this is a an interesting kind of rebirth but but of the same organism in a new body.
This is even in these animals this is even this is even even more more apparent that these are plenty area these are flatworms which I'll talk about more in the rest of the talk but the key feature of planarians is that they regenerate so if you cut them into pieces every piece
will give rise to any worm, and they have a brain up here, a true centralized brain with the same neurotransmitters that you and I have, and you can cut off the head and they will regenerate.
It's an amazing thing, and this was discovered in by James McConnell and we replicated his work using modern automation in 2013.
What he discovered is if you train this animal, then you cut off the head, the tail sits there doing nothing for about a week they eventually regrows a new brain, and when it regrows a new head and brain you can show that they remember the original information.
So they learned they learned that food is to be found on these on these little on this little laser edge discs.
Now, this allows you to to to perform an experiment again from from philosophy of mine which is called the malfunctioning transporter.
So the idea that you know let's say let's say there's a transporter that somehow transports you from here to there but it's broken down and so once it's transported you it fails to remove the original copy so now there's two of you and so so which one is the original
person so so in the planarian you can actually do that we can cut them into pieces and now you have multiple individuals that are basically copies of the original as far as the content of their of their brains are concerned.
So you can see this this amazing plasticity that where where the the ability to change the body in this case to regrow ahead or to metamorphose and rebuild a brain is is deeply connected with the cognitive content of that of that creature's mind.
And, and this this plasticity of plasticity of the body extends to vertebrates. So here's a tadpole of a frog. So here are the nostrils the mouth, the brain, the gut here and this is the tail back here.
And so what you'll notice what we've done here is we've created a tadpole in which the prize the eyes are missing so there's no eyes up here, but we did create an eye on its tail, and I'll talk later about how we do that.
But these animals when you create this eye without long periods of evolutionary adaptation, they can see they can see out of this eye and we know that because this device that we've built and it's the same device that we use to train to test to train and test the planarian during their behavior studies, we can show that that these
these animals can be trained on visual tasks and to stay away from particular moving lights and things like that. So, so this is this is this is amazing because the brain dynamically adjusts its behavioral programs to accommodate a completely different body architecture.
So, and this has this has many, many implications for evolution that that we can talk about later if people want to, but but that that plasticity of, you know, how is it that cells, I precursor cells implanted onto the tail, not only make a perfectly
normal eye even though they're in a weird environment with muscle next to them and so on, they make a perfectly normal eye but they figure out how to connect and they don't connect to the brain they connect here to the spinal cord, for example.
And that information is able to be picked up by the brain so so so that that competency of the parts is is really quite quite quite remarkable. And so what this gets us to is is this that biological organisms are not merely nested dolls structurally so we all know you know we're
not just not not just structurally but functionally each of these independent layers is is solving problems it's an independent, it's independently competent and solving various problems, and, and this is happening simultaneously at all scales of organization.
Now what are these problems that it's solving well, we're pretty used to recognizing intelligent activity in the in the three in three dimensional space. So our cognitive and sensory structures are prime to look for medium sized objects moving at medium
three dimensional space, and doing clever things like like like this crow that's learned to pick up cigarette butts to receive a reward.
But imagine if we had the innate sense of really feeling every all the all the parameters of your blood chemistry, for example, if we had an innate feeling of that, much like we see the outside world.
So I think we would have no problem recognizing, for example that our liver, our kidneys are various organs are performing very interesting intelligent behaviors in adjusting to all these circuit to all these novel circumstances in physiological space.
There are numerous other problem spaces that we're simply not not used to. But, but these, these spaces are ones in which intelligence can be manifest in exactly the same way that it can be manifested in three dimensional space we just have to learn to think about these.
So what are these spaces so there are spaces of physiological physiological parameters there are spaces of a transcriptional meaning gene expression right so a separate dimension for every gene and then you have this huge dimensional huge dimensional manifold
space in which in which every cell is navigating as it as it changes its its transcriptional states, and we have this which is sort of my favorite and what I'll spend the most time talking about which is anatomical morphospace, the space of all possible shapes
for example the possible the parameter space that defines different shapes of planarian heads. So before we launch into into more space I want to give you one example of transcriptional and physiological space that we discovered a couple years ago.
So here's our planarian. And what we've done is we take this, we take this flatworm, and we put it into a solution of barium barium chloride barium is a is an interesting chemical barium blocks all of the potassium channels.
When you block all the potassium channels cells, which rely on potassium flux to manage their physiology become extremely unhappy. In fact, the, the planarian head has so many neurons that require this, the whole head explodes literally they just over overnight
and explodes they lose their head. But the amazing thing is that if you keep them in barium, what they will do over over the next week or two is they will grow a new head, and the new head is completely adapted to barium has no problem with barium whatsoever
And so we asked a very simple question. How is that possible? What is this, what is this head doing that's different from the original head that allows it to
So it's a, it allows it to maintain its function in barium barium barium. I'm sorry, could somebody mute? There's a lot of noise from somebody.
There we go. Thank you. So we, what we did was we compare the transcriptomes. So we just looked at all of the genes that are expressed in these in these normal heads versus the ones that are expressed here, and we asked what's different. So what's what's transcriptionally different about these
about these animals. And what we found is really a very small number of genes that were turned on to allow them to adapt to barium. Now, here's the amazing thing, planarian never encounter barium in nature. So there, there has never been evolutionary pressure for being able to deal with with barium exposure and for knowing what to do with these
How did these cells know exactly which genes to turn on to deal with this new physiological stressor. So you can sort of imagine this problem. It's because because they're, I don't know, 20,000 genes or however many there are, you can imagine it's like you're in a
a nuclear reactor control room. It's it's melting down. There's a big problem. How do you know what to do. In fact, you can't. There's no time to just start flipping genes randomly on and off. There's no time for that. The cells don't don't turn over like bacteria. So there's no time for some kind of
You know, random change where everything dies in the one successful cell, it repopulates the head. And so there's this real, real problem of understanding how do these cells navigate to the correct region of transcriptional space they have to have to take this walk from
kind of random change where everything dies and the one successful cell repopulates the head.
And so there's this real problem of understanding how do these cells navigate to the correct region
of transcriptional space. They have to take this walk from this state to this state and it's not
known how they do that. So that's an example of problem solving in physiological space.
What I'd like to do next is to really focus on morphogenesis and problem solving in anatomical
space as a kind of collective intelligence. And so let's talk about this for a few minutes.
We all start life like this as a ball of embryonic blastomers. So this is kind of an early stage
in these cells. Eventually build something like this. This is a cross section through the human
torso. And you can see the amazing order here, the structure. Every organ and tissue is in the
right place, the right size, the right position relative to each other. Where is this structure
specified? Where is this order specified? Now, people often will want to say, well, it's in the
DNA, but we can read genomes now and none of this is directly in the DNA. What the DNA specifies is
the micro level hardware of each cell. So the proteins that every cell gets to have. But it's
the physiology and the dynamic behavior of these cells that then gives rise to the right number
of fingers, eyes, and everything else. So we have to understand how do cells, groups of cells,
know what to make and when to stop. As workers in regenerative medicine, we would like to know,
well, if a piece of this is missing, how do we get these cells to rebuild again? And as engineers,
we would like to ask a further question, which is, well, that's fine to regenerate this, but
actually, what else can we make? So can we ask these cells to build something completely different?
I'll show you that towards the end of the talk. So I like to think about the end game of this field,
specifically of regenerative medicine, with a concept of an anatomical compiler. An anatomical
compiler is an aspirational future system, where what you should be able to do is sit down in front
of a computer and draw the animal or plant that you want. It could be anything. It could be a typical
one. It could be some sort of hybrid. It could be anything you like. And if we knew what we were
doing and we understood we had a mature science of morphogenesis, what the system would be able
to do is output a set of stimuli that you could give to a group of cells and they would build
exactly what you asked for. So an anatomical compiler. Now, notice that I'm going to argue
that an anatomical compiler is not a 3D printer. You are not micromanaging the positions of individual
cells and trying to print it. What it really is deeply is a communication device. It's a translator
from your desired three-dimensional shape to the signals that need to be given by the cellular
collective to cause that collective to build it in exactly the same way that it normally builds
something else. And so now why do we need this? Well, we need it because most problems of biomedicine
with the exception of infectious disease, most problems of biomedicine boil down to
the control of shape. So birth defects, traumatic injury, cancer, aging, all of this would be solved
if we knew how to convince a group of cells to do what we want them to do.
So now we have molecular biology and genetics. So isn't that enough? What else do we need?
Well, here's a very simple example. This is an axolotl larva. So these are salamanders and baby
axolotls have little legs. This is a tadpole of a frog. Frog tadpoles do not have legs. And in our
lab, we can do something like make a chimeric called a frogolotl. So we can mix the early cells.
We can make a chimeric embryo called a frogolotl. Now, I ask a simple question. Will the frogolotl
have legs or not? We have both genomes. You have the axolotl genome. You have the frog genome.
Can you tell me if the frogolotl is going to have legs? The answer is no. We have absolutely no
frameworks currently to be able to determine this kind of anatomical information, even though
you have the full genetics for both animals. And so where we are now is this. We're very good.
Molecular biology and medicine are very good at manipulating pathways, so cells and molecules.
But we're really quite a long way from controlling form and function, which is what we want.
And my argument is that in biomedicine, we are basically where computer science was in the 40s
and 50s, that it was still basically stuck at the hardware level. Everything is about pathways
and molecules and genome editing. And this is all at the level of hardware. But we really have an
opportunity, which is to exploit something remarkable that exists in biology and also in
some computer systems, which is higher level information processing. And in biology, we call
this agency. And so I want to give a definition of what I'm talking about. And I like this William
James's definition, which is for intelligence is the ability to reach the same goal by different
means. Somebody else put it, and I wish I could remember who said this. Somebody else said that
it's the continuum of different capacities that make the difference between two magnets
trying to get together and Romeo and Julia trying to get together. It's the degree of
sophistication you can expect from a system in meeting a specific goal, which looks like maybe
energy minimization in very simple systems. And it looks somewhat different in complex systems.
So how does intelligence work out in morphogenesis? Well, here's a simple example.
So we know that development is extremely reliable. So almost all of the time, an embryo will give rise
to a proper human body. But actually, it's reliable, but it's robust. It's not hardwired.
So if we take an early embryo and we cut it in half, you don't get two half bodies, you get two
perfectly normal monosygotic twins. And development in general has this ability to reach the same
goal, meaning the same state in anatomical morpho space from different starting positions.
And despite various perturbations like these local maxima where hardwired systems would simply
get stuck, the way two magnets trying to get together would just be forever stuck. If you put
a barrier in their place, they're never going to walk around it. They're just going to try to get
together in the direct path. Development isn't like that. And regeneration isn't like that either.
So here's a salamander. This guy, this is called the axolotl. And these guys will regenerate their
legs, their eyes, their jaws, various internal organs. So if you amputate, for example, anywhere
along this the slim, they will grow exactly what's needed. And then they will stop the stopping is
the is the most amazing part. When do they stop? They stop when the correct large scale anatomy
is complete. So the system as a whole knows exactly what a salam what a normal salamander looks like.
And and anywhere you cut, it'll grow just the right amount and it'll stop at the right time.
So this is an example of anatomical homeostasis, or the the ability to return back to that region
of anatomical morpho space when it's been perturbed away from it. I should say that this is not just
some weird capacity of lower organisms, human human livers are highly regenerative, human children
will regrow their fingertips, and deer regrow large amounts of bone, innervation, vasculature,
and so on every year. So so there's all kinds of capacities for that regeneration. But one of the
one of the most amazing and one of my favorite examples is this and this was this was discovered
back in the 1940s. This is a cross section through a kidney tubule in a in a newt. And what you see
is that there's eight or 10 cells that cooperate together to build this kind of this kind of tubular
structure. Now one thing you can do is you can you can force the cells to be much larger. And when
you do that, when the cells get larger, the newt stays the same, the same size. So so it has a
regulative regulative ability. And remarkably, then, just a fewer number of cells are being used,
but they make the same structure. And the most amazing thing happens when you make these cells
so enormous, that what it does is one cell will bend around itself to to form a to form the exact
same structure. Now what's remarkable about this is that this is a completely different
molecular mechanism. This is cell to cell communication and tubular genesis. This is
cytoskeletal bending. So what you have here is a nice example of top down causation. In the service
of a large scale anatomical goal, making a proper tubule of the right shape and size,
different molecular mechanisms will get called up, in this case cytoskeleton bending, in this case
cell to cell, cell to cell interactions, different molecular mechanisms get called up to to to serve
this this high level anatomical goal. And so we can see this this kind of multi scale. So this is,
of course, very, very much what what cognitive architectures do, right? You have you have high
level on high level executive function of some sort, and that that eventually feeds down to
physiological processes and making your muscles move and so on. And and this is this is another
really nice example, which we discovered a few years ago, which is which is this that these again,
this is a tadpole. So the eyes, the brain and so on, these tadpoles need to become frogs. And in
order to become frogs, they have to rearrange their face. So the jaws have to move the eyes have to
move everything has to move around. And it was thought that this was a hardwired process, meaning,
meaning every organ just moved in the right direction, the right amount, and then you go from
a normal tadpole to a normal frog. So we decided to test the idea that that this process was had
very low intelligence and basically just was a was a hardwired set of movements. So what we did
was we scrambled all of the initial starting position. So we made this the these Picasso what
we call these Picasso tadpoles, where all the organs are in the wrong place. And what happens is
that actually, they still make pretty normal frogs, everything moves around in novel paths.
Sometimes they go too far and they actually have to come back, but everything moves around
until they get to their normal position, and then they stop. So this is very interesting,
the system is not just a set of hardwired movements, it can actually do the same,
it can reach the same goal despite this, this, this perturbation. And what the genetics gives you
is is not a hardwired machine, what it gives you is an error minimization scheme. It gives you a
system that executes a very flexible program that can start off in different starting positions
and still get to where it needs to go through novel actions that are not normally taken
through development. So this kind of navigation of morphospace with different
competencies is exactly what we're looking for as an invariant across really diverse problem
solving systems. So we started to think about this process as this kind of homeostatic loop,
like a simple homeostat on that initial scale that I showed you from Wiener and colleagues.
So the idea is that this here is the typical developmental story that you get in textbooks
where you have gene regulatory networks, the genes turn each other on and off and you get
some proteins that interact according to the laws of physics. So this is a kind of a complex
dynamical system. And then through the magical process of emergence, you get a complex outcome,
you get something like this. And that's true, all of that does happen, but the more amazing part
of it is that actually, this is not a purely feed forward emergent process. What you actually
have is a set of control loops that will be activated if you deviate from this target state.
So so that means injury, mutation, teratogenesis, whatever, if you cancer, if you deviate from
the state, then both at the level of transcription at the level of physics,
actions will be taken to try to get the system back to where it needs to be. So basic homeostasis.
Now, here's the thing in biology and medicine, we're very used to homeostatic circuits. So
so that's that's no big surprise for temperature and pH and things like that. However,
two things are unusual here. One is that in those kind of systems, the set point is the
parameter is a scalar, it's a single number, you know, pH, temperature, something metabolic state,
something like that. But here, what we're saying is the set point is actually some kind of
coarse grain anatomical descriptor. So the set point is complex here, it's not a it's not a
single number, it's a shape descriptor. And so that's unusual. And the other thing is that
because this has this has the cybernetic flavor of error minimization, it's very much a goal
directed system in the in the formal engineering control theory sense of a goal. It's a state
towards which the system can repair, use energy to try to get back to that state despite perturbations.
And so so that's kind of unusual because because in molecular biology and and feels like that,
you're not supposed to talk about goals, you're only supposed to talk about feed forward
emergence. And I think that's a big that's a big miss for for for those kind of approaches.
So this way of thinking this unusual way of thinking about it makes a couple of very strong
predictions. The first thing it says is that, well, if this is true, it has to have an explicit
encoding of the goal state. Every thermostat has a set point to be recorded somewhere.
And in order to have this kind of homeostatic circuit, you need to be able to know what the
set point is. And so somewhere you have to store the actual memory of what the correct
salamander looks like. That's quite unusual. And and if that's true, the prediction is is
twofold. First of all, that you should be able to find it, you should be able to decode it,
and you should be able to rewrite it. And the other big thing about this is that if you do that,
that's a completely different way of controlling the system than the traditional bottom up
molecular biology approach. Because if this was an emergent system, then your only hope was was
to somehow figure out what to do down here. Which genes do I alter? So so for example, if we decided
that we wanted more more fingers or we wanted this to have three fold symmetry instead of bilateral
symmetry, can you figure out which genes need to be changed to make that happen? And the answer is
we have no idea how to do that. But but there's potentially another approach. Let's leave this
let's leave the hardware alone, the way you would do with a thermostat and change the set
point, can we decode that set point and get the exact same cells to build something completely
different. And so what I'm going to show you now is is our efforts, our efforts to do that,
because we've basically uncovered the idea that the informational medium for this collective
intelligence, this these groups of cells that do these amazing things and repair and and and so on.
There is there is a kind of cognitive glue that allows them to do that that binds the
individual cells into a single agent that has goals and morpho space and that glue is
but perhaps not shocking because that's what that's what happens in the brain.
That mechanism is developmental bioelectricity. So let's so let's look at let's look at brains as
an example of a biological system in which this kind of problem solving capacity exists. How do
brains solve problems in three dimensional space? Well, the hardware looks like this. So it's a
network of cells connected to each other. Each cell has these little ion channel proteins that
allow the cell to maintain different voltage potentials. And that electrical state can be
propagated to the neighbors through these little electrical synapses known as gap junctions.
And and so that kind of hardware is known to support an amazing kind of behavioral software.
So you see this here this this this group made this amazing video of electrical activity in a
zebrafish brain and a living zebrafish brain as fish think about whatever it is that fish think
about. And this drives a this drives a process of or a project of neural decoding. So the idea is
that if we record all of this activity, and we learn to decode it, we will be able to read out
the the the the mental states, the goals, the preferences, you know, everything else about
this about the the the mental life of the system, because it is a commitment of neuroscience that
all of the cognitive content of the of the of the organism is is stored and implemented by the brain
physiology here. So it turns out so so so that's the that's the that's the standard neuroscience
story. But it turns out that neuroscience is actually applicable way beyond neurons, because
all of the cells in your body have ion channels, most of them have gap junctions to their neighbors.
And so what we've started is the this idea this parallel idea of non neural decoding,
where we can take a look this happens to be a frog embryo developing same same technology
imaging the electrical conversations that these cells have with each other.
We should be able to decode this. And from there derive all of the protocognitive capacities
that the system is using to navigate anatomical space and becoming a proper embryo. What does
the collective measure what does it remember what does it know what errors does it try to minimize.
All of these things we should be able to discover if we knew how to crack this bioelectric code.
And so so the interesting thing is that it's extremely this this this architecture of brain
and behavior, right, where where the DNA specifies the the the the electrical components, and then
you have this this excitable medium that with with certain architectures that then supports
behavior which you can you can affect not not just by editing the DNA but with experience
with with with with with electrical signals through the through sensory organs with drugs.
And what it does is it controls your muscles electrically to move the body through three
dimensional space. But of course this system is evolutionarily ancient this was used long before
brains and neurons appeared even even bacterial biofilms already knew how to do this. What it does
is the is uses the exact same exploits the exact same computational capacities of electrical
networks to make decisions collectively that move your body shape through anatomical morpho space.
So it controls your journey not through physical space but through anatomical space
before you have a brain and muscles and and all of that and this is this is not only evolutionarily
ancient but developmentally extremely extremely early. So there's a really strong isomorphism here
because evolution of course likes to likes to reuse things and and we think that what it did
was was simply pivot the same set of tricks into different effectors and thus into different problem
spaces. And so here are some tools we developed. We developed these these voltage sensitive dyes
that allow us to track all the electrical states of for example in early embryo so here's the
time lapse taken by my colleague Danny Adams. We do a lot of computational modeling to link
it to the molecular biology of these ion channels to figure out which channels and pumps
are responsible for the states of individual cells and then of course is the hard work of
doing the systems of physiology of figuring out what the patterns mean. So I'm going to show
you two examples of these patterns. This is a voltage movie taken of an early frog embryo
putting its face together and you can see here that this is one frame out of that movie that
basically we can now read out the pattern memory that these cells have of what a normal
face looks like. So before all the genes come on and all the cells become rearranged and everything
this is you can already see the tissue nose here's where the mouth is going to go here's
where the first eye is going to go the second eye comes later here are the placodes you can we can
already read out these pattern memories. Now this is we know these are instructive because if you
change this using optogenetics or various other techniques I'm going to show you in a minute
everything goes go everything that downstream is changed the gene expression is changed the
the position of the organs change and so on this is the this is the reference point
that serves as the representation for for for making the this this embryo. Now that's that's
the native one required for normal development here's a pathological one and and I'll talk a
little bit about more about this later but but basically the idea that that what we can do is
we can inject human oncogenes into these tadpoles they make little tumors but even
before the tumor becomes morphologically apparent you can already see the bioelectrical changes
that happen as this this oncogene causes these cells to disconnect electrically from their
environment and go off and live as amoebas treating the rest of the body as just external
world so it breaks the connection of these cells to this global bioelectrical pattern the collective
intelligence is is is broken here so to to to do these functional experiments to manipulate these
things we've developed two kinds of tools basically just everything stolen from neuroscience and
appropriated to other cells and that's a very important point none of the techniques of neuroscience
distinguish between neurons and other cells everything works all the concepts from from
active inference to a by step above perceptual by stability to a rewrite ability of memory all
all these things work and and the the actual tools work so we use all the same all the same
techniques we use optogenetics we use neurotransmitter drugs ion channel drugs all the same stuff
works now now keep in mind in the things I'm going to show you there are no electrical
fields being applied there are no waves or magnets radiation nothing like that all we do
is control the native interface the native bioelectrical interface that these that these cells
exposed to each other to allow them to program each other's behavior and that interface of
course are these gap junctions in these ion channels so we use drugs we use we use some
light as an optogenetics we can change the structure of these channels and so on and so
it's to change and so what we're trying to do is change the resting potential and in particular
the spatial pattern of resting potential this is not a single cell phenomenon this is a network
phenomenon so what happens when you do this well one thing that can happen is that if we if we put
in if we inject into the early embryo an mRNA encoding a specific ion channel that will
cause a pattern that's similar to the pattern that we saw in the electric face that I just showed you
we can induce those cells to form an eye and so we can make an eye anywhere not just in the anterior
norectoderm which is where the textbooks will tell you the only tissue competent to become an eye
are so that's not true if you go go far upstream of master eye genes like pack six and set the
correct electrical state you can convince any region of the body to make an eye for example the
gut here okay and so if you section these eyes they have all the same components that normalize do so
so here are your lens your retina your optic your optic neural of that is here and and so
so notice notice a couple of interesting things first of all this this shows you that these
bioelectrical patterns are instructive they don't just make they're not just epi phenomena they don't
just make defects they're actually instructive force for large-scale pattern also notice the
modular control this electrical state that says build an eye here is basically a subroutine call
we don't provide all the information needed to to make an eye it's a very simple electrical state
that's that's a that's a simple state downstream all the complexity of actually carrying it out
does not have to be micromanaged that's very interesting and they have an interesting capacity
that is seen for example in ant colonies which is recruitment if i only inject a small number
of cells not enough to make this whole lens this whole thing is a lens sitting out in the tail of
a tadpole somewhere if i only inject a few cells what they do is they recruit their neighbors so
the blue cells are the ones whose voltage we changed these other cells we never targeted them
they're completely wild type they become recruited to this process of making this very nice lens so
they have the ability to recruit their neighbors to handle a task that there's not enough of them to
do that that's a that's an interesting capacity of collective intelligence what can you what can
we make well we can make um ectopic hearts we can make legs so here's our six-legged frog
we can make ectopic four brains using this technique we can make inner ear organs or
odysseists we can also make fins now that's kind of weird because tadpoles aren't supposed to have
fins that's more of a fish thing but i'll show you what's what's going on here in a minute
so so so whole whole organs can be re-specified again we're we're we're programming the collective
we're not telling individual stem cells what tissue to be we're telling a whole region you
should be an eye and or or a leg or something else and and what is an eye or a leg individual cells
don't have any way of representing that but collectives do and the way they represented is
through these electrical signals now now biometrically of course we're using this now to to
to try to achieve certain goals in regenerative medicine so here's our leg regeneration project
so frogs normally do not regenerate their legs unlike salamanders if you amputate 45 days later
there's at this stage there's basically nothing but what we've done is we've created a bioelectrical
cocktail that when you apply to the early wound shifts the decision making of that
collective towards a leg regenerating goal and there and and then so so it's just a
single day treatment and then you get about a year of leg growth and by 45 days already here
here's this msx1 uh uh uh blastema marker that the the blastema genes are turned on
and then by 45 days you've already got some toenail that you've got a toenail you've got some toes
and eventually a quite respectable leg and the leg is you can see here it's touch sensitive
and it's motile so the animal can use can use this leg okay so so again it's this idea of
communicating a very simple thing to the collective and then taking your hands off the wheel not
trying to micromanage what the stem cells do or or or what the gene expression is all of that is
handled top down the idea is to give the the appropriate information at the very beginning
and I have to I have to do a disclosure here because I'm David Kaplan and I are co-founders
of a scientific co-founders of a company called Morphosuticals which is trying now the same
technology in mammals and the idea is to ultimately go to limb and organ regeneration and human
patients someday so I want to go back to this to this amazing amazing creature which are these
these planarium and really think about uh try to try to really cash out this idea that that these
electrical uh much like in the brain this electrical network is really storing the uh
the the goals and the and the and the informational content of the collective intelligence
and so just to introduce you to this to this creature a little bit uh quite complex many
different organs a true brain you can chop them into pieces and every piece knows exactly what's
needed to form a perfect little worm in fact they are so good at maintaining the correct shape
that they do this all the time in their bodies and thus are immortal there's no such thing as an
old planarian they they don't age at the level of the organism they just keep going and and you know
that that that they have to have a very developed uh uh system of of global communication because
if you cut them in half this half becomes a tail this these cells up here form a head but these
cells were direct neighbors a moment ago so that decision to make a head or a tail can't be locally
determined in these cells they have to communicate with the rest of the body do we already have a
head which way is the one facing and then they make their decision so understanding this this
decision making process was really key for us um we developed a model of of of of of
bioelectrical signaling at the wound that appears to be involved in that head tail decision and that
allows you to do the following thing uh here's a normal planarian one head one tail it has normal
gene expression anterior genes in it turned on in the head and then when you amputate this guy you
get a hundred percent of the time you get a one-headed offspring from this from this middle
middle fragment but what you can also do is you can also take one of these again same thing
anatomically normal uh transcriptionally normal and it makes a two-headed worm this is not photoshop
these are real um real animals and you ask well why is it that I just told you that this was an
incredibly reliable process why did this guy form an ectopic head at the posterior because
having figured out this electrical circuit we were able to rewrite their pattern memory of
what a correct planarian is supposed to look like so here is what this animal represents
as a normal planarian one head one tail this is again voltage um voltage imaging but we were
able to and this is of course so somewhat messy but the the technique is is being worked out
we were able to change that electrical pattern by acting on the ion channels and the gap junctions
to be to store this two heads and then when you cut that animal it makes a two-headed worm
now this is really critical this electrical map is not an electrical map of this animal this
electrical map is a map of this perfectly normal anatomically one-headed animal that and this is
an electrical memory that is latent it's not doing anything this animal it doesn't match the anatomy
that the idea of I should be two-headed does not match the current state which is one-headed
it's late that memory is latent because we we rewrote it but nothing happens until you
injure the animal once you injure the animal and cut and cut off this middle fragment then it
consults that memory and then it becomes two-headed so this is if you're interested in neuroscience
and and our brain's amazing ability for what they call time travel the ability to store and imagine
states that are not true right now so either things that were true or things that might be
true later but they're not true right now I think this is a good example of a very basic
kind of primitive version of this because this tissue can store a bioelectrical pattern of
what it will do if it gets injured in the future it's a counterfactual memory it's not true right
now and so a single planarian body can store up to two different ideas of what a correct
planarian should look like and so I promised you earlier on that that I would show you that that
we can find and edit the the cognitive medium of this collective intelligence of morphogenesis
and here it is when we ask where is the information that guides what you build here it is it's it's
it's it's represented much like in the brain by stable electrical states in the in the tissue
that guide the activity and no doubt there's more than two but this is this is what we've
worked out now I keep calling it a memory why because we we we also found out that if you
take these two two-headed worms um and and here they are so you can see you can see the video
of them live if we take these two-headed worms and we continue cutting them in plain water no
more manipulation of any kind this middle portion will continue to regrow two-headed
worms even though their genetics is completely untouched so let me let me re-reiterate that
there's nothing genetically wrong with these animals we did not change the hardware at all
what we changed very was a using a very brief physiological manipulation of the electrical
state basically a stimulus right we we communicated to this collective intelligence with an with a
brief physiological stimulus of turning the channels on and off the way that it happens for
example in your retina when you see stimuli we've communicated the idea that there should be two
heads instead of one and once you do this the circuit holds that memory and in the future
with no more manipulation despite the wild type genetics it will continue to generate a completely
different anatomy and so the question but you know the deep question of what determines how
many heads you have you can't simply say DNA what the DNA does is gives you a hardware machine
a bioelectrical machine that by default generates a memory of a one-headed pattern
but it's rewriteable and if you rewrite it it will it will maintain so and so this has all
the properties of memory it's long-term stable but it's got some it's it's labile a little bit it
can be rewritten it has conditional recall which I just showed you it has discrete possible behaviors
so what we're doing right now is really trying to use some techniques for from from connectionist
machine learning and some other some other tools of of of dynamical systems theory and some other
things to really pull together what we know about the physiology of the electrophysiology of the
circuit and a state space of the circuit and the ability of the system to do amazing things like
regain specific states if it's pulled out of that condition and also to be rewriteable
the way that that memory in real and artificial neural networks is rewriteable now we can now
what's interesting is this is memory goes beyond the number beyond setting the number of heads
it also goes to the it also is involved in the in setting the shape of the heads so this is a
perfectly um normal uh du uh duizia doradoscephala with this nice triangular
head and uh what we can do without changing the DNA is cut off the head and then perturb the
bioelectric network topology of this of this creature by by blocking the gap junctions for a
little bit then you let it go and the system settles back down but when it settles back down it
can make flat heads like a pifalina it can make round heads like an s-mediterranean or it can make
the you know the the normal heads and so what you see is that and and by the way not only not
only the the head shape but actually also the the shape of the brain and the distribution of the
stem cells become exactly like these other organisms they are about 100 to 150 million
years evolutionary distance and so you can ask this the exact same hardware to make heads belonging
to other species so basically other attractors in the state space of this electrical circuit
correspond to other species so evolution can can can search the the space the state
space of this bio electrical circuit to derive these other species and it does not uh it does
not require a genetic change although of course it might become genetically assimilated that change
may become genetically assimilated and then become become heritable um okay and not only can you
find other species in that morpho space which Darcy Thompson gave us this idea of of of a
morpho space a mathematical morpho space in that uh in that morpho space you can find other things
that don't look like plenaria at all you can find these weird spiky forms you can find these
cylindrical things that aren't flat you can find combinations sort of hybrid um hybrid forms
all of this is done with exactly the same cells so um I want to take just uh just a a few minutes
now to uh go back to uh really thinking about the mechanisms of this collective intelligence idea
what I've shown you so far is that uh individual cells which are themselves competent to solve
problems in transcriptional space in metabolic space in a physiological space are bound together
in a multicellular organism to solve anatomical problems okay problems in anatomical morpho space
and then eventually evolution reused it to for to make brains to solve behavioral problems
and eventually linguistic space and so on so so I want to talk for a few minutes about
how does this scaling work how do these individual how do you go from from from numerous tiny little
little proto minds to one uh one larger cognitive system and so and so I want to show you some
hypotheses about that um in a uh in in evolution what we have through multicellularity is an
expansion of goal states so this this cell is very good at handling very local goals it's never
going to work towards any other sort of large-scale goal but together in a collective and I've shown
you some evidence that what binds that collective together is electrical uh communication and the
properties of electrical networks they can work on much bigger goals in a different space so so
here's the goal of making a limb and if you've made a limb and I deviate you from that goal
you will use uh as as the cellular collective you will use energy and very rapidly try to get back
to that state so so individual cells have no idea what a finger is or how many fingers you're supposed
to have or anything like that but the collective certainly does and it will keep implementing
this under under under various types of deformations so that is taking a bunch of low-level minds and
making um making something that's able to pursue large-scale goals in an anatom in a different
space in the anatomical space but that uh that set of mechanisms it has a failure mode and that
failure mode is known as cancer so this is human glioblastoma in culture and so what's happened
to these cells is that they have disconnected from each other electrically and when they do that
they roll back down to their unicellular past they no longer are able to be a part of a network
that perceives large-scale goals so they they go back to their early initial goals which were every
cell wants to become two cells and to go wherever life is good and that's and that's cancer and
metastasis so we need to understand this process of scaling up and and the various failure modes
and I think that basically what happens is simply um that that when you have single cells
they have a little bit of memory going backwards they have a little bit and this has been shown
in the field of basal cognition cells have the ability to anticipate future stimuli but it's
quite small right both in space and time it's quite small and when you join together into
larger networks you have more computational ability to store past memories you have more
ability to predict future states and you have a larger spatial perception you're able to
collectively measure things on a physically larger scale and so if this is how collectives form
we ought to be able to use this to address the cancer problem and in fact that's that's
that's what we've done is to say okay the oncogene is there we're not going to try to
edit the genome or to kill or to somehow kill those cells or to remove that that uncle protein
what we're going to do instead is force those cells to remain in electrical communication
with their neighbors regardless of what the oncogene says and so when you do that here's
the the uncle protein is labeled with red fluorescence it's very bright in fact it's all over the
place you can see this is the same animal there's no tumor because what we've done is we've co-injected
a particular ion channel that sets an electrical state that forces these cells into the normal
communication with their neighbors and they participate in normal morphogenesis they make
skin they make for the various organs instead of going off on their own and making a tumor
so this is another example of taking advantage of the of the decision making in this at the
software level to get a different outcome even though your hardware is is different right and so
that we've had in our lab many many examples of addressing these kind of hardware problems
at the at the at the software level by by exploiting this this this collective
phenomena so what we're interested in is how to what happens when when individual individual
cells which can do this kind of homeostatic loop how they scale up to be a collective
of coupled homeostats that can do very interesting things like navigate problem spaces and so on
and so what you really have here is an expansion of something I call the cognitive light cone
for any being and this is this goes back to my initial stated goal which is that we want a
framework where we can put anything we can compare anything in the same framework so whether it's
naturally evolved design whatever so in in any frame any any agent what what do all cognitive
systems have in common what do all agents have in common what they have in common is a certain
cognitive light cone which is the spatial and temporal size of the largest goal that they
can pursue so if you can only if you only care about the local concentration of some kind of
chemical and you have a little bit of memory and all all you're trying to do is optimize your local
constant chemical concentration you might be a bacterium or a tick as far as cognitive cognitive
light cone size is concerned so very small if you're a dog you have a bigger cognitive light
cone you have lots more memory going back you have some predictive ability going future
but you're never going to care about what happens three months from now in a town that's 10 miles
over it's just impossible for as far as we know it's impossible for for a dog to have that that
large scale of goals and so you have a bigger light cone but it's you know it's still delimited
if you're a human you might have you might be working towards goals that are planetary scale
for hundreds of years into the future in fact past your own lifespan and so you might have this
this enormous cognitive light cone and if you're some sort of an alien being or a future a future
human that has has a much bigger cognitive light cone you might you might be able to care for example
in the linear range about all the living beings on earth the humans can't do that we don't we don't
have the capacity to to scale our care linearly beyond us you know some some small number of
concerns but but but there could be potentially enormous minds that could that could literally
do that you know this kind of this kind of advanced form so so so all of us have these
cognitive light cones and evolution is a journey that of enlarging these light cones that that
then allow us to have bigger goals in different spaces and of course we are composite beings full
of other organisms other cells and and organs and cells all of which have their own different
sizes of light cones in different spaces so i'm going to end in a in a couple minutes with one
last thing i want to show you one one last thing which is a completely new organism and then and
then i'll and then i'll finish so i'm in after due disclosure again because josh bond guard and i
are scientific co-founders of fauna systems which works on computer design synthetic organisms
what we wanted to do was we wanted to ask how much plasticity do cells have to
navigate their various spaces okay and what could we could we um liberate wild type cells
from their normal normal environment and and ask them to reboot their their their multi-cellularity
what what would they do okay and so this is this is this is the experiment here and what happens
is that um this is uh we take um uh this is uh Doug blackistan and my group did did all the
did all the biology for this work and this was done in in collaboration with josh bond
guard's lab at university of vermont and his student sam kreigman did all the computational
aspects so so we take we take the uh the animal cap cells from this early frog and these are
skin these are these are fated to be uh to be epidermis of various types and we dissociate them
and then we put them in this little um this little depression and uh and we leave them overnight and
you want you wonder what might happen well they could die they could spread out they get away from
each other they could form a two-dimensional monolayer the way that cell culture does
instead what they do is uh overnight this is a time lapse they coalesce they come together
and they form this little um this little circular thing uh which has an interesting
property we call it a zenobot because zenopus lavis is the name of the frog and it's a biorebotics
platform so it's a biobot so we call it a zenobot what does this zenobot do well first of all it
swims uh on its own power we do not uh pace it or direct it in any way how does it swim you can
see that here it has little hairs these little hairs are normally used by the frog embryo to
distribute mucus on the surface of its body to to sort of keep the mucus flowing down
but but this thing these guys have figured out how to how to roll in opposite directions on either
side of of this of this of the structure and as a result it can it can swim so they can go uh
they can go in circles they can patrol back and forth like this they can have a collective behaviors
here's here's a bunch of them these two are interacting with each other these guys are
sitting there doing nothing this one is taking a kind of a long journey around the petri dish
here's one here's one navigating a maze um what you can see here the water is perfectly still here
it will move forward it uh takes a turn without bumping into the opposite wall and then at this
point for some internal reason that we don't know it decides to turn around and go back where it
came from this is a very uh simple example of uh spontaneous self-determined motion there's some
kind of process inside that that guides what it does it can take turns it can uh change change
direction and and go back uh if we scan the um if we scan the uh the physiology this is calcium
signaling so what we're imaging is is is calcium spiking in these cells what you see is that very
much like um you might see in uh in brains uh you see you see a bunch of calcium spiking
we're currently using all the same techniques that you might use in neuroscience to analyze
the information flows here uh in fact within the within each zenabot but also between zenabots who
knows maybe they're they're somehow talking to each other and you can detect that using information
theory approaches they regenerate if you cut it in half they will uh they will seal themselves
back up so here so here it's basically cut in half like this and then they'll seal themselves
back up to a norm to a new zenabot shape and then here's the most amazing part of all uh it was
noticed that when you simulate these bots with objects in their environment what you find out
is that um actually their their behaviors tend to tend to collect particles into little into
little groups and so what we decided to do based on this based on an AI kind of model of of
their morphogenesis and behavior is we decided to give them some actual other cells to play with
and what we found out was was something amazing uh what they do is so this white stuff here these
are these are loose skin cells and what the zenabots do is they run around and they collect
these skin cells into little balls and because we're dealing here not with a passive material but
with an agential material meaning with living cells the same material that evolution works with
so we as human engineers the zenabots and evolution all three of us work with this
kind of agential material and what that allows it what what that allows is that when they do make
these little little balls overnight the balls themselves mature into the next generation of
zenabot which then will run around and do exactly the same thing and you get the next generation
and the next generation and so on so think about what this means we've made it impossible for these
guys to reproduce in the normal froggy fashion it's just skin there's no neurons there there's
no reproductive machinery that's these are these are just balls of skin basically but what they've
been able to do is to fulfill von Neumann's dream which is to which is a robot that that
goes around and collects materials from its environment and makes copies of itself and
that's what it does and we call this kinematic replication so um so so the last the last bit
here is simply this let's let's think about this for a minute um there's been no genomic editing
here we didn't change the genome we didn't provide some weird nano material uh when you sequence the
genome here all you see is zenopus standard zenopus lavas so so when we ask what does the
zenopus lavas genome actually encode well it encodes cells it encodes a hardware machine
that under normal circumstances produces this it produces a set of standard embryonic stages and
then some tadpoles that can do this kind of behavior but under different circumstances
these same cells can solve the problem differently and they can become a zenabot with its own
weird developmental stage and then its own very unusual behavior so as far as we know no other
system does kinematic self-replication so so so here here are a couple of interesting interesting
things here um first of all this is engineering by subtraction we didn't add anything but what we
did do was we liberated these cells from the normal influence of the other cells so if you
look at a normal embryo in their skin cells and you ask what do they know how to do well you say
well all they could do is be this boring two-dimensional layer sitting on the outside of the animal
keeping out the bacteria but in fact uh what you find out by by by putting them on their own is that
yeah that's normally what they do when they're sort of behavior shaped or bullied by these other
cells into into having that role but on their own their default behavior is actually this so you
can start to think about evolution as a way of searching the space of behavior shaping stimuli
how do how do we get cells to tell other cells what to do and because you're dealing with an
agential material not uh not passive legos but an agential material these cells already have
certain capacities you can't just put them where you want and have them stay there you have to
you have to use various signals to get them to do to get them to change their their native behaviors
the other thing about this is that for any other living organism if you ask why does it have a
certain shape or a certain size certain behaviors the answer usually is well evolution the anatomical
goals come from evolution you've been selected for eons to be a specific kind of shape well there's
never been any xenobots there's never been any evolutionary of a pressure to be a good xenobot
all of this is completely emergent from the from the generic problem solving capacity of these cells
so one of the things we're working on is is understanding how it is that evolution makes
not just specific solutions to specific environments but actually problem solving machines
that have the capacity to do new things in new environments that they never had specific selection
for uh so um and and we're at the moment uh studying their their cognitive capacities we
actually have no idea what what what can they learn what do they sense what are their preferences
all of that remains to be to be determined so i'm gonna i'm gonna end here with two things first
just a um uh just a summary of of the kind of philosophical aspects of what i've told you
so so in my framework i think that we have to look at uh agency as a continuum not binary
categories uh and we have to really understand um how it is that these capacities change when
bodies and and minds change uh i think that persuadability is a useful engineering um way
to organize that axis which enables what i what i've shown you is that it enables uh important
it enables new discoveries and new capabilities in biomedicine and then so on by thinking about
how how to communicate with these cell groups and so on i think there's no privileged
substrate for cognition i think that there's nothing magical about uh about biological substrates
it's uh we're gonna have intelligences that are that are extremely um diverse uh we have this
notion of the self described by a cognitive light cone as the the size of the goal the largest goal
that it's capable of of pursuing with this idea of evolution and engineers pivoting these systems
through different problem spaces and it doesn't have to be three-dimensional space when when we
look at how intelligent we think a system is we're really taking an IQ test ourselves to ask
whether we've recognized uh the space that it's working in whatever goals it's trying to reach
and its competencies in reaching those goals those are not apparent immediately like as i showed you
for development it looks like it's always does the same thing but it's actually much more much
more clever than that i've shown you that developmental bioelectricity is a evolutionary
precursor of of brain dynamics and it's basically the physiological medium for the software of
multicellular life it's the it's the substrate in which the cognition the the proto-cognition of
the morphogenetic swarm intelligence is held and i've shown you the examples of reading and
rewriting the memories of that of that intelligent swarm and this is just the beginning these are
these are very early primitive kind of experiments still and that i think that we have a really
interesting implications for evolution here which is not only due to the multi-scale competency
of the organs you know you put a bunch of eye cells on the tail and they can still form an eye
they figure out how to connect and the whole thing still still sort of works if you have a
mouth that's off in the wrong place it will readjust itself so so this has many implications
for for evolution and and a really fundamental question of where do these goals come from if
it's not just selection and so the last thing i'm going to say is this that that when darwin
said the phrase endless forms most beautiful when he was interested in and impressed in the wide
variety of of shapes out there in the biological world all of that is a tiny corner of possible
space of agents because biology is highly interoperable it solves problems that it's never
seen before which means that any combination of evolved material designed material and software
is some kind of viable agent so we have hybrids and cyborgs and all kinds of different things that
many of these are already being made but but some of them will be in the future and we really need
a new kind of ethics to be able to relate to sentient beings that are very different from us
they have a different origin story they have a different composition and they have a different
kind of kind of intelligence so all of the details can be found in these in these papers which
i'm happy to send to you if anybody's interested i want to thank all the people that did the that
did the work these are the postdocs and the students that did all the all the hard work here
our support staff my many collaborators our funders so many people that have supported this work
and i thank you for listening
