Who I greatly admired and also enjoyed as a person.
I should start, but the only thing I'm going to save an anecdotal nature is my first encounter
with John Bell, which had to do with a series of conferences.
I think it was the first one on quantum gravity, which Dennis Sharma and Chris Asim and I organized.
There were three of them eventually.
I think it was the first one, but I'm not quite sure.
I remember we were worried about quantum mechanics and certain aspects of the Copenhagen interpretation
and so on, which we never felt very happy with, and we needed somebody we felt who would
be able to express the conventional Copenhagen-ish view.
Now knowing very little about John Bell, except his theorem, which seemed to be establishing,
showing that quantum mechanics was right, so we needed somebody to put the position showing
quantum mechanics right.
We invited John Bell and we were shocked and delighted to find that he really shared most
of our views and was, I think he was, as far as I can remember at the time, he was thinking
that he probably was also a little bit under the misapprehension of what cosmologists thought,
namely that they all liked the many worlds interpretation, which was certainly not what
either the three of us wanted, but nevertheless, I think his talk was somewhat aimed at that.
I've forgotten exactly what he said, but I remember it was a very realist point of view,
so that was very much the kind of thing, you see this reality here.
I think the fact that he had this view of wanting to make sense of what we see and what's
going on in the world and square that with quantum mechanics was something which we very
shared, a viewpoint we very much shared with him.
The non-locality, of course, was what he effectively established, and this is something
which I don't remember it featuring quite that strongly.
This was at a time, of course, when it was before GRW and at a time when the Bohmian
thing was, I think, was what he was plugging very much, I think, at that time, because
it was giving us a way we can actually look at quantum mechanics in a way which gives
you a sort of real picture of the world, which is very satisfying from our point of view.
I don't remember ever talking with him about twisters, so that's specifically not very
much to do with John Bell, but I'll say that what I want to say about twisters, namely
how it relates to quantum non-locality, is, of course, very much a John Bell thing.
I'm afraid that most of my talk will be about twisters, so I'll have to explain Twister
Theory because I'm not going to assume that people here are experts or necessarily know
anything about the subject at all.
So I'll have to say about twisters, and I'll go rather quickly, but I'm not expecting
people in turn to follow all the detailed equations and things like that.
It's more the general ideas and the geometrical pictures and things which I want to convey.
So Twister Theory, well, the pictures here give you the central idea.
I have to stand in two places at once, it's slightly awkward.
As you can see from the nature of the transparency, this is a pretty old slide, but I think it
serves its purpose very well.
Here we have a picture of spacetime, this is Minkowski's space, flat spacetime, and
I want to try and convey partly that twisters are about real things.
When I was talking about four-dimensional spacetime, I'm not going to any high dimension
in that respect.
In fact, it's very geared to three space and one time, so three space very specifically,
one time very specifically, so it's quite unlike things like string theory where you
bring in extra spatial dimensions.
It is primarily a transcription from a spacetime picture to another picture, and this is meant
to be completely equivalent.
Despite being equivalent, you find that the things which are easy or natural to do in
one picture tend to be obscure and a little bit complicated in the other picture, and
that happens both ways around.
So there are things which are nice and easy to do over here, which are not so easy over
here, and vice versa, things which are easy and direct over here, which are a little bit
obscure and hard to see what's going on down here.
But it is a translation, it's a correspondence, a very specific mathematical correspondence.
Roughly speaking, light rays, thinking of a light ray here, is represented by a point
in the other space, and a point in Minkowski space, you think of all the light rays through
it, and that is basically the celestial sphere.
So here we have a point, and we are looking back along the light cone, and all the light
rays through that point, that collection of light rays represents the point, and that
collection of light rays will be a sphere, that is the celestial sphere, and one of the
important points about the sphere that represents the point in spacetime is that it is naturally,
in some sense, a Riemann sphere.
Now when I say a Riemann sphere, I mean the complex plane with a point added to infinity.
It's a complex one-dimensional space, the simplest kind, which is topologically a sphere,
and one of the remarkable features of this, which is very direct, is that if you think
of the, here we're looking back at the past light cone, and we have two observers moving
at great speed with respect to each other, and because of aberration, they will see a
slightly different arrangement of the stars in the sky, but this arrangement of stars
in the sky has this very important property, that it is conformal, it actually sends circles
to circles, so if you found a set of stars which seem to lie on a circle, then they will
also seem to lie on a circle for the other observer, and it's telling you that you have
a conformal picture of the sky.
Okay, so that's a crucial thing.
I've got three words written down here, all of which are important.
The first word, complex, so this part, when I say this is a Riemann sphere, that is a
complex manifold, and that's the simplest complex manifold, it's a complex curve, and
so the idea is to think of this as a complex space, and the hope would be to think of the
whole space in some sense, as a complex space, and one of the reasons for thinking that's
a good idea is quantum mechanics, because of course quantum mechanics is based on the
complex numbers, the complex amplitudes, and so that was one of the ideas here, to try
and bring in a relationship with quantum mechanics.
It's also non-local, and of course that's very important here in our conference.
In fact, the scheme of Twister theory came about before the famous bell paper and all
this, but nevertheless, I was already fairly persuaded that we needed some description
of spacetime, which was in some important way non-local.
It's not sort of clearly non-local after what Bell showed us, that we really do have to think
of spacetime or what's going on in physics, as in some sense non-local, and I think that's
very important, but I was already thinking that we needed some kind of non-local description.
And mathematical sophisticated wasn't something that was an intention, but it turns out this
way, so you have to worry about certain fairly sophisticated mathematical ideas, and one of
these particularly will be the crucial point, which I want to make in this talk.
Now you see it's non-local in a rather trivial way originally, which is that we're talking
about an entire light rays represented by a point, so in a certain sense, the whole
light rays is simultaneous, well of course it is in a sense, if you were a photon travelling
along, you wouldn't experience the passage of time, and so the whole thing if you like
is a simultaneous entity, and in that sense, when it's collapsing down the light ray to
a single point, and it's encompassing some aspect of non-locality in doing that, but
I'm saying that is a relatively trivial aspect of non-locality, certainly doesn't involve
any of the subtleties that Bell's theorem does in showing that quantum mechanics is
fundamentally non-local.
Now the other aspect of the Riemann sphere, which this is very much to do with, is of
course the amplitudes, we have a particularly with spin half particle, you see it very clearly,
and the combinations of up and down give you all the other directions in space, and
this is a feature of the three dimensionality of space, it works much more, the amplitudes
have this very close relationship to directions in space, which you see through the behavior
of spin half in particular, also for higher spin, but it's a little bit more complicated,
and I won't go into that here, but you see again a Riemann sphere, we're looking at
these complex numbers, where they are allowed also to be infinite, because it's the ratio
of the complex numbers that's important, and that is a Riemann sphere, and the geometry
is very clear also, because here we have the complex plane, the green one here, and the
complex numbers in there, or the vessel plane, and here we have the unit circle, and I put
the Riemann sphere to have that unit circle as its equator, and by organizing things, so
your coordinates are fitted in the right way and so on, infinity with course corresponds
to when w equals zero, so that corresponds to the spin down, and that's the point down
here, and the other spin will correspond to a point on the sphere, you just look at the
ratio z over w, put that on the complex plane, project from the south pole, and you get a
point on the sphere, this is a stereographic projection, and the direction up from the
origin gives you this direction of spin that corresponds to, so this is just sort of straightforward
geometry showing you the relationship between the geometry of three dimensional space related
to the amplitudes of complex, the complex amplitudes of quantum mechanics, and that's
really struck me very much for a long time, that you have in built in some sense a relationship
between geometry and the complex amplitudes, so part of the philosophy here is trying to
make that complex geometry which seems also mysterious and everything, and make it much
more down to earth, or if you like real, that's part of the reality picture, these are part
of two spinner calculus of course, and these amplitudes here go fit together to make a
vial spinner or two component spinner, and you can have an index like this, and that's
dinner right here, you can make that a little bit more geometrical by taking the direction
to be along the light cone, the spinner corresponds to a direction along the light cone, and there
is the phase of the spinner also is given by a flag plane through that direction, which
can be an arrow on the section through the light cone here, I'm not going to worry too
much about that, I just want to show that as I like to do these things which seem sort
of mysterious and algebraic and you're not quite sure what they mean, very often do have
absolutely clear cut representations in ordinary geometry, and to do make it make this clear
is something I've always liked to do, what about twisters then, well if we have these
two component spinners, you can see a twister in a sense is a pair of two component spinners,
and the most clear cut connection between these and the geometry of a light ray are
the following, this is all quite formal, I'll do a little bit more specifically in a minute,
that if you take the spinner pi, I'm calling them omega and pi, because pi has to do with
momentum, and usually lose the letter P for momentum, so if you take pi times its complex
conjugate, this is an outer product, no contractions, then that is essentially the momentum, and
it's a null vector, because this is an outer product, and omega has to do with angular
momentum, which is an omega is a letter of use for angular momentum, so here we have
the picture, here is our light ray, and here is an origin, and then pi has to do with the
direction of that light ray, and omega has to do with the direction out from the origin
intersecting the light ray, you'll notice I have this little helix running along the
light ray, that is to indicate that there is something a little bit more than a light
ray in the twister, which I'll come to in a minute, which has to do with the angular
momentum of the, if it was a photon, it would be the angular momentum of photon, I want
to say, make this point right early on, that I don't mean that the light ray is a photon,
it's like saying, you know, if you have normal description in space of particles, you would
say a particle is located at a point, the point is not necessarily a particle, because
there are lots of points in the space which don't have particles on them, so in the same
way the twister is not a light ray, it's where the light ray could be if you like, so thinking
of it as the analog of a point in space, it's the analog in a different kind of geometry,
you could say that particular photon, if it could be viewed classically, it would be perhaps
represented by that particular twister, but the twister doesn't have anything to do with
being a photon or any other particular massless particle, but the helix or the twister going
along the light ray is just to indicate that it's also got a spin, and the spin will be
in the direction or either positively related to the momentum or negatively, so this could
go one way or the other, and it could have a certain size too, so I'll come back to that.
The angular momentum is actually a combination of omega bar and pi bar, you have to bring
the pi in together with the angular momentum, with the omega to get the angular momentum.
I'll give you some formula in just a minute, but I think the main thing is not to worry
about the detailed formula, but just to get the general picture of what I'm trying to
say.
So here we have initially again the same correspondence, just what I was saying a minute ago, I regard
this as the first approximation to the twister geometry, to get a better picture of it, you
see I said this wanted to be a complex manifold here, one of the obstructions of this is almost
immediate, namely that the think of light rays and you count how many dimensions there
are, it's a five dimensional space, now a five dimensional space is certainly not going
to be a complex space because it's got an even number of dimensions, so it's not can't
be quite that, so what you do find is something a little bit more than that.
This original picture here is just that subspace here, I'm calling that PN, that means projective
null twisters, and that's this space, this space we just had is that one.
Now here I drew the Riemann sphere as a sphere, I'll tend to draw it often as a line because
it really is a projective line, complex projective line which is a sphere, but I can't very easily,
I might draw it as a long sausage sometimes, to show that it's both a line and a sphere
at the same time.
This space then is a complex manifold, it's in fact a complex projective three space,
we have coordinates for that space, will be these things z, I'll have z zero, z one,
z two and z three, and it's the ratios between these, since it's a projective space, the
three independent ratios which give you the point in this space, and here I have the blue
point here, representing a light ray, also you can have points up here and down here,
so I've extended this five dimensional submanifold to a six dimensional complex projective three
space, so it's two dimensions for each complex, two real dimensions for each complex dimension,
so it's a six dimensional as a real space.
Because it's the ratios, it's the independent ratios of those four coordinates, if you want
to describe a projective space you take coordinates and then you're just looking at the ratios.
What is the correspondence between these two pictures?
The correspondence is what I call incidence, so incidence here means that the point lies
on the line here, also means that this line passes through that point, that's what it
means, this gives you the correspondence between the two, over here the points are the blue
things and those are the ratios between the z's, and incidence is just this equation here,
so here we have the Minkowski coordinates, r0 is the time, 1, 2, 3, and then you make
this Pauli matrix sort of thing, and good an eye in front of it, and the square root
of 2 just to make things work nicely, and incidence means these two coordinates are
this matrix times the other two, and the equation of Pn, that's this thing in the middle, is
this emission form, it's a split signature, 2 pluses, 2 minuses if you make this diagonal,
which is written down explicitly there, so that is the space of light rays is represented
that way, and the extents into two halves by when you violate this condition here, so
this is the equation of Pn, and this is the incidence relation, okay, so that gives you
the whole picture, but I want to relate this bit more to the notation, index notation,
and when you, if you're not used to this index notation, I would say don't worry too much,
because I'm not going to worry about the details of the formulae, I just want to tell you,
but just to say what you mean, in the two component what van der Verden notation, the
spinners, indices which are capital letters represent to the, you take the tensor indices,
each tensor index is the product of a spinner index, and the complex conjugate, I've got
a prime on it where it's the complex conjugate, and you have this relationship which is explicitly
written here, and you just take it for granted afterwards, and then this is the matrix I had
before, and the metric is just epsilon, these epsilon's are skew symmetrical objects, don't
worry too much about the details, this is the interpretation I gave you before at the
bottom, because I'll just flash the formulae at you without expecting you to check any
of them. Here we have the incidence relation again, written down, this is just the same
as I had before in the other transparency, in indices it's that, and here we have the
twister is the omega and the pi, the omega's the first two components, the pi is the second
two, and the incidence relation is omega equals i r pi, and that's the important thing which
tells you the relationship between the spacetime given by the r's and the twisters given by
the omegas and pi's. If you move the origin, the omegas change, the pi's don't, the complex
conjugate of a twister, you take the complex conjugate of each bit and swap them around,
so this then gives you z z bar, the scale of the norm if you like of the twister, which
is this equation of P n. If this is zero, that is the equation of P n. Generally the
interpretation is that you have a four momentum, which is along the light cone, which is now
pointing to the future, that's automatically, that comes about from the momentum equals the,
I'm using abstract indices here, so I don't have a way of, people tend to write sigmas
in there, but you don't really need the sigmas if you get the idea of the abstract
indices, don't worry too much about it. So the momentum is the pi times pi bar as I said
before, the angular momentum is the slightly more complicated expression with skew brackets
and so on, let's not worry about the details. The helicity, you see a self-respecting massless
particle ought to have the property that is angular momentum when skewed with its momentum
and dueled is proportional to its momentum. So this is a condition, the Pali-Lubanski spin
vector, which is this thing, has to be proportional to the momentum, and the factor of proportionality
is this thing s, which is the helicity. Helicity is a real number, it could be positive or
negative, depending on whether it's right handed or left handed, and that is basically
the norm. So when s is zero, that is the correspondence we had before, when s is not zero, that extends
the correspondence to the top and bottom halves, so that's really when the helicity is zero,
we're talking about light rays, when the helicity is not zero, you're allowed to go up and down.
So these points are really representing the angular momentum and momentum of a massless,
a classical massless particle, according to relativity, and that's exactly what one's
doing here. So that's, yes, wave functions. If you want to write down a twisted wave
function, you might say, well, this is like P in X, I can make a choice, do I use the
position space or momentum space? Well, here it means, do I use the twister space or the
dual twister space? Yeah, you can make a choice. Let's just arbitrarily say, use the twister
space. That means if I have a wave function, or the twister analog of a wave function,
I shall be looking at a function of z's, which is independent of z bars. Now what does it
mean to say it's independent of z bar? Well, it means you write down the Cauchy-Riemann
equations, which are derivative of f with respect to z bar, is not. What does that mean? That
means it's holomorphic, complex analytic. So to say you're independent of z bar means
you are talking about holomorphic, complex analytic functions. Okay. Now, what about
Helicity eigenstates? Well, you look at what the Helicity operator is. That is basically
the Euler operator, z, d by dz. Displaced a bit, never mind about that. But the s operator,
the Helicity is the Euler homogeneity operator, a bit displaced. The relationship between the
homogeneity, which is n, and the Helicity is given by this formula here, somewhere here.
There it is. I sometimes have an h cross, or sometimes I don't. If you ever see one,
put it equal to one. Sometimes the slides I'm using will not put it equal to one, sometimes
they will. But if you put your h bar equal to one every time, then you have a consistent
picture. So we have the degree of homogeneity is basically twice the, so n is twice the
Helicity, and minus two, minus n is the degree of homogeneity. Okay. So if you want a Twister
wave function, you look for a homogeneous holomorphic function of z. You could use z bar, which you
could rename as w, which is a dual Twister, and that gives you the dual representation.
You can use one or the other.
Yeah, for the moment, yes. But of course you can handle many particles, but which of course
is what one wants to do if one wants to talk about Bell inequalities and so on. I'll come
to some of that in a minute. But let's talk about one particle for the moment, and we
have wave functions. These, I'm saying it could be any Helicity, of course we only know about
photons, and neutrinos had they been massless. Gravitons, it's been one instead of, it's
been two instead of one. That's okay, if you like. When I say graviton, I mean a linearized
graviton here. The equations are basically these things, basically due to Dirac, actually.
These has been fields, and you have the simplest thing you can possibly write down. And before
going further, I should explain the connection between the more normal way of writing gravitational
electromagnetic fields. You see, if you have a thing with two indices, symmetric, then
there is this relationship between the spinner and the Maxwell field. If this is to be a
real field, these two things will be complex conjugates. If it's a wave function, well
then one will tell you the left-handed and the other the right-handed part of the wave
function of the photon. So this F is the photon, and this C is the magnetic field.
C, that's the vial curvature, linearized vial curvature in flat space, and that's
related to a four-index object. And these, in the case of the Maxwell equations, they
just become this equation with two indices. In the case of the linearized gravitational
field, it's this equation with four indices. So these things are already, you're talking
about all the different spins, all in one equation, if you like. The connection between
the homogeneities and the different particles is given here. The photon, the left-handed
photon has zero, has minus four. The right-handed photon has plus one here, minus four homogeneity,
and the left-handed one is zero homogeneity. For the graviton, it's minus six for the
right-handed one, and plus two for the left-handed one. You notice this is hugely chiral, which
is a curious feature of Twisted Theory. It is hugely chiral. If you want to retrieve...
What do you say? Hugely? Hugely chiral. That is to say, it's handed, it's chiral. It's
handed. Yeah. I don't know what... Yes, chiral, yes, chiral. Yes. So this is a very
interesting question. So if you reflect in the mirror, you go over to the dual Twisted
Representation. But you have to make a choice. So you say, shall we use the Twisters or the
dual? And once you've chosen one or the other, you've chosen the chirality. And this is reflected
in the rather strange different homogeneities you have here. In the linear case, it's not
so bad, but when you start talking about nonlinearities, it's a huge issue. I'll say something about
that, but not too much. Now, what is the actual connection between solutions of these field
equations and the Twister function? Okay. What is the connection? It's given...
Don't put any restriction on the positive and anti-solution.
I shall give that in a minute. Yes. You're all leaping ahead of me. I'm going to slowly.
That's clearly... Yes. You're leaping ahead of me. I shall say that in a minute. Yeah.
Absolutely. If you aren't interested in that for the moment, but are interested in the
relationship between the field equations and the Twister function, what is the relationship?
Well, it's a contour integral. What is the case? The simplest case is S equals 0. That
is to say you're looking at a scalar. And the field equation is simply the wave equation.
The wave equation on phi. How do we get that connected with a homogeneity degree minus 2
Twister function? You just do a contour integral. Here is the Twister function. This delta z
is this natural... It's this thing in terms of pi. It's differential which differentiates
out or integrates out the pi variables. You relate the pi to... You look at... This is
omegas and pi's in there. Wherever you see an omega, you put in the incidence relation
that makes it into a pi and an x. You integrate out the pi's, you're left with a function
of x and that is phi. That function of x automatically satisfies the wave equation. If this happens
to be a higher spin thing, you have to make it homogeneity degree minus 2 to make it a
proper contour integral. So you've got to multiply by a lot of pi's. If it's a negative
degree, you bring it up to a minus 2 and then integrate out the thing as before and you
have a thing with these in each pi gives you an index. And so you have a solution of the
wave equation automatically from the holomorphic nature of the f. If you have one which is
positive or greater than minus 2, homogeneity, then you need to go with d-body. You notice
this is the quantization rule in a sense because here you have the pi's going to the
complex conjugates. The complex conjugates are d-body omegas. So you put d-body omegas
in here and then you get the unprimed indices. So you have the...
The x is now space-time coordinate.
The x is the space-time coordinate.
The x.
Oh, x is the space-time coordinate. Yes, I'm sorry. x is the space-time coordinate. Geometrically,
what does that mean? Well, let's take a particular case. Geometrically, what it means, first
of all, is that x is a space-time point in twister space, in projective twister space,
is a line. So a point is represented by a line here. A line, remember, is a Riemann
sphere. Here is the Riemann sphere, which represents that line. A simplest representation
I can...of a function I can take here. I want a minus 2 homogeneity function. Let's take
one over a product of two linear forms, linear expressions in z. That's the simplest you
can do. Where are the poles here? Where are there the two planes? I'm going to make these
two planes intersect in the bottom half of twister space, which we can do. That will
give us a positive frequency function. That's the trick here. If you want a positive frequency
function, and here's the more general case, make sure the singularities of our function
f have two camel humps pointing up into the top half of twister space and they can do
anything it likes in the bottom half.
I'm sorry, I missed something there. What's the four-vector?
Oh, not x. x is a position point.
So is x i? It's not the four-vector.
Yes, it's a four-vector.
My question is, all these things in this x-view emerge from the index of omega and pi.
Because the index of omega and pi, you have to calculate it.
It's the incidence relation. Let me go back to that. The relationship is precisely the
incidence relation. Here it was. It's this question here, or this one here. You see,
the pi is there and the omega is there. What's that got to do with the spacetime point? Well,
it's given by the incidence relation here. So this is the x, this is the r. And it contracts
one of its indices onto the pi and the remaining one becomes omega.
It's like writing a vector using bispin.
It is. Bispinners, it's a vector.
I don't know.
If you call that a bi, I think bispin or something else, but never mind.
It's got one index in the original spin space, the other index in the complex conjugate spin
space. Yes. If that's what you mean by bispinner, yes. That's right. I mean it's a
Pauli matrix thing. And the connection with the twisters is that it contracts on the pi
and you get the omega. And that means that the x is incident with the twister.
So the geometry over here is that the x, you see, x is a line in twister space and the
integral is done by converting, well, I don't know how to say it. It's looking at x and
seeing what the integral does on fixing the x. And then that gives us a relationship.
For each x, I can eliminate the omega using incidence and then integrate out the pi, which
amounts to doing an integral. What it amounts to is I'm taking my line here, which represents
x. That's a particular Riemann sphere. I'm then taking the intersection with these planes,
which gives us the poles. So there will be two singularities. I then do a contour integral
between the two singularities and that gives us a value. This is the value of the field
at the point represented by x. It's the result of a contour integral. Is that clear?
Yes. Okay. So I have a very specific way of getting, this is in the scalar case or when
I've got the indices, doesn't make much difference to the geometry, it's doing this. Now that's
in a special case. In a more general case, I might say I've got a singularities which
have two bumps up into the top half. I didn't say this before, it's related to your question
that the, if I take x in the top half of twister space, that corresponds to a complex, a point
in complex Minkowski space, which is what people refer to as the forward tube. And this
means that if I just have two camel humps in the top, I can move that line all the way
around in the top, as long as I don't go to the bottom and I'm going to have a positive
frequency solution of the equations. So I have an honest wave function, which is automatically,
not only automatically satisfies the field equations, it automatically is positive
frequency at the same time. So it does a lot of things for you all at once. Okay. Now
that's, that is a key thing. These are twister wave functions of single particles. Now there's
something funny about this, which I've worried about for a long time. I had the idea, yes,
this top half of twister space has got to be positive frequency, that was a big motivation
right early on in the whole subject to try and get positive frequency out of it. But here
you have this very funny looking geometry with having to have these two humps up in the
top. What does that mean? Well, it took a long time to understand that. If I paid attention
when I was an undergraduate, a graduate student to lectures that had been given at that time
and people were talking about the theory of stacks as they were then called, I think I
might have understood, I certainly didn't understand it. Then later on I had conversations
with Michael LaTea who made it clear what's going on. What is going on? Look at this picture.
See, compare it with this one. Here I've got these two singularity regions. You see, the
mistake is to think of the singularity regions, I think. The singularity regions have these
two humps sticking up. What does that mean? Let's look at it in a different way. The top
half of twisted space, that corresponds to the forward tube. It corresponds to positive
frequency massless fields. Now, I can represent this top half as the union of two regions.
I'm calling one u1 and the other one u2. One of them leaves out one camel hump, the other
one leaves out the other camel hump. The whole space is the union of them. Pt plus is the
union of those two. Pt plus, that means the top half. The function f is defined
holomorphically on the intersection of these two regions. That is where I remove both
humps. So I have a covering of the top half of twisted space by two open sets. The union
of those two open sets is the region of interest. The intersection is the region where the
function is defined. Now, this is an instance of check cohomology, of first cohomology. You
could have a much more complicated covering. I could have covered the top with lots and
lots of regions if I wanted to, and then the algebra just gets a bit more complicated.
But it is this one I've written down in these colors is the definition of a check one cycle.
Is it one cycle? Yeah. Now, you can represent that as a branched contour integral, if you
like, and that's what this picture is doing. It's more complicated than the simple contour
integral I had before. Never mind. It doesn't matter too much. And don't worry too much
about all these indices and all that, because I'm going to give you another way of looking
at check cohomology, which is at least in a simple case, because people who have never
got used to these things find it all very baffling. It is a bit baffling, but it's a
crucial point. And let me try and make it clearer by showing you this picture. This is a, it's
very nice to use this picture if you're going to try and explain cohomology to people who
don't know any mathematics. It originated because I was being interviewed by people
for the BBC, I think it was, in some program, and I let slip at one moment. It was about
twisters, and I let slip at one moment. Oh, it's really to do with chief cohomology. And
they say, oh, what's that? What's that? So I say, oh, no, no, I can't possibly explain
that. You say, no, no, no, we'd like to know. So I came back the next day with this picture,
you see. They didn't use it, I may say, but I was quite pleased with it, nevertheless,
because it's a very good representation of cohomology. And the cohomology here is the
impossibility of this picture. See, that is a structure which you could imagine, at least
part of it, you could make it out of, out of a piece of wood if you wanted to, quite happily.
In fact, I'm going to do that in a minute. I'm not actual wood. But, yeah, let me say
what it is, you see. What I could do is I could construct my triangle, like this, out
of, there's the triangle. And I want to know, see, somebody, I've gone to somebody, a
workman, and he's produced these bits of wood here. And now there's some instructions
about how I glue the pieces together. And those are the FIJs that I was talking about,
you see. I could call, these are three open sets, and then I have, on the intersection,
I have one rule which tells me how to patch this with this. I want to do that with that.
And I want to know, is it going to be a structure realizable in ordinary Euclidean
three-space or not? Well, I have to work out the cohomology, and if the cohomology
comes to zero, then I can do it. In this case, the cohomology doesn't come to zero,
and the measure of the impossibility of this structure that I'm trying to build is this
cohomology element. It is precisely that. It's precisely what you would get if you went
through and did all the F's that I'm doing in here, and you check, it's a
co-cycle, and the, it isn't actually, it doesn't have vanishing cohomology. Now, this
is the case, you see, you find, you try and fix it together, and you might fix these
three points together, and you find the last one doesn't fit, or, and that is because
of the non-vanishing of the co-homology element. Now, what does that mean, you see?
It means that in Twister theory, I have my F's. It's not really an F's, you see.
It's a co-homology element. The top half of Twister space is assigned this co-homology
element. It's a sheaf co-homology element, as they call it, and that element is the
wave function. Now, that wave function has automatically a non-locality when
represented this way. It has, as I say, Twister theory was aimed at trying to be
non-local, but I had no idea it was going to come out this way. The non-locality that
we get here is the information in the wave function. It's not made out of wood like
this, these are holomorphic functions, and it's the kind of fact that they don't quite
fit over the whole space, which is the first co-homology element. So what I'm
saying, now, I'm going to try and, see, I can't get quite to bell. I tried to do this
last night. I've been trying to do it for many years. In fact, it's a problem I used
to set my students. I say, okay, here's a representative, a clear representative of
first co-homology. What can, this is a prize for anybody that could give me a
simple representation of second co-homology. Well, I sort of know how you do it,
and I thought I might be able to bring you a picture this morning. I hadn't worked it
out well enough to be able to do it, but I think I know a way you might do it. The
sort of thing is that you imagine there's a, you're going to a room, and this room
has a spherical wall all around you, and you look around at this thing. It's got a
mural painted on it, and you look at this thing and you say, that's impossible. You
look around, and then suddenly somebody opens a door somewhere, and it makes a hole,
and it, oh, now it's become possible. So can you think of something, a picture, which
would be consistent over the whole wall, anywhere where you open a door, and it
becomes possible. Now, I think I could almost do it, but unfortunately, my pictures
didn't quite work out. I have to work it a little bit longer. Good this.
Yes. You see, as exactly the point that I think you were making a minute ago, this
is one particle. Now, one particle is a non-locality, which is a non-locality that
people have forgotten about, rather. I'm sure people used to worry about it in the
early days of quantum mechanics. There is a non-locality for a single wave function,
and here we have a single particle emitting a photon. Let's have a parabolic
mirror or something like that, and here is the wave function here, and there's a
screen at the back. Now, this screen is sensitive to the photon, and maybe it
detects the photon here, or suppose it does. Then it's got the signal to everywhere
else on the screen, it says, too late, I've seen it. Whereas somebody sitting
over here, as far as the wave function is concerned just locally there, how does
it know that that wave function is not now representing a particle? That's a
non-local feature. It also is a feature which cannot be represented without
exceeding the speed of light. If it was like a water wave, and the intensity of
that wave would tell you a probability of receiving the photon here, the intensity
would tell you a probability of finding here. You might see them in both places.
You might see them in neither place. That's not the way quantum mechanics works.
The way quantum mechanics works is if you see it here, too late. You can't see it
anywhere else. If it was a classical thing, you'd have to have a signal coming
and it can't get there in time because after all that's faster than the speed of
light. So you already have a much more elementary non-locality in quantum
mechanics. Okay, it's not that got the subtleties of bell anywhere near that kind
of subtlety, but it's the kind of non-locality that it seems to me is reflected
in the picture here. That's a first
comology element. Now, you see, you would need a second
comology element to represent two particles. If in Twisted Theory you want
a two particle state, you have to take the product of Twisted, like we were
worrying about with wave functions which belong to higher dimensional spaces, it's
a product of Twisted space with itself, and then you've got second
comology elements on that to represent two particle states. Now, in that
somewhere are the bell inequalities. Or if you like the
bell inequalities, the violation of them is hiding in that. There are
ways that people do look at comology and try to represent bell inequalities in
terms of, I think, Samson and Bramovich and people have looked at these
things, and I was trying to get a student to try and connect that stuff with this
stuff, and he went off and did something else, unfortunately. I'm hoping that at
some stage somebody will make more of a connection between the comology that we
naturally get in Twisted Theory, which will be a second comology element here,
and to see how that relates to the chief comology things that other people have
been doing to try and represent the violation of bell inequalities and when
you can find a cross-section of something which gives you a realisation, a
locally realistic realisation, and when you can't, and to try and connect that
with the Twisted problem. Let me think of this slightly differently. You see,
here we have this, think of that's the wave function zipping along and hitting
the screen, and it is a non-local thing. If the impossibility in that thing is
the information. Now, if somehow I tap off the information by looking at one
point in the screen, the impossibility is gone. It is a non-local thing. If I
observed it here, instead of that part of the screen, the impossibility is gone,
and so there's no information in the comology anymore. Now, what does it
mean? That's when you make a measurement, you see. So you have to tie this in with
what a measurement is. Now, how much time do I have, if any? None.
Can I spend five minutes or something? There is a very rapid part of the rest
of this talk, which you see, I think, and I've been trying to plug this idea for
some while, as Dioshi did and others, namely that the measurement issue has to
do with gravity. Now, that would mean that it's when gravity comes in, when
you have curved spaces come in, somehow the linearity which preserves this kind
of impossibility will continue on, and it's the measurement which will introduce
some kind of nonlinearity and so on. So I just wanted to give you two things here.
First of all, how does Twister theory address these questions? Well, it has been
addressing these questions for a long time. These are old constructions. This is
the ward construction for self-dual gauge fields. And what you do is you have
your Twister space at the bottom and then you put a bundle over it and you patch it
together and you find you get first homology elements to describe the structure
of the bundle. And indeed, it works but only for the left-handed fields, which is
kind of curious. This was slightly, I had an earlier construction, which was to do
with piecing together Twister spaces to use gravitational fields. And you can do
that, works fine but only for left-handed fields. So you can make complex solutions
of the Einstein vacuum equations which are left-handed. That's to say the right-handed
part of the vial curvature vanishes, which means it describes in a certain sense,
which is what I used to call the nonlinear graviton. This is the left-handed
nonlinear graviton. Now, it's been a huge obstruction to the development of
Twister theory, in my view, the biggest obstacle to taking the theory seriously as
how you describe the world in terms of Twisters, which is that this never seemed
to work for the right-handed fields. This is what I call the googly problem and not
only people who belong to the former British Empire will know what a googly is,
I suppose, because it's a cricket ball, bold, so as to look as though it spins
left-handed, whereas it actually spins right-handed. So it's a very difficult thing
to do, but nevertheless, it very much expresses what I'm trying to do here. That
is to say, using the formalism which naturally bolds you right-handed
massless particles and make it bold you a left-handed one. And that's what we
call the googly problem. Now, I should say that the googly problem is about, I don't
know, 40 years old. It's been obstructing the development of Twister theory for all
this time. And, well, that's been the big, to my view, it's been the biggest problem
in Twister theory. Now, there is a development which is about a year old,
which I haven't been able to work my way through yet, which is to try and do
something a bit more subtle than this. So this is taking pieces of Twister space
and gluing them together and make a curved Twister space. But what I'm going to do
now, this is, rose out of some conversations with, or one specific
conversation with Michael Atia particularly, is how to generalize that in a
certain way. You're trying to patch together the spaces without knowing what
the spaces are. And that required not looking just at the complex, the
holomorphic functions on the space, but to looking at the algebra, the sort of
Heisenberg algebra. That is to say, you look just at the, not just at the
functions of Twisters, but look at the differential operators as well. So it
has built into it the Twister quantization rule. So although I don't
really know how to do this yet, it is something where you bring in the dual
Twisters. So once you bring in the dual Twisters, you spot the whole thing
because it's not holomorphic anymore. You want to keep things holomorphic as you
can. But the trick is not to bring in the complex conjugate, but to bring in the
differential operator d by dz instead. It doesn't commute with z, so now you
have a non-commutative algebra, so that instead of having the holomorphic
functions, you have this algebra with, which is non-commutative. And then you
go through all the things we were talking about before and patching things
together. And now it should be ambidextrous in the sense that you have
right-handed and left-handed, both in the same formalism. Now this is, I think,
along these lines is going to be the solution of the Googly problem. It's
not worked out yet. I just have hopes that this is how it's going to work. One
other comment, if I could make that, it's a whole really other topic, but I
think I should just explain where I go from here with regard to the measurement
issue, since that's a big thing in the discussions that we've been hearing
about here. I don't have a solution to any of these things. I think that
Twister theory is probably the way to go, because it's got natural nonlocalities
in it, and that it may ultimately form a framework where one can formulate
physics in a way which is non-local in the right kind of way. So that's the
hope. Now it has to bring in aspects of general relativity which needs to
solve the Googly problem in sort of ways I've been saying there. That's something
for the future, no doubt. But nevertheless, I also would hope that it will
give us something ultimately which deviates from standard quantum mechanics.
Now the principle that I'm just going to hint at in a minute, which I think
standard quantum mechanics has problems with, is the Galilei Einstein principle
of equivalence. A principle of equivalence of course says that a gravitational
field is equivalent to an acceleration locally, or here we have an imitation
of Galileo dropping a big rock and a little rock from the top of the leaning
tower, whether he did or not actually is not the point, and the insect sitting
on the big rock will look at the little rock as though there was no gravity.
And of course that's experienced by space travelers and so on. Now does that
make sense in relation to quantum mechanics? And I want to say there is a
problem here. Now the problem can be illustrated this way. Suppose we have
a tabletop, we're trying to do a tabletop experiment, and on the tabletop
we are trying to do quantum mechanics. Just a simple little problem where we
have a gravitational field to take into consideration. Now we might do this in
two ways. One would be two alternative ways. One is the Newtonian, which would
be the sort of conventional physicist's way, which would say, oh well, we just
put in a potential for the Newtonian field and proceed as though it was ordinary
quantum mechanics. No problem. Except that, that's not the way Einstein tells
us to look at the gravitational field. Einstein says instead, we should think
of the gravitational field as an acceleration. So we imagine, we take a
frame of reference which drops freely. This is the purple coordinates now. In the
purple coordinates we drop freely. There is now no gravitational field. We then
transform back to see how it compares with the other wave function. And what you
find, perhaps not too surprisingly, is there is a phase factor which relates the
two wave functions. The green one is the Newtonian wave function. The purple one
is the Einsteinian wave function. And here we find a phase factor which relates
the two. In fact, there are old experiments, Kalila, Albert, Hausner, and
Werner did some experiments to show that the principle of equivalence, if you like,
was consistent with quantum mechanics. And you might say, phase factor, who cares?
These are equivalent physicists. They're not. Because look here, you see there's a
T cubed in the factor. What does that do for us? Well, if you're staying in one
gravitational field, not much, you can choose. What it's telling you is that the
two are different vacuums. They belong to different Hilbert spaces. You are
treating physics according to different vacuums. It is actually the same thing
as unru. The unru effect. The unru effect is to tell you that if you are in
accelerating frame, you feel a temperature which is the same thing as the
Hawking radiation. If you have a black hole sitting there and you hold something
above the black hole, it feels a temperature, and this can be thought of as
the Hawking temperature, or as the unru temperature, that the acceleration of that
particle, what it feels because it's not dropping freely. If it drops freely, it
doesn't feel the unru temperature, and that temperature then is only felt if by
stationary fields outside the hole. Okay, you've got different vacuum. In the case
of the unru effect, it's a thermal vacuum. But if you look at the temperature of
that, you find it has the speed of light squared or something in the bottom, which
tells you that if you imagine the limit when the speed of light goes to infinity,
which is what I'm doing here. I'm considering the Galilean limit or the Newtonian
limit, the speed of light's gone to infinity, and you then have no temperature
anymore. But it is still a different vacuum because of this phase factor here,
which involves a T cubed. Now, that's probably not a problem if you're just
going to do an experiment with a constant gravitational field. But suppose you have
an experiment in which you have an object which is supposed to be in a superposition
of two different locations. Now, those two different locations, each will have its
own gravitational field, and therefore, if you're sitting over here, you will feel
two different accelerations which are in superposition. And this is telling you
that you have to be doing your quantum mechanics in the same Hilbert space or
else you're in trouble. But you're not in the same Hilbert space. If you look at the
Einsteinian point of view, you've got different Hilbert spaces. So what do you do?
Well, I don't know what you do in general, but at least I can say I can measure
an estimate of the error. And that is, how far wrong am I going? So I take the
difference in these G's, it's the troublesome term here, and I square that
and integrate it over space. This is a quantity I'm calling EG. It's equivalent
to, by doing just a little bit of manipulation, the gravitational self-energy
of the difference between these mass distributions. So you take this one and
subtract it from that one, work out the gravitational self-energy of that
difference. That is a thing called EG, which is the same as the error term in
what I said before, which I'm claiming is a problem. Now, the way I'm
interpreting this is to say that it is the way nature resolves this problem is
in a sense to invoke the Heisenberg time energy uncertainty, and as
one would do with an unstable particle, you say there is an energy uncertainty
and that's reciprocally related to the lifetime. So what I'm saying is that
there is a time scale for the survival of that superposition, which is you
integrate the mass distribution of one, subtract it from the other. I'm sorry,
you subtract one mass distribution from the other, you square that. What am I
saying? You subtract one mass distribution from the other, work out the
gravitational self-energy of that. That is the energy uncertainty of that
system, which I claim is reciprocally related to a decay time. It's also
going to be reinterpreted in this sort of way, which I think a bit like something
that Giancarlo was saying a few minutes ago. See, here we have a lump of material.
It gets put into a superposition of two locations. You look at the way the
difference between these two geometries and there's a certain region where the
difference of these two geometries, you work it out and you see when this reaches
a sort of Planck scale of unity, then you say that's critical point where
something happens and it has to make a choice between one two and nature goes
one way or the other. That is the state reduction process and you can see in
general qualitative terms that this happens when the deviation between these
spacetimes in an appropriate sense reaches a Planck scale. That is when one
thing or the other happens according to this view and that would be coming about
when you try to combine quantum mechanics with general relativity in a way which
respects the principles of general relativity and this is just to show that
there are experiments which are still under, well the Dirk Baumeister is really
the person in charge of these, who's been working on them for over a decade now
when I saw him about three years ago in Leiden, quite uncharacteristically he said
to me, in ten years we'll have an answer. That is to say, does this proposal I just
mentioned, which is similar to Diocese's earlier proposal, does this proposal, is it
respected by nature or is it not? And I saw him again two years later wondering if
ten years was a constant of nature and he quite uncharacteristically I thought
with no prompting said, in seven or eight years we will have an answer. So I thought
that was pretty consistent. That was a year ago, so I suppose it's six or seven
years from now. So I'm keeping my fingers crossed. Thank you very much.
