The Republican administrations of the 1920s were hardly unconcerned about international
matters, but they understood that the American public had a low tolerance for international
activism.
So Washington refrained from taking bold actions in its own right, and instead used the private
sector as an instrument of policy.
So if, for example, the U.S. government decided that a particular country was in need of financial
aid, it would encourage American bankers to extend loans to that country, rather than
asking Congress to appropriate foreign aid.
Another way in which official policy reflected the public's isolationist mood was in immigration
law.
In 1924, Congress passed the National Origins Act, which imposed restrictions on future
immigration to the United States based on nationality.
Each nationality was given a quota based on its percentage of the U.S. population back
in 1890.
Obviously, this strongly favored those ethnic groups that already comprised the largest
percentage of the population, Northern European Protestants, while discriminating against those
of Eastern or Southern European origin.
The National Origins Act was even harder on people from East Asia, who were barred from
entering the country altogether.
These restrictive immigration policies would remain substantially in place until the mid-1960s.
For the purposes of the National Origins Act, Middle Easterners were officially regarded
as white, so they were not excluded outright in the same way that East Asians were.
And if you look at the Arab American press of the 1920s, you'll find that the leaders
of that community were extremely eager to maintain Arab's status as whites, since the
consequences of losing that status could be socially, legally, and economically devastating.
This anxiety was especially pronounced in the American South, where racial discrimination
was more formal and pervasive, and where darker-skinned Arabs were sometimes mistaken for blacks.
People whiteness did not, of course, spare Middle Easterners from the quota system, and
because people of Middle Eastern origin represented such a small percentage of the U.S. population
in 1890, immigration from that region was locked in at a very low level.
Not until after the immigration reforms of the mid-1960s would the United States experience
the massive influx of Middle Eastern immigrants that has done so much to alter the texture
of American life.
But for all the political insularity of America in the 1920s, it was impossible to turn back
the clock when it came to technology and mass culture, and in these areas, Americans were
becoming more, not less connected to the outside world.
Radio and cinema made sounds and images from faraway lands accessible to Americans everywhere,
even in the smallest rural communities.
American travel was becoming faster, cheaper, and more comfortable, bringing overseas travel
once the preserve of the very rich within reach of the middle class.
By the end of the decade of the 1920s, the pioneers of aviation were conducting trans-oceanic
flights, cutting the traveling distance between the continents to a matter of hours.
It would be a few more decades before trans-oceanic flights became readily accessible to commercial
travelers, but the exploits of Charles Lindbergh and other aviators were avidly followed by
millions of Americans expanding their geographical and cultural horizons.
Contributing to Americans growing cosmopolitanism was the recent experience in the World War.
For a brief but vivid period, hundreds of thousands of Americans, soldiers, sailors,
engineers, diplomats, relief officials, reporters, had traveled abroad for the first time, and
American newspapers had been full of lively dispatches about battles, peace conferences,
revolutions, epidemics, and famines in faraway lands.
To be sure, the war and its aftermath caused millions of Americans to turn away and disgust
to what nothing to do with such a dangerous and messy world, but it also created a new
awareness of international events that could not be wiped away.
One part of the world that World War I opened up to ordinary Americans was the Middle East,
especially the Arab world.
As we saw in the previous lecture, the Allied struggle against the Ottoman Empire had been
an important, though secondary, aspect of the overall war effort.
An Arab force under the leadership of Sharif Hussain of Mecca had mounted an uprising against
the Turks, mainly in the deserts of present-day Syria, Jordan, and northern Saudi Arabia.
