Since most of the Jewish refugees who were required to leave their assets in Germany,
many were denied entry into the United States on this account.
Franklin Roosevelt, the U.S. president at this time, sympathized with German Jews but
did little to ease their plight.
Roosevelt could have asked Congress to raise the quotas on immigration to allow more Jews
to enter the country, but he declined to do so because he assumed that Congress would
never grant such a request.
This assumption was almost certainly correct.
In the 1930s, anti-Semitism remained a potent force in the United States.
It was still legal to refuse to sell your home to a Jew or to deny employment to Jews
on account of religion.
Moreover, in the desperate climate of the Great Depression, most Americans were strongly
opposed to relaxing immigration restrictions for fear of attracting an influx of foreigners
who would take away scarce jobs from struggling Americans.
So Roosevelt figured there was no point in even trying to change immigration laws.
Between 1933 and 1941, the United States admitted only about 8,500 Jews into the country per
year on average.
The difficulty of settling German Jews in Western nations brought about a revival of
Zionism among American Jews.
The Zionist Organization of America underwent a major expansion in the mid-to-late 1930s,
increasing its membership by several fold.
American Zionists, like their counterparts in Europe and Palestine, began pressuring
Britain to increase the numbers of European Jews it allowed to enter Palestine each year.
Initially, Britain responded favorably to this pressure, significantly increasing the
annual quota of European immigrants admitted into Palestine.
But then, just as the plight of German Jews was becoming truly desperate following the
Kristallnacht attacks of 1938, Britain began to rethink the wisdom of creating a Jewish
state in Palestine.
A major factor in Britain's reassessment was the attitude of Palestinian Arabs, whose
opposition to the Zionist project was far stronger than the British had anticipated.
Over the last couple decades, Britain's pro-Zionist immigration policy had brought a profound demographic
change in Palestine.
In 1920, only 10% of Palestine's population had been Jewish.
By 1939, Jews accounted for 31% of the population.
Palestinian Arabs were deeply alarmed by this transformation.
Their country was slipping away for them, before their very eyes.
In 1936, the Palestinians mounted a major uprising against the British in Palestine.
Although by 1939, the British had managed to suppress the revolt, the experience convinced
them that the full Zionist program was unworkable.
Establishing a Jewish state would require forcibly dispossessing the Palestinians.
This in turn could alienate the whole Arab world from Britain.
The last thing Britain needed as it was preparing for another war with Germany, which by now
appeared increasingly likely.
So in 1939, Britain issued a new policy statement known as the White Paper.
The White Paper placed strict limits on the number of Jews admitted into Palestine each
year and announced that Jewish immigration would end entirely in a few years time.
It also called for the regulation of land sales to Zionist institutions and individuals.
Thus, just as the world was about to plunge into another world war, the Zionist movement
appeared to have suffered a crippling blow.
During the Indian-Suing War, even as it supported Britain in the struggle against the Nazis,
the Zionist movement, whether in Palestine, Britain or America, would bitterly oppose
Britain's stance on Palestine.
As David Ben-Gurion, the leader of the Zionist movement in Palestine, and later the first
Prime Minister of Israel, put it at the time, Zionists would fight the war as if there were
no White Paper and fight the White Paper as if there were no war.
The second major issue that pushed Americans back into the hurly-burly of international
affairs was oil.
