To ensure that Saudi oil would remain available to the United States, during the war, Roosevelt
forged closer relations with the Saudi Kingdom.
He established a diplomatic mission in Saudi Arabia and declared the kingdom eligible for
Lend-Lee's aid.
The U.S. aid was welcome news to the king of Saudi Arabia, Ibn Saud, whose country's
economy had been hard hit by the war.
Ordinarily, the Saudi royal family derived a good deal of its revenues from the annual
pilgrimage to Mecca, but the war had interrupted the pilgrim traffic.
U.S. aid at this crucial moment cemented Ibn Saud's relationship with the United States.
America's growing involvement in Saudi Arabia caused considerable friction with the British,
who suspected the United States of seeking to monopolize Saudi oil opportunities.
This perception, combined with America's simultaneous attempts to acquire oil drilling
rights in Iran, caused the British to fear that their whole position in the Middle East
was in danger of being undermined.
The Americans, for their part, suspected the British of trying to take over the American
oil concession in Saudi Arabia, and they reacted with paranoia to every move the British government
made in that country.
When Britain sent a team of pest control experts to help Saudi Arabia deal with an influx of
locusts, American oil men were convinced it was really a team of oil prospectors in disguise.
Another cause of misunderstanding was the fact that much of the materiel the United States
sent to Saudi Arabia via the Lend-Lease program was processed through a British-run supply
center in Cairo.
Some of that material arrived in Saudi Arabia inscribed with British markings, convincing
U.S. officials that the Brits were trying to take credit for American generosity.
Toward the end of the war, the British and American governments came to the conclusion
that their rivalry in Saudi Arabia was doing neither of them any good, and they worked out
an agreement whereby each country pledged to respect the other's existing oil concessions.
Although the U.S. Senate never ratified the agreement, it did allow for a more cooperative
relationship between the two countries.
As for U.S.-Saudi relations, they continued to grow closer as the war drew to an end and
seemed destined to grow closer still in the post-war era.
In February 1945, on his way home from the Yalta Conference in the Soviet Crimea, Roosevelt
briefly stopped at the Suez Canal Zone in Egypt, where, on the deck of an American naval
vessel, he hosted a visit by King Ibn Sa'ud of Saudi Arabia.
The two leaders got on famously.
Out of deference to Ibn Sa'ud's religious sensibilities, Roosevelt refrained from smoking
in the king's presence, a considerable sacrifice for the nicotine-addicted president.
During the lunch break, however, Roosevelt wheeled himself into the ship's elevator,
pushed the emergency button, and chain-smoked two cigarettes before rejoining his guests
at the table.
At another point in the meeting, Ibn Sa'ud said that he could identify with the disabled
Roosevelt, since he, Ibn Sa'ud, also had difficulty walking on account of old war wounds to his
legs.
To this, Roosevelt said,
"'You are luckier than I, because you can still walk on your legs, and I have to be
wheeled wherever I go.'
"'No,' my friend replied, Ibn Sa'ud, "'you are more fortunate.
Your chair will take you wherever you want to go, and you know you will get there.
My legs are less reliable and are getting weaker every day.'"
So then, much to Ibn Sa'ud's delight, Roosevelt got out a spare wheelchair that he had brought
along for the trip and presented it as a gift to the old Saudi king.
Another country of crucial interest to the United States and its allies was Turkey.
Turkey remained neutral for most of the war, and the Allies expended considerable effort
to keep things that way.
Except for a brief period in 1943, the Allies did not want Turkey to enter the war on their
side.
This may seem like an odd position, but there were sound reasons for it.
The Allies realized that if Turkey joined the war on their side, it would be attacked
by Nazi Germany, and then the Allies would have the burden of coming to Turkey's defense.
On the other hand, it would be disastrous if Turkey joined the war on the side of Germany
because then it would close the Turkish straits and cut Russia off from the Mediterranean
Sea.
So the best arrangement from the Allies' perspective was for Turkey to remain neutral,
and the Americans and the British spent much of the war bribing and pressuring Turkey not
to go over to the other side.
