Turkey, for its part, skillfully maneuvered between the Axis and Allied Packs, balancing
a non-aggression pact with Germany against a defensive alliance with Britain and a lend-lease
agreement with the United States.
Periodically, Turkey would threaten to move closer to Germany as a way of extracting more
aid from the Allies.
For most of the war, the United States and Britain tolerated this behavior since Turkey's
neutrality was so prized.
The Allies were angered, however, by Turkey's insistence on supplying Germany with chrome,
a material necessary for the production of armament steel.
In 1944, the United States and Britain began playing hardball.
They cut off aid to Turkey and threatened to blockade the country unless it stopped sending
chrome to Germany.
Turkey succumbed to the pressure, and in August 1944, after the D-Day invasion of France
made it clear that Germany would lose the war, Turkey severed diplomatic relations with
Germany, and in February 1945, Turkey declared war on Germany, assuring itself a seat at
the victor's table.
Still another area of crucial interest to the U.S. war effort was North Africa, which
played a key role in the basic strategy that Britain and the United States devised for
winning the war against Nazi Germany.
In late December 1941, just a couple weeks after Pearl Harbor, British Prime Minister
Winston Churchill came to Washington to meet with Roosevelt and coordinate Allied war strategy.
Churchill was quite literally Roosevelt's guest, for he stayed in the residential quarters
of the White House.
And a number of personal anecdotes have arisen out of Churchill's stay in the White House.
According to one of them, which is probably too good to be true, Roosevelt is being wheeled
down the hallway past Churchill's bedroom when the bedroom door opens up and Churchill
steps out, stark naked, with a towel over his shoulder, heading for the shower.
Roosevelt does a double take and says, I'm sorry Winston, I didn't realize you weren't
decent.
Churchill sticks out his chest and says, not at all.
The Prime Minister of Great Britain has nothing to conceal from the President of the United
States.
In their substantive discussions, Roosevelt and Churchill agreed that the struggle against
Hitler should take priority over the effort to defeat Japan, but they differed over how
to achieve the defeat of Nazi Germany.
The Americans wanted to launch a frontal assault on German forces in Western Europe, probably
by mounting an invasion of France across the English Channel, and to do this as soon as
possible.
Churchill, however, was opposed to opening a Western front anytime soon.
He was haunted by the memory of World War I, in which whole armies had been massacred
while launching frontal assaults against entrenched positions.
Churchill wanted to postpone any invasion until Germany had first been weakened by a
combination of naval blockade, aerial bombardment, and attacks on other fronts.
Yet both countries agreed that some sort of offensive had to be mounted soon.
So with some reluctance, the Americans accepted Churchill's suggestion that the allies invade
Europe by way of North Africa.
Specifically, the idea was to land forces in Morocco and Algeria, move east to seize
the German airfield in Tunisia, and then use the airfield as a launching pad for an invasion
of Sicily.
Sicily in turn would serve as a stepping stone to the Italian peninsula, from which the allies
would then move up into Nazi-occupied central Europe.
One major obstacle to this plan was the fact that both Morocco and Algeria were under the
control of Vichy France.
When Germany defeated France in 1940, the country was split into two parts.
The northern part of France came under direct German occupation.
The southern part was not occupied, but it was placed under a new government that, while
nominally independent, was clearly subservient to Nazi Germany.
Still, the fact that Vichy France, as this country was called, was not completely under
Germany's control, created an opportunity for the allies, especially when it came to
France's far-flung colonies.
For although the French officials governing these colonies now worked for the Vichy government,
they were not uniformly committed to advancing Germany's war aims.
And in some cases, colonial officials were willing to permit Allied forces to operate
within the areas they controlled.
So the question now facing the allies was whether, and to what extent, Vichy officials
would allow Allied forces to operate in North Africa.
