His administration's passivity and ineffectualness were nicely captured in a public statement
made in 1948 by the U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations who implored the Zionists and
the Arabs to end the fighting and to settle the problem in a true Christian spirit.
Accordingly, when the Zionists eventually prevailed in the war, showing they could secure
their political independence on their own, there was palpable relief in the White House
over the fact that outside intervention had not been necessary.
To be sure, Truman was not happy about Israel's post-war attitude, especially regarding Palestinian
refugees, but getting Israel to compromise on such questions would have required far
more energy and political capital than Truman was prepared to expend, and he eventually
abandoned the effort leaving these contentious issues to his successors.
But for all his passivity, the fact remains that Truman played a key role in bringing
Israel into being, first by pushing through the partition plan and then by extending
recognition to the newly proclaimed Jewish state.
As a consequence of these actions, America's image in the Arab world drastically declined.
Prior to 1947, the United States had enjoyed a benign reputation in the Arab countries,
especially when compared with that of other major Western powers.
American involvement in the region had been almost entirely missionary, philanthropic,
educational, or commercial, but now, in the space of a few years, much of that goodwill
turned to bitter resentment, an attitude that persists to this day.
Although most Arab governments remained pro-American, Arab public opinion was deeply distressed by
the plight of the Palestinian refugees and placed much of the blame for it on the United
States.
And in the coming years, it would be harder for such governments to justify their close
relations with the United States.
The Arab countries' relations with Israel were, of course, even more embittered.
In early 1949, as I mentioned, the Arabs and the Israelis had agreed to armistice agreements,
but they were far from peace.
Israel not only refused to repatriate the refugees, but refused to give up any of the
additional territory it had seized.
The Arabs refused to make peace with Israel or extend formal recognition to it as long
as Israel took these positions.
Now it is often claimed that in the first few decades following Israel's creation,
the Arab states were entirely opposed to its existence.
This is not quite true.
The official position of most Arab states was that there could be no peace with Israel
until Israel gave up the territory exceeding its allotment in the 1947 partition plan,
which most Arab governments now retroactively accepted, and until it allowed Palestinian
refugees to return to their homes.
The implication was that peace would be possible if those conditions were met.
In their public statements, however, Arab governments seldom stated this position plainly,
rather than coming out and saying that they were prepared to recognize Israel under certain
conditions.
They would simply insist on the implementation of all relevant UN resolutions, by which they
meant the 1947 partition plan, and subsequent resolutions calling for the repatriation of
Palestinian refugees.
They would say implement all the resolutions and leave it at that.
This coyness was mainly a response to public opinion in Arab countries, which remained
outraged by what had happened to the Palestinians.
It was very difficult politically for any Arab leader to speak publicly about making
peace with Israel.
Still, the official position of most Arab governments, conveyed in diplomatic documents,
did leave the door open to a negotiated settlement.
But publicly, as I said, the overwhelming mood in the Arab world was one of fierce resistance
to Israel's existence and deep resentment against the United States for having served
as the midwife for Israel's birth.
And as we'll see in the next lecture, in the 1950s this mood would help fuel a powerful
Arab nationalist movement, seriously challenging Washington's efforts to keep the nations
of the Middle East oriented toward the West.
