In the spring of 1951, when Truman was still president, the Iranian parliament voted to
nationalize the facilities of AIOC.
And shortly thereafter, Mohamed Mosaddegh, the main architect of Iran's nationalization
policy, was elected prime minister.
Mosaddegh was easily ridiculed in the West.
He liked to spend all day in his pajamas, even when giving speeches and receiving official
visitors.
He was given to crying fits in public.
He was a hypochondriac, always pretending to be sicker than he really was.
And he would use this to his advantage in negotiations if he was dealing with someone
and the other person pushed him a bit too hard.
He would go into a coughing fit and that would cause the other person to worry that he might
cause Mosaddegh to keel over if he wasn't careful.
In his own country, however, Mosaddegh was a revered and charismatic figure whose defined
opposition to British domination and especially his nationalization of the AIOC captured the
imagination of the Iranian public.
Britain retaliated for the nationalization decree by mounting a boycott against Iranian
oil.
As long as the nationalization remained in effect, Britain refused to extract, refine,
or market any Iranian oil.
The Truman administration, too, was disturbed by the nationalization of AIOC, seeing it
as a dangerous precedent for other oil-producing countries, and it supported the British boycott
by discouraging American companies from distributing Iranian oil.
Since oil exports accounted for two-thirds of Iran's foreign exchange, Britain's boycott
was deeply damaging to the Iranian economy.
But Mosaddegh refused to rescind the nationalization.
And for the time being, the Iranian public strongly backed him up.
Although the British and the Americans both opposed Iran's nationalization policy, they
did not fully agree over how to respond to that challenge.
The British wanted to force Mosaddegh from power, and when the oil boycott failed to
accomplish this objective, they began advocating a military takeover of the AIOC's oil refinery
in Abadan on the southern coast of Iran.
The Abadan facility was the largest oil refinery in the world.
By seizing it, Britain would regain a huge share of Iranian oil production.
But the Truman administration was opposed to this course.
It warned that a British intervention in Abadan might provoke the Soviet Union, Iran's neighbor
to the north, to launch a much larger intervention of its own, causing the whole country to fall
under Soviet control.
The Americans instead hoped that Mosaddegh could be compelled by the pressure of the
boycott to agree to a compromise with the British.
And to facilitate such an outcome, Truman offered to mediate the dispute between Iran
and Britain.
In the fall of 1951, Mosaddegh came to Washington to discuss the matter with U.S. officials.
After weeks of intensive bargaining, Mosaddegh and the Americans worked out the general outlines
of a deal.
The nationalization of Iranian oil fields themselves would remain in effect.
But the AIOC would be permitted to set up a separate company to buy, ship, and market
Iranian oil.
The resulting profits would be shared by Iran and the AIOC on a 50-50 basis.
The same deal American oil companies had recently made with Saudi Arabia.
So that was the deal worked out by the U.S. and Iranian governments.
But the British rejected the U.S.-Iranian agreement on the grounds that nationalization
was unacceptable in and of itself.
So the standoff continued.
Britain's boycott had a devastating effect on Iran's economy.
And the longer it continued, the harder life became for ordinary Iranians.
Britain ran rampant.
Law and order collapsed.
And Mosaddegh began losing popularity.
To compensate for his loss of domestic support, Mosaddegh governed in an increasingly authoritarian
manner, dissolving parliament, imposing martial law, issuing decrees, and intimidating his
opponents.
Mosaddegh even began challenging the Shah for supremacy in the country.
The Shah, for his part, was extremely weak and indecisive and seemed to have no idea
how to counter Mosaddegh.
So this was where things stood when Eisenhower became president in January 1953.
Eisenhower's appearance on the scene was bad news for Mosaddegh.
