Lecture 9, Kennedy, Engaging Middle Eastern Nationalism
In this lecture, we're going to look at the Middle East policies of President John F. Kennedy.
The Kennedy years are fascinating because in this period, the U.S. government made a
remarkably serious effort to reach an accommodation with the forces of indigenous nationalism
in the Middle East.
It did so not for sentimental reasons, indeed the Kennedy administration prided itself on
its pragmatism and hard-headedness, but out of a conviction that victory in the Cold War
would be impossible unless anti-Western grievances in the Middle East could be successfully addressed.
I'm going to focus in this lecture on three major policy areas, U.S. relations with Arab
nationalism, the Arab-Israeli conflict, and U.S.-Iranian relations.
In each of these three areas, Kennedy tried to strike a delicate balance between placating
radical Arab nationalists like Gamal Abdel Nasser and supporting conservative Arab regimes
like Saudi Arabia and Jordan, between ensuring Israel's security and pressuring Israel to
make concessions to its Arab neighbors, and between bolstering the Shah of Iran and pushing
him to make internal political and social reforms.
In each case, Kennedy achieved some measure of success in the first two years of his presidency,
finally to falter in his third and final year, leaving a far less promising situation
to his successor, Lyndon B. Johnson.
Let's start with U.S. relations with Arab nationalism.
Kennedy entered the presidency sharply critical of Eisenhower's policies toward the Arab
world.
He believed that Eisenhower had made a terrible mistake by pressuring Nasser and other Arab
nationalists to side with the United States in the Cold War.
These crude measures had succeeded only in alienating Arab nationalists, pushing them
further into the Soviet embrace.
Kennedy believed that the best way to deal with Arab nationalists was to treat them with
respect, to allow them to make their own foreign policy decisions, and to offer them assistance
in developing their countries internally.
If the United States followed this approach, Arab nationalists would eventually come to
see that Washington was on their side, and would willingly align with the United States
and the West.
Paradoxically, then, Kennedy hoped to win the Cold War in the Middle East by de-emphasizing
that very conflict.
In some respects, Kennedy's approach to Nasser resembled that of Eisenhower in the mid-1950s,
before Eisenhower decided to get tough with Nasser.
Instead of pressuring Egypt and other countries to join an anti-Soviet pact, Kennedy would
try to reassure them that the United States was genuinely interested in their well-being,
in the hopes that such a soft-cell would, in the long run, convince those countries
to side with the United States.
But one major difference between Eisenhower's approach of the mid-1950s and Kennedy's of
the early 1960s was that Kennedy, unlike Eisenhower, also tried to move much closer
to Israel, a subject I'll come back to in a moment.
Another way Kennedy differed from Eisenhower was that Kennedy saw his approach to Arab
nationalism as part of a much broader effort to portray the United States as a friend and
supporter of the emerging nations of the Third World.
Kennedy was elected to the presidency just as the decolonization process was reaching
its peak.
Across Asia and Africa, European nations were liquidating their colonies and granting formal
independence to the subject peoples.
Indeed, in just one two-month period, September and October of 1960, coinciding with the presidential
election campaign in the United States, 17 African nations achieved their independence.
Kennedy recognized that these new nations represented a rising force in world affairs,
and that many of them would be naturally suspicious of the West, given their own painful experience
with Western colonialism.
Kennedy believed that the best way to allay these suspicions and thus prevent the new
nations from turning irrevocably against the West was to downplay the Cold War and
focus instead on social and economic needs of the newly independent states.
Although most Arab states had achieved national independence some years earlier, Kennedy saw
them as part of this larger group of emerging nations.
And his approach to Arab nationalism was in keeping with his broader strategy of trying
to woo the nations of the Third World.
