But Kennedy failed to achieve his grand bargain with the Israelis.
The problem it would seem lay in the fact that although the Israelis clearly understood
what Kennedy wanted in exchange for the Hawke missiles, the repatriation of Palestinians
and an end to Israel's nuclear weapons program, the three issues were never formally linked.
Instead, the Kennedy administration would issue one document stating its intention to sell
missiles to Israel, a second document stating its desire for Palestinian repatriation, and
a third document urging Israel not to develop nukes.
Kennedy avoided formal linkage in order to build an atmosphere of trust between his government
and Israel's.
If the United States treated Israel as an ally rather than as an underling, Kennedy
calculated, Israel would be more responsive to American wishes.
What happened instead was quite different.
The fact that the issues were not formally linked made it possible for Israel to treat
each of them separately.
Israel gratefully accepted the offer to purchase Hawke missiles, but strongly resisted the
notion of repatriating 100,000 refugees, arguing that this would result in the establishment
of a hostile fifth column inside Israel.
To be fair, Israel was not the only intransigent party since the Arab states themselves showed
little interest in Joseph Johnson's plan, which sought to repatriate only one-fifth
of the refugee population.
But Israel's refusal was a serious impediment, one that could conceivably have been overcome,
or at least whittled down, had Kennedy established a firmer linkage between the refugee issue
and the sale of Hawke missiles.
But since Kennedy had offered the missile sale without strings attached, there was little
he could do to compel Israel to change its position on the refugees.
The Israeli's response to the nuclear question was rather more subtle, but the bottom line
was much the same.
They successfully thwarted Kennedy's efforts to block their drive to acquire a nuclear capability.
On the surface, the Israeli government seemed to cooperate with Washington's non-proliferation
agenda.
Israel assured the Kennedy administration that the Demona reactor was purely for civilian
purposes and agreed to allow an American inspection team to make periodic visits to
the facility to confirm this for themselves.
But when the American team tried to schedule specific visits, the Israelis would find some
reason for delay, insisting that one date was not suitable because it fell during the
election season, that another wouldn't work because it coincided with a Jewish holiday,
and so forth.
Of course, the Israelis could not put the Americans off indefinitely, and eventually
the US inspection team did make it to Demona.
But the Israelis succeeded in establishing extremely rigid ground rules for the inspection.
The inspectors could visit only certain areas and only at certain times, and this prevented
the inspection team from gaining a full picture of what was going on at Demona.
After completing their visit, the inspectors issued a report saying that they could find
no evidence that the Demona facility was producing enough plutonium for the production
of nuclear weapons.
Now the members of the inspection team may have been fooled, but the CIA remained convinced
that something fishy was going on.
Aerial photographs taken by American spy planes showed that the Demona plant was much larger
and more complex than what would be necessary for civilian purposes alone.
Kennedy, who of course had access to the CIA information, grew increasingly frustrated
with Israel's evasiveness, and he began warning the Israelis that unless they leveled with
him about the nature of their nuclear program, relations between the two countries would
be gravely jeopardized.
This was where matters stood at the time of Kennedy's assassination in November 1963.
Let me now briefly turn to Kennedy's policies toward Iran.
In Iran, as in the Arab world, Kennedy hoped to deemphasize overt concern for Cold War
security in favor of social and economic development, assuming that this would in the long run benefit
America's position in the Cold War.
But such an approach ran counter to the authoritarian policies of the Shah of Iran.
Ever since being reinstalled in power in 1953, the Shah had portrayed himself as a staunch
ally of the United States, willing and able to crush any manifestations of internal dissent
so as to keep Iran squarely in the Western camp.
