This may seem an odd situation on the face of it, since Johnson was such a strong advocate
of social reforms at home, what with his great society programs and civil rights legislation.
One would think that Johnson would favor similar sorts of policies for Iran, rather than squandering
money on arms and internal security forces.
But Johnson was also a great admirer of strength and loyalty.
Whenever a foreign leader showed he was willing to stand up and be counted on the side of
the United States, Johnson's impulse was to give that leader unstinting support, regardless
of how ruthlessly he might treat his own people.
The Shah shrewdly played on this facet of Johnson's character, constantly reminding
Johnson that Iran was a loyal ally in the Cold War.
Johnson was especially grateful for the Shah's public support for the Vietnam War, at a time
when even America's closest allies were expressing doubts about that policy.
The Shah also played on Johnson's weakness for flattery and attention, never failing
to note a birthday, illness, or other personal event.
The Shah directed a steady stream of gifts toward the Johnson White House, and saw to
it that the President was well supplied with pistachios, caviar, and other Persian delicacies.
To a man of Johnson's personal insecurities, such gestures made a real difference.
But there were other more tangible reasons for the Johnson administration to support
the Shah.
By the mid-1960s, it was clear that Britain, which had been maintaining a set of protectorates
and military bases on the Arabian Peninsula, would soon have to give up these assets because
the financial cost was too high.
The big question was who would fill the resulting strategic vacuum in the oil-rich Persian Gulf?
Would it be the Soviets, radical nationalists, or some pro-Western power?
The Shah made it clear that he would be happy to fill that vacuum.
And from Washington's perspective, he was far preferable to any of the alternatives.
So this seemed to be a good time to curry favor with the Shah, rather than hassle him about
the nature of his rule at home.
Moreover, in the mid-to-late 1960s, the scale of Iran's weapons purchases from the United
States was so great that it had a discernible impact on the U.S. economy.
Some corporations like Boeing and McDonnell Douglas manufactured hundreds of millions
of dollars worth of military equipment for Iran, creating thousands of jobs for American
workers.
This was not the primary reason for U.S. support for Iran, but it certainly didn't hurt the
Shah's case in Washington.
In Iran itself, this satisfaction with the status quo remained at a high level.
But the Shah, now confident of Washington's unwavering support, was able to drive much
of that dissent underground.
Still, a major crisis erupted in 1964, shortly after Johnson became president, when the U.S.
and Iranian governments signed the Status of Forces Agreement, or SOFA.
SOFA was designed to clarify the legal status of American military personnel who had been
stationed in Iran to provide advice and training to the Iranian military.
The problem was what to do about the many instances in which American servicemen got
into brawls, caused traffic accidents, or otherwise ran afoul of local laws.
Of all these behaviors, reckless driving by American military personnel was probably the
most infuriating to ordinary Iranians, and as we saw in the lecture on World War II,
this problem dated back to the early 1940s.
And now, under SOFA, it was agreed that any American soldiers suspected of committing
crimes would be court-martialed by the U.S. military rather than tried in Iranian courts.
In effect, American servicemen would be exempt from Iranian law.
SOFA provoked a furious reaction among the Iranian people, who saw the agreement as a
throwback to an earlier period in Iranian history when Britain and Russia had insisted
that their own citizens living in Iran be immune from local law.
Once again, Iran seemed to be knuckling under to the demands of an imperial power, surrendering
an essential part of its national sovereignty.
