In the fall of 1968, a most revealing conversation took place between Paul Warnke, an assistant
secretary of defense in the Johnson administration, and Yitzhak Rabin, who was then Israel's ambassador
to the United States and who would later serve as Israel's prime minister.
According to a memorandum of that conversation, Warnke observed that he could not find in
the record any understanding of what Israel means by the provision Israel will not be
the first to introduce nuclear weapons.
Mr. Warnke asked the ambassador what was meant by this term.
And then Rabin responds with a long, complicated, Clintinesque answer in which he says, it all
depends on what one means by the terms introduce and nuclear weapons.
And as Rabin keeps talking, it becomes clear that he considers that Israel can construct
a nuclear explosive device without violating the letter of its pledge to the U.S. government.
As long as Israel refrains from publicly announcing that it has nuclear weapons, and as long as
it refrains from testing those weapons, then Israel hasn't actually introduced nuclear
weapons to the Middle East.
In other words, Rabin is using the word introduce in its literal sense in much the same way
that you might use it at a social gathering, Middle East nuclear weapons, nuclear weapons
Middle East.
If the weapon hasn't been introduced in that very public way, it doesn't really exist.
The memorandum of conversation continues.
Mr. Warnke said, then in your view, an unadvertised, untested nuclear device is not a nuclear
weapon.
Ambassador Rabin said, yes, that is correct.
So by the end of this conversation, if not before, it was clear that Israel's pledge
would impose few actual limits on its nuclear ambitions.
As Warnke himself later wrote of his negotiations with the Israelis, at the time I believed
and subsequent information has tended to confirm that Israel had in fact developed a small
arsenal of nuclear weapons.
Indeed, it is believed that Israel acquired its first usable nuclear bomb sometime in
early 1968.
In the ensuing years as Israel built up its nuclear arsenal, it developed a posture that
one historian has referred to as nuclear opacity.
Never openly acknowledging that it had nuclear weapons, but leaving its adversaries in no
doubt that such a capability existed.
The idea was to deter any Arab state from thinking it could annihilate Israel, while
avoiding a public declaration that might compel an Arab state to seek a nuclear capability
of its own.
The problem, of course, was that any Israeli nuclear capability, even an unadvertised one,
was inherently provocative.
And it was only a matter of time before some other state in the region would seek to acquire
its own weapons of mass destruction.
By the time Johnson left office in early 1969, the outlines of a new American policy were
coming into view.
Rather than carefully balancing, rather than continuing the careful balancing act that
President Kennedy had attempted, Johnson had adopted an openly partisan approach,
siding with the Shah of Iran against his internal opposition, with the conservative Arab regimes
against Nasserist Egypt and with Israel against the Arab states as a whole.
As we'll see in a later lecture, these alliances would be solidified and formalized during
the presidency of Richard Nixon, with far-reaching consequences for US policy in the Middle East.
But we won't go to Nixon just yet.
Instead, we'll devote our next lecture to examining the causes, conduct, and consequences
of the Six-Day War.
In an immediate sense, as we shall see, the Six-Day War reinforced Johnson's inclination
to take a partisan approach to Middle Eastern affairs.
For the longer term, it would dramatically transform the political and strategic landscape
of the Middle East, creating a new status quo with which the peoples of the Middle East
and the international community as a whole would wrestle for decades.
