On May 21st, however, Nasser finally ordered his army to occupy Sharma Sheikh.
The following evening, in a defiant speech at a Sinai airbase, Nasser announced the closure of the Strait of Tehran to all Israeli shipping,
and to vessels of any nationality carrying strategic materials to Israel.
The announcement created enormous excitement throughout the Arab world,
reminiscent of the euphoria that had greeted Nasser's nationalization of the Suez Canal Company back in 1956.
Nasser's actions in this crisis have long puzzled historians.
If he knew that blockading the Strait would bring an inevitable Israeli attack,
and if he knew that his army was not ready to go to war, why did he go ahead and block the Strait?
As I see it, there are two main reasons or two main answers to this question.
In the first place, Nasser concluded that the political price of not blockading the Strait would be exorbitant.
Had he failed to take advantage of this opportunity to block the Strait, he would have been ridiculed throughout the Arab world,
and he might well have lost his position as the standard bearer of Arab nationalism.
There are even some indications that Nasser feared being overthrown by the Egyptian military if he failed to take a tough stand against Israel.
In the second place, Nasser evidently assumed that an Israeli attack would not be as devastating as it turned out to be.
While Nasser realized that his armed forces could not defeat Israel outright,
he apparently believed they could hold their own in a defensive situation.
With sufficient air cover, the Egyptian army could temporarily blunt an Israeli advance across the Sinai Desert
until the United Nations had a chance to intervene in the crisis, brand Israel the aggressor,
and force it to withdraw to its pre-war positions.
In other words, Nasser expected the war to unfold in much the same way that the Suez War had unfolded back in 1956.
At worst, Egypt's military would get its nose bloodied, and the status quo would be restored,
and Nasser would survive to fight another day.
At best, Nasser would emerge from the crisis with enhanced regional prestige, as he had done a decade earlier.
From Nasser's standpoint, either of these scenarios was preferable to the humiliation that would result from taking no action against Israel.
Evidently, Nasser had no idea just how unprepared for war his army actually was.
Once Nasser had announced his blockade of the Strait, it became extremely likely that Israel would go to war against Egypt.
Still, the Israelis wanted to know exactly where the Americans stood on the issue.
So Abba Iban, Israel's foreign minister, flew to Washington to talk to Lyndon Johnson and other U.S. officials.
In a tense meeting in the White House, Johnson told Iban that if Israel fired the first shot and then got into trouble in the ensuing war,
it would be impossible for the United States to bail Israel out.
Israel will not be alone, Johnson said, unless it decides to go alone.
Johnson also promised that if Israel refrained from going to war,
he would try to get several other nations to join with the United States in publicly challenging Nasser's blockade,
that is, by having an international flotilla sail through the Strait of Tehran and dare Nasser to fire on it.
By this means, the Strait would be opened for Israel's use as well.
The Israelis agreed to hold their fire for the time being and give Johnson a chance to organize the flotilla.
The Egyptians, meanwhile, approached the Soviet government to see what kind of support they could get from their superpower patron.
Moscow's advice was similar to Washington's.
If Egypt started the war, the Soviets would not be able to bail it out, so Nasser agreed not to fire the first shot.
Although Nasser's posture was now defensive, his public rhetoric and that of other Arab leaders was extremely bellicose.
Indeed, in the days leading up to the Six Day War, the Arab countries appeared to fall victim to war fever.
Although none of the Arab countries was ready for war, Nasser and other Arab leaders whipped up the crowds with strident and at times even bloodthirsty rhetoric.
Creating the impression that if war broke out, the Arab states would seek to wipe Israel off the map.
Nasser pledged that Egypt would not fire the first shot, but if war came, the Arabs would restore the situation to what it was in 1948,
presumably a reference to the elimination of Israel.
Radio Damascus was even less restrained, predicting that if the United States intervened to protect Israel from the Arabs,
the righteous Arab masses would hang the last imperialist soldier with the entrails of the last Zionist.
