In the excitement over war, all of the rivalries that had recently fractured the Arab world
were momentarily forgotten, as everyone focused on the coming battle with Israel.
Arab leaders who had recently castigated Nasser, including King Hussein, now flocked to his
side.
King Hussein signed a mutual defense pact with Nasser, placing his army under Egypt's
command.
It was as if the whole Arab world, leaders and citizens alike, had seized on the crisis
as a means of overcoming their differences and reasserting a common Arab mission and
destiny.
King Hussein's decision to team up with Nasser, combined with the violent rhetoric emanating
from Arab capitals, terrified the Israeli public, convincing them that the Jews once
again faced possible extermination.
Israeli leaders were more confident of Israel's military strength vis-a-vis the Arab states,
but they could not ignore public opinion, and there was enormous pressure on the government
to do something about the threat, and to do something immediately.
Moreover, by this time Israel had conducted a full military mobilization, which disrupted
all industrial activity in the country.
It was doubtful that the Israeli economy could endure such a state of affairs for more than
a few weeks.
Meanwhile, Washington's efforts to organize an international flotilla to challenge Nasser's
blockade were getting nowhere.
Few countries were willing to allow their navies to take part in an effort to force
the Strait of Tehran.
An alternative approach would be for the U.S. Navy to challenge the Egyptian blockade unilaterally.
But Johnson knew that Congress would be unwilling to authorize such an operation, especially
at a time when the war in Vietnam was losing popularity at home.
So as these alternative solutions receded from view, the Israelis went back to the Americans
and said, in essence, OK, we know you can't fight alongside us if we fire the first shot,
but can you at least promise that you won't actively oppose us the way Eisenhower did
back in 1956?
And this time the Israelis got an encouraging response, albeit through an unorthodox channel.
Here's how it happened.
In late May and early June, the Israeli ambassador in Washington met frequently with Supreme
Court Justice Abe Fortas, a close friend and advisor of President Johnson.
In these meetings, Fortas' message to the ambassador was basically as follows.
Mr. Ambassador, the president deeply appreciates the fact that Israel delayed its decision
to go to war, which gave him a chance to try to find a peaceful alternative.
As of now, that effort seems to have failed, and Israel should decide for itself what the
best course of action is.
This is not a quotation, it's a paraphrase of what Fortas was telling the ambassador.
The Israeli ambassador interpreted this message to mean that Johnson, while still hoping to
avoid war, would not strongly object if Israel went ahead and started one, an accurate interpretation
as it turned out.
And so, on June 5, 1967, Israel broke the impasse by launching a surprise attack on Egypt, destroying
its air force on the ground.
Deprived of air cover, confused and demoralized by conflicting orders issued by incompetent
military leaders, the Egyptian army was all but defenseless against the Israeli ground
assault in the Sinai.
After Israel attacked Egypt, Jordan entered the war on Egypt's side.
Israel quickly defeated the Jordanian army as well, taking control of East Jerusalem
and the West Bank.
Israel then turned its attention to Syria, from which it seized the strategic Golan Heights.
So by the time the war ended on June 11, 1967, Israel had tripled the amount of territory
under its control, taking the Sinai Peninsula and Gaza Strip from Egypt, the Golan Heights
from Syria, and the West Bank from Jordan.
Over a million Palestinian inhabitants of the West Bank and Gaza came under Israeli
military occupation, while tens of thousands more were forced into exile in neighboring
Arab countries, swelling the ranks of a previous generation of Palestinian refugees.
