The destruction of Egypt's air force was so devastating and thorough that it was difficult
for Nasser to admit that Israel had accomplished it on its own.
Early in the war, Nasser publicly charged that the U.S. air force had taken part in
the attack, and Egypt broke diplomatic relations with the United States on that account.
The charge was false, but Nasser stuck to his story for several months thereafter, and
U.S.-Egyptian relations would not be formally restored until 1974.
Nasser greatly overstated Washington's support for Israel, but President Johnson's reaction
to Israel's behavior in 1967 was markedly different from that of Eisenhower in 1956.
Whereas Eisenhower had forced Israel to withdraw from Egypt, Johnson merely called for and
achieved a ceasefire in place, which meant that the fighting should stop and each country's
forces should remain where they were.
This allowed Israel to remain indefinitely in possession of the Arab territories it had
seized.
In the fall of 1967, the UN Security Council passed Resolution 242, which would become the
basis for virtually all subsequent attempts to resolve the Arab-Israeli conflict.
Resolution 242, which was accepted by Egypt, Jordan, and Israel, essentially called for
a land-for-peace deal, whereby the Arab states recognized Israel's right to exist in security,
and Israel withdrew from territories seized in the Six-Day War.
But Resolution 242 was an extremely ambiguous document.
It did not say explicitly which should come first, the Arab state's recognition of Israel,
or Israel's withdrawal from Arab territory.
The Israelis insisted that they did not have to give up any of the occupied territories
until the Arab states first recognized Israel, while the Arabs demanded an unconditional
Israeli withdrawal before there could be any talk of recognition.
Moreover, at the insistence of Israel and the United States, the clause dealing with
Israeli withdrawal did not contain the definite article.
Israel was to withdraw not from the territories, but simply from territories occupied in the
recent conflict.
The Israelis would claim that 242 entitled them to keep substantial portions of the newly
acquired territories.
On the other hand, the preamble to the resolution referred to the inadmissibility of the acquisition
of territory by war, which implied that Israel was not entitled to keep any of the land it
had acquired.
These conflicting interpretations of Resolution 242 would plague all subsequent attempts to
resolve the Arab-Israeli conflict.
The Six-Day War itself was a devastating event for the Arab world, and especially for Nasserist
Arab nationalism, which could not avoid responsibility for the catastrophe.
For all of the previous Arab defeats to Israel, Nasserists and Arab nationalists had provided
self-serving excuses.
The defeat of 1948 was the fault not of the Arab people themselves, but of corrupt Arab
monarchs who had betrayed the Arab cause.
The military defeat of 1956 had occurred not because Egypt was weaker than Israel, but
because Britain and France had entered the war on Israel's side.
But 1967 could not be explained away so easily.
Of the three Arab states Israel had beaten so handily, Egypt, Syria and Jordan, only
Jordan was a conservative monarchy.
The other two countries were governed by fiery Arab nationalists.
It was a blow from which Arab nationalism would never fully recover.
Nasser II was devastated by the defeat.
He would spend the remaining three years of his life desperately trying to regain the
territory and honor he had lost.
1967 also came as a terrible shock to the Palestinians.
Since the early decades of the 20th century, and especially after 1948, Palestinians had
developed a distinct national identity.
Still, when it came to confronting Israel, Palestinians had tended to downplay their
separate identity in favor of Arab solidarity.
The Arab states themselves had encouraged this tendency, telling the Palestinians that the
only way for Palestine to be liberated was for the Arab states to band together and vanquish
the Jewish state.
After 1967, Palestinians became increasingly convinced that collective Arab action was hopeless
and that the only way for them to regain Palestine was to take matters into their own hands and
to seek liberation for themselves.
