In the late 1960s, the Palestine Liberation Organization, or PLO, which had been created
in 1964 to serve mainly as an instrument of Egyptian policy, freed itself from Egyptian
control and became an independent political and military force under the leadership of
Yasser Arafat.
Being mainly out of refugee camps in Jordan and Lebanon, the PLO was a broad coalition
of groups, each with a different strategy for achieving liberation.
Some groups wanted to engage in armed struggle against Israel in the newly occupied territories.
Others wanted to convince the international community to impose a just settlement of the
Arab-Israeli conflict.
Several others, on the far left, believed that the only way to liberate Palestine would
be to overthrow the conservative Arab regimes and unite the Arab world behind a revolutionary
agenda.
Meanwhile, another previously marginalized segment of Arab political life was also gaining
ground.
These were the Islamists, by which I mean individuals and groups committed to organizing
political life according to Islamic principles.
Of course, Islamists had been active prior to 1967, but they had tended to be eclipsed
by secular Arab nationalists.
By the early 1970s, however, secular nationalism was coming under increasing attack in the
Arab world, and not just because of the 1967 debacle, although that was a big part of it.
Nasser and other Arab nationalists had promised a new era in which ordinary Arab citizens
would shape their own destiny and in which the Arab world's resources would be redistributed
among the people along vaguely socialist lines.
Critics pointed out, however, that while living standards had improved in Egypt and in other
countries following similar economic policies, that improvement had been far less dramatic
than expected.
They also charged that the Arab nationalist regimes, instead of ushering in a new era
of democracy and citizen participation, had proved to be just as dictatorial and corrupt
as the conservative monarchies they critiqued.
In short, there was a growing feeling in the Arab world, and in other Islamic countries
as well, that secular nationalism had failed to deliver the goods, and that some alternative
form of political organization had to be found.
Many Arabs became convinced that their governments had gotten into trouble because they had abandoned
their Islamic heritage, and had turned instead to ideologies imported from the West, like
liberalism, socialism, materialism, and secularism.
Such ideologies, the argument went, had corroded Arab society from within, making it more vulnerable
to Western domination.
So as pan-Arabism declined, Palestinian nationalists and Islamic activists came into their own.
In the years to come, it was these groups that would pose the most vigorous challenge
to American and Israeli power in the region.
Sell them again after 1967, would there be much reason to expect that Arab states would
band together to oppose a common foe?
Arab resistance to American or Israeli schemes would arise on occasion, but it would usually
be mounted by non-state actors or by states acting alone.
The Six-Day War also completed the reorientation of U.S. Middle East policy that Lyndon Johnson
had begun shortly after taking office in late 1963.
From the start, Johnson had moved away from the careful balancing act that John F. Kennedy
had performed.
Whereas Kennedy had both supported the Shah and pressured him to make internal reforms,
Johnson had dropped the reform agenda and hailed the Shah as a staunch ally in the West.
Whereas Kennedy had tried to improve relations with Arabs and Israelis simultaneously, Johnson
had increasingly embraced the Israelis.
Whereas Kennedy had tried to occupy a middle ground between supporting Arab radicals and
supporting Arab conservatives, Johnson had openly sided with the conservatives.
And now, with Arab nationalists thoroughly defeated and embittered against the West,
the last vestiges of Kennedy's balancing act were cast aside.
It was as if American officials said to themselves, look, what's the point of even trying to
accommodate indigenous nationalists in the Middle East?
In the first place, we'll never get their support.
And in the second place, we don't need their support.
Let's stick with those governments that already support us and are able to keep stability
in the region in a manner that suits our interests.
And so, by the time Johnson left office in early 1969, three countries were emerging
as Washington's primary allies in the Middle East.
Iran, Israel, and Saudi Arabia.
In the administration of Johnson's successor, Richard M. Nixon, U.S. relations with each
of these countries would become much closer and more extensive, with far-reaching consequences
for the subsequent political history of the region.
