Lecture 12 The Nixon Doctrine and the Middle East
We left off last time with the end of the Lyndon Johnson administration and with the
observation that over the course of his five years in office, Johnson dispensed with the
balanced approach attempted by John F. Kennedy and instead became more closely allied with
the governments of Israel, Iran and Saudi Arabia.
In this lecture, as we look at the first term of Johnson's successor, Richard M. Nixon,
we'll see how these three alliances became even more firmly established, buttressed as
they were by a new foreign policy formulation known as the Nixon Doctrine.
Upon taking office in early 1969, Nixon was determined to control foreign policy from
the White House.
He ensured his control over U.S. foreign policy by appointing a highly secretive Harvard
professor named Henry Kissinger as his national security adviser.
Kissinger was a German Jew who as a boy in the 1930s had fled with his family to the
United States to escape Nazi persecution.
He had achieved prominence in the 1950s and 1960s as a political scientist and foreign
policy analyst, occasionally serving as a consultant to the U.S. government.
Theoretically, Kissinger's function as Nixon's national security adviser was to receive input
from all the executive departments concerned with foreign policy, state, defense, the CIA,
etc., and then make recommendations to the president.
What actually happened was that Nixon and Kissinger largely ignored the executive departments
and conducted foreign policy in secret, forcing the bureaucracies to fall into line.
Indeed, the man Nixon appointed as his secretary of state, a lawyer and old friend named William
P. Rogers, was selected largely because he knew little about foreign relations and was
thus unlikely to interfere with Nixon's and Kissinger's deliberations.
From the start, Nixon and Kissinger were powerfully drawn to each other.
As one journalist said of the Nixon-Kissinger relationship, Nixon had a consuming need for
flattery and Kissinger a consuming need to provide it.
Or positively, both men thought in broad conceptual terms.
They realized that a new era in world politics had begun, one in which America's power
relative to other nations had declined.
Western Europe and Japan had fully recovered from the devastation of World War II and were
now emerging as powerful economic rivals of the United States.
Since China had developed nuclear weapons and the Soviet Union had achieved rough nuclear
parity with the United States, America's relative decline as a world power had been
both symbolized and hastened by its inability to achieve victory in Vietnam.
Nixon and Kissinger realized that the United States must somehow adjust to these new realities.
One way they tried to do so was by seeking a new modus vivendi with the communist superpowers.
During Nixon's first term, the United States reached a major arms control agreement with
the Soviet Union and even more strikingly began the process of normalizing relations
with the People's Republic of China.
Another way the Nixon administration tried to adjust to changed circumstances was by placing
limits on the sorts of international commitments the United States would assume.
This latter course was spelled out in a speech Nixon delivered on the island of Guam in 1969.
In that speech, Nixon said that while America remained committed to helping with the defense
of its allies, the United States cannot and will not conceive all the plans, design all
the programs and undertake all the defense of the free nations.
Other nations would have to play a much larger role in their own defense.
This proclamation became known as the Nixon Doctrine.
Initially, the Nixon Doctrine was meant to apply mainly to Southeast Asia.
It was an attempt to find some grand strategic framework in which to couch Nixon's new policy
on Vietnam, which was to start withdrawing American troops from South Vietnam and to
get the South Vietnamese government itself to take more responsibility for waging the
war.
But over the next few years, the Nixon Doctrine began taking on a broader meaning and to indicate
a genuine pattern for Nixon's approach to world politics.
During his first term, Nixon not only scaled down the American troop commitment in South
Vietnam, though he escalated the war in other ways, but significantly reduced U.S. forces
stationed in South Korea, Thailand and Japan.
