By these means, Egypt completed the construction of a vast network of SAM-3 missiles on the
western bank of the Suez Canal, with the ability to shoot down Israeli aircraft on the opposite
bank.
At a huge cost, 10,000 Egyptian civilians and soldiers may have died in the war of attrition.
Egypt had laid the basis for a hostile crossing of the canal.
This fact would become extremely important during the Yom Kippur War of 1973.
A month after the Egyptian-Israeli ceasefire in September 1970, a fresh crisis occurred
that was to have a far-reaching impact both on US-Israeli relations.
As we saw in the previous lecture, by the late 1960s, the Palestine Liberation Organization,
under the leadership of Yasser Arafat, had created a state within a state in Jordan,
recruiting fighters in the refugee camps and building up a considerable arsenal.
Officially, these fighting forces were intended for liberating Palestine, but increasingly,
the PLO began getting into skirmishes with the Jordanian government.
Some of the more left-wing Palestinian groups were convinced that the only way to make progress
on the Palestine issue was to overthrow King Hussein, on the grounds that he was a puppet
of the United States who would never permit a full-scale offensive against Israel.
Arafat himself was not particularly interested in overthrowing the Jordanian government,
and his ability to control these left-wing groups was limited.
In September 1970, one of these radical groups, the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine,
or PFLP, hijacked four commercial airliners.
One of the planes was flown to Cairo, where the hijackers released the passengers and
crew and then blew up the plane.
The other three planes ended up on a desert runway in Jordan.
Once again, the hijackers evacuated the planes and blew them up.
The PFLP released most of these passengers immediately, but held a small number of them
as hostages.
The demolition of the planes was broadcast on live television.
It was one of the first spectacular acts of international terrorism to unfold before a
global audience in real time.
Apparently, the PFLP was trying to embarrass and weaken King Hussein by exposing his inability
to control events in his own country.
Hussein decided that enough was enough and launched a military crackdown on the PLO as
a whole.
The Jordanian army quickly gained the upper hand and was poised to crush the PLO.
In desperation, PLO leaders took to the radio and appealed for assistance from other Arab
countries.
Syria, whose radical government strongly opposed the pro-western Hussein, responded to the
appeal by sending a column of tanks over the border into northern Jordan.
Now it was Hussein's turn to be desperate.
Hussein secretly contacted Washington and begged for assistance against the Syrian attack.
Hussein let it be known that while he preferred that the United States intervene directly,
he would, if necessary, allow himself to be bailed out by Israel itself.
It was a measure of Hussein's desperation that he was willing to consider such a scenario,
which would surely blacken his name throughout the Arab world.
But for Hussein, as for most people, survival was the paramount concern, and he was prepared
to accept Israel's intervention if U.S. intervention were impossible.
From the start of the crisis, Kissinger was the official who coordinated the U.S. response.
Like Nixon, Kissinger was convinced that the Syrian intervention was being masterminded
by Moscow, almost certainly an exaggeration of the Soviet position, and that the communist
challenge could not go unanswered.
But Kissinger also believed that Israeli intervention was the preferred alternative, since that would
spare America the necessity of diverting U.S. forces from other theaters, especially
Southeast Asia, where the United States was still heavily engaged.
So with Nixon's approval, Kissinger asked if the Israeli government would be willing
to intervene in Jordan on Hussein's behalf, and the Israelis said yes.
A squadron of Israeli jets flew over to northern Jordan and swooped down low over the advancing
Syrian tanks.
The Israeli jets didn't fire on the tanks, but they made it clear that Israel meant business,
and shortly thereafter, the Syrian tanks turned back.
