Now, it's not entirely clear whether the Syrians retreated because of the appearance
of Israeli planes or because of the Jordanian counteroffensive.
Whatever the reason, the elimination of the Syrian threat made it possible for Hussein
to deal a crushing blow to the PLO in Jordan.
In the fall of 1970, to save his organization from utter defeat, Arafat signed a ceasefire
agreement with Hussein that called for the PLO to withdraw its forces from the cities
and towns of Jordan and to stay inside Palestinian refugee camps.
In 1971, fighting flared up again between the Jordanian government and the PLO, and
Hussein succeeded in expelling the PLO from Jordan altogether.
Arafat and his organization moved their headquarters to Lebanon, eventually establishing a state
within a state in that country.
Hussein was harshly denounced in the Arab world, but his kingdom had been secured.
This defeat of the PLO came to be known by Palestinians as Black September, after the
month in 1970 in which the crisis began.
Black September also came to be the name of a new Palestinian paramilitary group, which
over the next few years would seek to avenge this defeat and call attention to the Palestinian's
plight, through a series of spectacular terrorist attacks.
The most notorious of these attacks occurred at the 1972 Olympic Games in Munich, when
a group of Black September militants took 11 Israeli athletes and coaches hostage, demanding
the release of scores of Palestinians held in Israeli jails.
During a subsequent shootout with West German police, the militants killed all of the Israeli
hostages.
Such acts of violence did succeed in bringing the Palestine issue to the world's attention,
but they also saddled the Palestinian with a reputation for violence and fanaticism that
remains with them to this day.
The Black September crisis had a profound effect on U.S. policymaking toward the Middle
East.
The first Rogers' plan, as we saw, had failed to gain endorsement by either Israel or the
Arab states.
The fact that Kissinger had quietly sabotaged it was conveniently ignored.
The second Rogers' plan had ended the war of attrition, but it contained glaring loopholes
that the Egyptians had exploited.
Although Rogers was owe for two in Arab-Israeli diplomacy, the one area of policy he had been
allowed to dominate.
Kissinger, by contrast, had managed the U.S. response to the Jordanian crisis, which was
widely seen as a success.
Consequently, Rogers was discredited within the Nixon administration and was soon forced
to relinquish control over Arab-Israeli diplomacy as well.
On 1971 on, Nixon and Kissinger would directly control U.S. policy in that area.
Nixon's and Kissinger's approach to the Arab-Israeli conflict would be far more pro-Israeli than
Rogers had been.
The fact that Israel had been willing during the Jordan crisis to come to the aid of a
pro-U.S. Arab country made a deep impression on Nixon.
It suggested that Israel could actively promote American interests in the Middle East.
So Nixon now moved closer to Kissinger's pro-Israeli position.
Shortly after Syria withdrew its tanks from northern Jordan, Nixon instructed Kissinger
to deliver a personal message to the Israeli government.
The message read, the president will never forget Israel's role in preventing the deterioration
in Jordan and in blocking the attempt to overturn the regime there.
He said that the United States is fortunate in having an ally like Israel in the Middle
East.
These events will be taken into account in all future developments.
And taken into account they were.
Over the next few years, there was a steep rise in U.S. aid to Israel.
From about $93 million in fiscal year 1970 to $634 million in 1971 and then up to $2.6
billion in 1974.
Although the first Rogers plan, which had called on Israel to withdraw from virtually
all of the territory occupied in 1967, remained official U.S. policy, Nixon and Kissinger
simply behaved as if the plan had never been issued.
They deemphasized the whole question of Israeli occupation and treated Israel as a strategic
asset entitled to unwavering American support.
And so Israel became, along with Iran and Saudi Arabia, a client state of the United
States under the terms of the Nixon Doctrine, one of the cops on the beat that would discipline
and thwart radical and pro-Soviet forces in the Middle East for the benefit of America's
strategic and economic interests.
But this new approach to the Arab-Israeli conflict would suffer a rude jolt during the
Yom Kippur War of 1973, which we'll look at next time.
