These lectures are titled, The United States and the Middle East, 1914-911, Part 2.
Lecture 13, The Yom Kippur War and Kissinger's Diplomacy.
In this lecture, I'm going to talk about the Yom Kippur War of October 1973, which
is so named because it began on the Jewish Day of Atonement.
The Yom Kippur War, which pitted Egypt and Syria against Israel, was a major turning
point in America's relations with Middle Eastern states.
The United States emerged from that crisis as the indispensable mediator in the Middle
East, as the one nation on which both the Arabs and the Israelis would have to rely
to achieve their political objectives in the Arab-Israeli conflict.
The emergence of the United States as the indispensable mediator was related to another
major result of the Yom Kippur War, a marked decrease in Soviet influence in the Middle
East, signified by Egypt's decision to move away from the Soviet orbit and to establish
closer ties with the United States.
This shift in orientation reflected Egypt's growing realization that the United States,
by virtue of its close ties to Israel, held the key to an acceptable settlement of the
Arab-Israeli conflict.
The Soviet Union could provide arms to Egypt, but only the United States could use its political
influence to change Israel's behavior.
Because Egypt was such an important and influential player in Arab politics, its reorientation
toward the United States was a major setback for the Soviets.
This decline in the Soviet position in the Middle East foreshadowed, and in a small way
contributed to, the decline and fall of the Soviet system a decade and a half later.
America's political victory in the Yom Kippur War was due partly to the enormous military,
economic and diplomatic power America had at its disposal, but it also reflected the
skillful and occasionally devious handling of the crisis by Henry Kissinger, who by this
time was the American Secretary of State.
Now before I discuss the Yom Kippur War directly, let me talk a little bit about the political
background of that conflict, especially from the standpoint of Egypt, the nation most directly
responsible for igniting the war.
Perhaps the best place to begin is September 1970.
That month, Egypt's president, Gamal Abdel Nasser, died of a heart attack at the age
of 52.
Nasser's death unleashed a wave of inconsolable grief throughout the Arab world.
His funeral in Cairo was one of the biggest in history, attended by about 4 million people.
Nasser had governed Egypt and dominated Arab politics for the last 18 years, and it was
difficult to imagine the Middle East without him.
Nasser's successor was Anwar Sadat, Egypt's former vice president.
Both at home and abroad, Sadat was widely seen as an interim president, someone to occupy
the office until a more commanding figure could be found.
This impression, of course, was totally mistaken.
That inherited Nasser's utter determination to regain the territory that Egypt had lost
in the Six-Day War of 1967, and to ensure the recovery of the other Arab territories
lost in that war.
But if Sadat shared Nasser's ends, he had a different view of the appropriate means.
Sadat proved far more willing than Nasser to rely on diplomacy to regain the lost territory.
So he also saw military pressure as an essential ingredient of a successful diplomatic strategy.
Sadat signaled his readiness for diplomacy in February 1971, when he announced that Egypt
would be willing to conclude a peace treaty with Israel if it fully withdrew from the Sinai
Peninsula and from all of the other Arab territories taken in 1967.
It was the first time an Arab leader had publicly contemplated peace with Israel.
At this time, William Rogers was still the American Secretary of State, though he was
rapidly losing control of Middle East policy to Henry Kissinger.
Indeed, one of the last independent moves that Rogers was able to make was to welcome
Sadat's February overture and urge the Israeli government to consider it.
But the Israelis rejected the overture, insisting that any return of Arab lands would have to
take place after the Arab states had made peace with Israel, not as a precondition for
peace.
The Israelis also insisted that they should not have to withdraw from all of the territories
taken in 1967.
