The U.S. airlift to Israel caused deep anger in the Arab world.
In mid-October, several oil producing Arab states retaliated by imposing an embargo on
oil shipments to the United States and to parts of Western Europe.
The United States received only about 12 percent of its oil from the Middle East at that time,
but the embargo, which lasted until March 1974, caused significant gas shortages in the country
and an increase in gas prices from 40 cents per gallon to 55 cents per gallon.
This in turn caused the general inflation rate to soar to 11 percent.
The American airlift certainly helped turn the tide of battle in Israel's favor, but
even before the equipment arrived, the Egyptian-Syrian offensive was starting to lose steam due
to the lack of true coordination between those two Arab countries.
On October 8, having secured a six-mile-wide strip on the east bank of the canal, the Egyptians
dug in and declined to advance further.
This operational pause, as Cairo called it, allowed the Israelis to divert forces to the
Golan.
The Israelis not only beat back the Syrian advance, but seized previously unoccupied
Syrian territory and began launching artillery attacks on economic targets deep inside Syria.
By October 10, they were shelling the Syrian Air Force headquarters in Damascus itself.
Assad pleaded with Sadat to resume the Sinai offensive and relieve the pressure on Syria.
Sadat initially resisted these appeals, but he was worried about being accused of abandoning
his Syrian brothers, so on October 14, against the advice of his military commanders, Sadat
ordered the Egyptian army to push on toward the Sinai passes.
This was a disastrous decision.
The Egyptians had never really intended to continue on to the passes.
That part of the plan had been drawn up for Syrian consumption.
As the Egyptians proceeded toward the passes, they moved beyond the area protected by their
own aircraft and surface-to-air missiles, and were thus exposed to a devastating Israeli
counterattack.
In the space of three hours, the Egyptians lost 250 tanks.
On October 15, Israeli forces, commanded by an aggressive Israeli general named Ariel
Sharon, punched through the Egyptian line and reoccupied the eastern bank of the Suez
Canal.
That night, Sharon's forces crossed the canal in rubber dinghies and established a bridgehead
on the western bank, mirroring the Egyptian operation of nine days earlier.
The Israelis then swung southward and came up on the rear of Egypt's third army, which
remained on the eastern bank of the canal.
Egypt's position began to grow desperate.
From the start of the offensive, Sadat had indicated that he would be prepared to accept
the ceasefire, but only if it were linked to an Israeli commitment to withdraw from all
the territories occupied in 1967.
Now with the 45,000 men of Egypt's third army completely at the Israeli's mercy, Sadat
abandoned this position and begged the Soviets to arrange for an unconditional ceasefire.
The Soviets complied and invited Kissinger to fly immediately to Moscow to discuss the
terms of a ceasefire.
So on October 19, Kissinger flew to Moscow.
His objective, however, was not to achieve an immediate ceasefire, but rather to stall
for as long as he could so that the Israelis could continue their offensive and gain still
more territory.
Kissinger's plan was to pretend to the Soviets that he had less discretion than he actually
did.
Whenever an important decision had to be made, he would say that he had to check with President
Nixon, thus buying the Israelis additional hours to improve their position on the ground.
Nixon, however, had not been apprised of Kissinger's scheme and undermined it at the start of the
Secretary's mission.
When Kissinger arrived in Moscow, he learned that Leonid Brezhnev, the Soviet leader, had
just received a personal message from Nixon indicating that Kissinger was fully authorized
to negotiate on Nixon's behalf.
So much for the necessity of checking everything with Washington.
Kissinger tried other means of slowing down the Russians, who were themselves in a big
hurry to get a ceasefire for their Arab allies.
At one point, Andrei Gromyko, the Soviet foreign minister, asked Kissinger if he had any technical
suggestions for implementing the ceasefire.
And Kissinger replied, oh, as a matter of fact, I do.
But unfortunately, I left them in my guesthouse, so I won't be able to submit them until later
today.
But then one of Kissinger's aides, thinking he was being helpful, interrupted to say
that he had brought the papers with him.
No delay was necessary.
The aide couldn't understand why Kissinger was glaring at him.
