But Kissinger could stall for only so long, and on October 21, he finally reached an agreement
with the Soviets for an immediate ceasefire.
The following day, the agreement was passed by the UN Security Council as Resolution 338.
The Israelis, however, were not happy with Kissinger's handiwork.
They wanted to continue their offensive indefinitely.
So here's where Israel's approach diverged from Kissinger's.
Israel wanted to destroy or capture the Egyptian Third Army.
Kissinger wanted to keep Egypt from being totally defeated or humiliated.
The Israelis defied the United States and continued to press their advantage, completing
their encirclement of the Third Army, refusing to allow food, water, and medical supplies
to be delivered to the stranded soldiers.
In desperation, Sadat sent messages to both Moscow and Washington, pleading with them
to send troops to the Sinai to force Israel to comply with the UN ceasefire.
Although Sadat's appeal was aimed at getting the Americans and the Russians to cooperate
with each other, it inadvertently triggered a dangerous superpower showdown.
On October 24th, Brezhnev sent a message to Nixon proposing that the U.S. and Soviet governments
grant Sadat's request and intervene jointly to stop the Israeli offensive.
Then Brezhnev ominously added, if you find it impossible to act jointly with us in this
matter, we should be faced with the necessity urgently to consider the question of taking
appropriate steps unilaterally.
By now, Kissinger was back in Washington.
And as I pointed out, one of Kissinger's main objectives was keeping the Soviets from
expanding their influence in the Middle East.
So the prospect of a Soviet military intervention in Egypt, especially a unilateral one, was
totally anathema to Kissinger.
So that evening, Kissinger met with other top administration officials, the Secretary
of Defense, the Director of Central Intelligence, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
and others, to decide how to respond to the Soviet challenge.
Conspicuously absent from the meeting was the President himself.
Kissinger had spoken to Nixon earlier that evening and had found him to be totally distraught
over the escalating Watergate crisis.
Just four days earlier, the infamous Saturday Night Massacre had occurred, in which Nixon
had fired the special Watergate prosecutor Archibald Cox, setting off a firestorm of
outrage throughout the country.
His citizens were now openly calling for Nixon's impeachment, and the crisis was taking a heavy
psychic toll on the President.
A transcript exists of the phone conversation Kissinger had with Nixon on the evening of
the Soviet ultimatum, and it reveals Nixon to be in a morbidly self-pitying mood.
Nixon complains that his domestic critics are attacking him because of their desire to kill
the President, and they may succeed, I may physically die.
From this, Kissinger concluded that Nixon probably wasn't in the best frame of mind
to deal with a major superpower crisis, so he convened the top-level meeting without
him.
Kissinger and the other officials agreed that a firm reply to the Soviet ultimatum was
called for, so they arranged to have a reply sent to Brezhnev signed over Nixon's name,
rejecting the introduction of either Soviet or American troops to the Middle East.
They also decided that some additional signal should be sent to Moscow, indicating how gray
the United States took the situation to be.
This was accomplished by putting US nuclear forces and troops all over the world on a
heightened state of alert.
The US alert was not publicly announced, but it was expected to generate a huge amount
of electronic signal traffic that the Soviets would pick up, which indeed the Soviets did,
along with the news media since it was, of course, impossible to put more than two million
soldiers in reservists on alert without having word of it leak out.
The next day, the Soviets sent a new message to Washington in which they essentially withdrew
their previous ultimatum, suggesting that it had all been a big misunderstanding.
But Kissinger had little time to savor this victory, for the Israelis continued to besiege
the Egyptian Third Army in violation of the UN ceasefire, jeopardizing the prospects for
post-war diplomacy.
