Ultimately, it was Sadat who found a way out of the impasse.
He withdrew his request for superpower intervention and announced that he would be willing to
negotiate with the Israelis directly over the disengagement of troops in the Sinai,
provided that one convoy would be made available to keep the Egyptian soldiers alive in the
meantime.
The Egyptian-Israeli talks began on October 28th when an Egyptian general met with an
Israeli general in a tent in the desert on the western bank of the Suez Canal.
It was the first time in 25 years that Egyptian and Israeli officials had formally communicated
with one another.
In early November, Kissinger took a four-day tour of Middle Eastern countries, including
Egypt and Israel.
Kissinger and Sadat met for the first time and took an immediate liking to one another,
based in part on the fact that each man had an unlimited capacity for both giving and
receiving flattery.
In a dramatic gesture, Sadat offered to resume diplomatic relations with the United States,
which Egypt had severed during the 1967 war.
Sadat also invited Kissinger to play a direct mediating role in any further negotiations
between Egypt and Israel.
These overtures reflected Sadat's assessment that the United States, on account of its
close ties to Israel, held the key to a satisfactory Middle East settlement.
The Soviets could provide Egypt with arms, but only the United States could induce Israel
to return captured Arab territory.
Direct mediation proved agreeable to the Israelis as well, and over the next, I should say direct
U.S. mediation proved agreeable to the Israelis as well.
And over the next two years, Kissinger brokered a set of bilateral agreements between Egypt
and Israel, whereby Egypt gradually reduced its state of belligerency in exchange for
Israel's gradual withdrawal from parts of the Sinai.
This first phase of Israeli withdrawal was completed in 1975, when Israel vacated a strip
of land on the western end of the Sinai while continuing to occupy the rest of the peninsula.
This process, inaugurated by Kissinger, would culminate in a formal Egyptian-Israeli peace
treaty during the administration of Jimmy Carter.
The one country that did not receive much satisfaction was Syria.
The most Kissinger was willing to do for Syria was broker a disengagement agreement that
essentially restored the pre-Yom Kippur War status quo.
Israel had to give back the additional territory it had seized, but the Golan Heights themselves
remained under Israeli occupation.
Kissinger saw little point in pushing the Israelis to give back more to the Syrians.
After all, Assad was refusing to make the crucial political concessions that Sadat himself
was now making.
Whereas Sadat was willing to reduce Egypt's state of belligerency against Israel in exchange
for portions of the Sinai, regardless of what happened on other Arab-Israeli fronts, Assad
was still insisting on a comprehensive approach.
Syria would make no moves toward normalizing relations with Israel until it had assurances
that Israel would withdraw from all of the occupied territories.
Even more to the point, whereas Sadat was now distancing himself from his former Soviet
patrons, Assad retained close relations with Moscow.
So Kissinger saw little to gain from a Cold War perspective by doing Syria any favors.
This last point underscores the overriding objective of Kissinger's diplomacy throughout
the Yom Kippur War to limit or reduce Soviet influence in the Middle East.
By this criterion, Kissinger's policies were a major success.
Whether they left a legacy that was conducive to resolving Arab-Israeli tensions is of course
another question.
One will take up in our next lecture.
