Try as he might, however, Carter could not banish his original image of softness and
his later attempts at toughness left voters confused.
Thus in 1980, they expelled Carter from the White House and replaced him with someone
whose hardline act was much more convincing, Ronald Reagan.
Carter's ineffectiveness in foreign policy was both reflected in and exacerbated by a
sharp political division between his two main foreign policy advisors.
Carter's Secretary of State was Cyrus Vance, a lawyer and diplomat who had held important
diplomatic posts in the Kennedy and Johnson administrations.
Although a thorough Washington insider who had supported the Cold War policy of maintaining
the Soviet Union, Vance had become critical in recent years of America's over-reliance
on military force to solve international problems and on its tendency to view all third world
disputes through the lens of the Cold War.
Vance now believed that much greater emphasis should be placed on negotiation and that third
world disputes should be viewed more on their own terms.
Vance was also deeply committed to slowing down the nuclear arms race between the United
States and the Soviet Union.
Opposing Cyrus Vance was Carter's National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski, a Polish-born
academic who, like Henry Kissinger, had made a career out of giving foreign policy advice
to political leaders.
Brzezinski was a Cold War Democrat in the tradition of Harry Truman.
He was deeply anti-Soviet and viewed most international disputes through the prism of
US-Soviet rivalry.
Although he gave lip service to Carter's goals of fostering peace and human rights abroad,
Brzezinski believed that nothing could be accomplished along these lines unless the Soviet Union
were first contained and weakened.
The diverging approaches of Vance and Brzezinski will be much more apparent when we talk about
policy toward Iran and Afghanistan, which we'll cover in subsequent lectures.
On the Arab-Israeli conflict, which we'll look at this time, the differences between
the two advisers were far less great, as both men agreed on the urgent necessity of working
out a political settlement of the Arab-Israeli dispute.
And even if there had been a serious disagreement between Brzezinski and Vance on this subject,
it probably wouldn't have mattered that much since Carter had some very distinct ideas
of his own over how to address this problem and relied, in this case, far less on other
people's advice.
But let's look at Carter's efforts at Arab-Israeli peacemaking.
As we saw in the last lecture, in October 1973, Egyptian President Anwar Sadat had gone
to war to regain the Sinai Peninsula, which Israel had seized in 1967.
Although the Egyptian army had initially done very well, the Israelis had eventually pushed
back the Egyptian offensive so militarily Sadat's effort achieved little.
Politically, however, it was a great accomplishment, since it got Washington to pay greater attention
to the issue and to acknowledge that some sort of settlement of the Arab-Israeli dispute
involving an exchange of Israeli-held land for peace was necessary.
At the same time, Sadat had come to recognize that Washington, by virtue of its close ties
to Israel, held the key to an acceptable settlement, and he increasingly oriented his country toward
the United States and away from the Soviet Union.
The Soviets were not terribly happy at this outcome, but they could do little about it.
For both political and religious reasons, Carter came into office determined to bring
peace to the Holy Land.
Initially he favored a comprehensive approach.
He wanted to hold a major international conference attended by Israel, the Arab states, and the
great powers of the world to reach a final settlement of the whole Arab-Israeli dispute
in all of its aspects.
Carter was even willing to grant the Palestinians a role in such a conference.
Carter's openness to Palestinian participation reflected some significant changes that had
occurred in the diplomatic status of the Palestine Liberation Organization, or PLO, and in American
thinking about the whole Palestine issue.
