Israeli opposition to Carter's approach became especially intense after May 1977, when Israel's
right-wing Likud party prevailed in national elections, and Menachem Begin, the Likud party
leader, became the country's prime minister.
Up until this time, all Israeli governments had been dominated by the Labour Party, which
tended to be more dovish.
Israel and Likud took a much harder line on the occupied territories, and especially
the West Bank, than their Labour predecessors had done.
Labour governments had resisted the idea of withdrawing from the West Bank, but they had
done so mainly for security reasons, arguing that prior to 1967 Israel had been much too
vulnerable to terrorist attacks from the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, and that it would
be dangerous to return to the pre-1967 status quo.
Begin and the Likud also used the security argument, but they supplemented it with a
religious claim, insisting that the lands of the West Bank had been given to the Jews
by God and were thus an integral part of the Jewish state.
So Begin, needless to say, vehemently opposed Carter's plan.
Israel's objections, especially those based on security concerns, were strongly echoed
by pro-Israel groups within the United States, and there was enormous domestic pressure on
Carter to abandon any plans for a Geneva conference.
Opposition to the Geneva conference was especially strong on Capitol Hill, where the Israeli
government enjoyed overwhelming support.
In the face of this reaction, Carter started backing away from his own proposal.
He assured the Israelis that the Geneva conference would start out in a comprehensive format,
but would quickly be broken up into a series of bilateral negotiations between Israel and
each of the Arab delegations, thus allaying Israel's fears about being ganged up on by
the Arabs.
Carter also agreed that Israel could veto the participation of any Palestinian figures
it deemed unacceptable.
So now it was the Arabs' turn to express anger and disappointment over Carter's approach
to Arab-Israeli peacemaking.
By the fall of 1977, Sadat had become convinced that due to Israel's ability to pressure the
U.S. government, no Geneva conference would be possible.
So in a bold effort to jump-start the negotiation process, Sadat announced that he was willing
to go to Jerusalem to talk to the Israelis directly, and Menachem Begin, the Israeli
Prime Minister, invited Sadat to come.
This was a stunning development, since it totally negated two cardinal principles that
the Arab states had adhered to since 1967.
First that there could be no negotiations with Israel until it first withdrew from all
the Arab territories it had seized in 1967, and second that any such negotiations must
be conducted by the Arab states collectively, not by any single Arab state unilaterally.
Accordingly, there was unanimous condemnation of Sadat's announcement throughout the Arab
world.
Every Arab government, and the PLO as well, opposed Sadat's visit to Israel.
But Sadat went to Jerusalem anyway, making emotional appearances at the Jewish Wailing
Wall and before the Israeli Knesset or Parliament, and speaking eloquently of the need for peace
between Israel and the Arabs.
Sadat's visit caused enormous excitement throughout the world, especially in the West.
Carter himself was greatly encouraged by this development, and he immediately dropped his
plans for a Geneva settlement and threw his support behind Sadat's initiative to achieve
peace through direct bilateral negotiations.
But although the Egyptians and Israelis could agree on the need for peace, they could not
agree on a formula for achieving it, and in the months following Sadat's visit to Jerusalem,
there was little substantive progress.
So in the summer of 1978, Carter decided to reinvigorate the peace process by inviting
both Sadat and Begin to come to Camp David, the presidential retreat in Maryland, and
negotiate with each other, with Carter himself serving as intermediary.
So for two weeks that summer, Carter holed up in Camp David with Sadat and Begin, prodding
the two leaders to arrive at some agreement.
And for the whole time he was at Camp David, Carter totally ignored all other issues, both
foreign and domestic, so that he could concentrate on the Middle East question.
