Although Sadat's principal objective was to regain the Sinai Peninsula, he was also
determined to get Israel to agree to a full withdrawal from all of the territories it
had taken in 1967, the Golan Heights, the Gaza Strip, and the West Bank.
Another of Sadat's objectives was receiving satisfaction on the issue of Jewish settlements.
Since 1967, the Israeli government had encouraged Israeli civilians to establish residential
colonies in the occupied territories.
In the view of most international lawyers, and of the Carter administration itself, these
settlements were a violation of international law, since the 4th Geneva Convention forbids
nations to send their own civilians to settle in foreign territories that they are occupying.
But Israel had continued to build settlements in the territories, apparently for the purpose
of building up the Jewish population so as to preempt the establishment of an independent
Palestinian state.
Settlement activity had been greatly accelerated under Begin, whose commitment to settlements
was based on religious conviction as well as on security concerns.
So Sadat was determined to make progress on all of these issues, not just the ones that
concerned Egypt alone.
He knew that if he came back from Camp David with the Sinai and nothing else, he'd be
condemned in the Arab world as a traitor to the Arab cause.
But things didn't turn out quite as Sadat had hoped.
Begin and the other Israelis took such a hardline stance at Camp David that Sadat was unable
to get any significant concessions on those other issues.
Indeed, he was made to feel that he would be lucky if he could simply regain the Sinai.
A brief look at the chronology of the Camp David meeting reveals the steady erosion of
Sadat's negotiating position.
Sadat started out by insisting on the standard Arab position.
Israel must withdraw from all of the territory taken in 1967.
Sinai Peninsula, Golan Heights, West Bank and Gaza Strip.
And an independent Palestinian state must be established in the West Bank and Gaza with
East Jerusalem as its capital.
So that was Sadat's opening position.
Begin flatly rejected this view.
Not only was Begin adamantly opposed to withdrawing from the West Bank and Gaza, he insisted that
Israel retain portions of the Sinai Peninsula.
Seizing the peninsula in 1967, the Israeli government had permitted Israeli Jews to build
settlements in the peninsula, much like the ones that had been established in the West
Bank and Gaza.
And Begin now demanded that Israel be allowed to keep those Sinai settlements.
So that was shocked by this demand.
And his resulting exchanges with Begin were so acrimonious that after the third day of
the Camp David Summit, the two leaders stopped speaking to each other directly.
For the remainder of the meeting, Carter himself served as intermediary, shuttling between
the two leaders' cabins, conveying messages between them, and offering suggestions of
his own.
Carter achieved an important breakthrough when he convinced Sadat to treat the Sinai issue
separately from the fate of the Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza, rather than linking
the two questions as Sadat had done in the past.
This gave Sadat an incentive to deemphasize the Palestinian issue and concentrate on recovering
Egyptian territory alone.
The separation of the two issues was a major victory for the Israeli side, drastically
reducing the likelihood that Israel would have to make any concessions regarding the
West Bank and Gaza.
And so Begin continued to insist on keeping the Sinai settlements.
Sadat was so disgusted by Begin's intransigence that he packed his bags and demanded that
a helicopter fly him back to Andrew's Air Force Base so that he could return to Egypt.
Carter rushed to Sadat's cabin and pleaded with the Egyptian leader to give diplomacy
another chance.
Carter pulled out all the stops, saying that the failure of Camp David would damage US
Egyptian relations and be a personal betrayal to Carter himself.
Carter also warned that if Sadat left in a huff, he would be blamed for the failure of
the whole Arab-Israeli peace process.
Sadat relented and unpacked his bags.
Meanwhile, Carter found a way to break the impasse over the Sinai settlements.
Begin had told him that he had made a solemn oath before God that he would never dismantle
a single Jewish settlement.
So Carter proposed that if Begin himself couldn't dismantle the Sinai settlements, perhaps some
other entity like the Israeli Knesset could.
Begin agreed that if the Knesset voted to dismantle the settlements and thus gave him
political cover, he too could acquiesce in their dismantling.
So Begin got guarantees from Knesset leaders that such a vote would pass and Sadat was
assured that all of the Sinai would be returned to Egypt.
