Initially, however, Khomeini's grip over the revolution was somewhat tenuous.
The revolutionary government he presided over included a number of figures who did not necessarily
share his hardline fundamentalist views.
So for the next several months, the situation in Iran was in a state of flux.
Indeed, throughout 1979, the Carter administration had some hope of establishing tolerable relations
with the new Iranian regime, especially since that regime was deeply hostile to the atheistic
Soviet Union.
Although most of the U.S. embassy staff in Tehran and all of their dependents had been
withdrawn, a skeleton staff of a little under 100 remained in the embassy compound.
Indeed, it briefly appeared possible that the U.S. government might gain influence with
some of Iran's new leaders.
I mentioned earlier that in the earlier months of the revolution, Khomeini had been obliged
to share power with more moderate Iranians.
One of those relative moderates was a French-educated economist named Abul Hassan Ben Isadar.
A long time opponent of the Shah, Ben Isadar had gotten to know Khomeini in Paris and following
the triumph of the revolution had returned to Iran to serve as a minister in the new
Iranian government.
Ben Isadar did not share Khomeini's ideology, but he forged an alliance of convenience with
him in order to have a role in shaping Iranian politics.
Sensing an opportunity to gain influence with the new revolutionary government, the CIA,
which continued to function from the U.S. embassy in Tehran, established contact with
Ben Isadar.
A CIA agent named Vernon Cassin, who went by the alias Guy Rutherford, began meeting regularly
with Ben Isadar.
Cassin did not tell Ben Isadar that he was working for the CIA.
He pretended to be an American businessman who was interested in investing in Iran and
who had important political contacts in Washington.
The short-term objective of these meetings was to acquire information about the new Iranian
government's attitudes and plans.
The long-term objective was to maintain friendly relations with an important official who might
someday supplant Khomeini as the leader of Iran.
Apparently Ben Isadar did not realize he was being cultivated by the CIA, but he seemed
eager to maintain contact with Cassin, who, as I said, was posing as a businessman.
And this gave the CIA hope that it had a potential ally in the Iranian government.
Indeed, the Carter administration became so confident of its ability to gain influence
with the new government that it began building up the embassy staff again in Tehran.
But then, in the fall of 1979, Carter made a major blunder.
By now, it had become known that the Shah, who was still in Mexico, was seriously ill
with cancer and needed advanced medical treatment.
Under pressure from Brzezinski, who insisted that the United States could not abandon a
former ally, Carter agreed to allow the Shah to enter the United States to get treatment.
This gesture enraged and alarmed Khomeini's student supporters.
They suspected the story about the Shah's illness was a sham, concocted to get the Shah
into the United States so that he could sit down with the U.S. government and plot his
own return to Iran.
The collective memory of the overthrow of Mohammed Mosaddegh, 25 years earlier, played
an important role in the Iranian students' perceptions.
You will recall that in 1953, in the midst of the U.S.-sponsored effort to overthrow
Mosaddegh, the Shah had lost his nerve and fled the country for Rome, only to return
in triumph after the coup had succeeded.
The Iranian students believed that history was repeating itself, that the Shah, once
again, was biding his time abroad, waiting for the CIA to prepare the way for his return.
As I mentioned by this time, the Carter administration was rebuilding the staff of its embassy in
Tehran, which only intensified the students' suspicions.
Convinced that the CIA was using the U.S. embassy as a headquarters for plotting the
overthrow of the revolutionary government, the students decided to take over the embassy
and prevent it from being employed for this nefarious purpose.
