Lecture 16, Era of Limits, Energy Crisis of the 1970s.
We left off last time with the presidential election of 1980 in which Ronald Reagan defeated
Jimmy Carter.
Before getting into the Reagan years, which we'll do in the next few lectures, I'd like
to use this lecture to look at the several years preceding Reagan's election, roughly
the years 1973 to 1980, with a special focus on the issue of oil.
These years brought a fundamental transformation in the challenge the United States confronted
in meeting its own energy needs and those of its allies.
For the first time in the post-World War II era, Americans had to face the fact that
oil, the lifeblood of their precious way of life, was a finite resource that was increasingly
under the control of foreign nations, including the nations of the conflict-ridden Middle
East.
The realization that the United States had lost its energy independence was brought home
to Americans by two major oil shocks occurring at the beginning and the end of the period
in question.
The first shock resulted from the Arab oil embargo of 1973 to 74.
The second was caused by the Iranian Revolution of 1978 to 79.
Both events removed large amounts of Middle Eastern oil from the available world supply,
revealing the extent to which the industrialized nations, including the United States, had come
to depend on that commodity.
Americans responded to the oil shocks and to the period of economic hardship that lay
between those two events, with bewilderment, anger, and a growing sense of impotence.
These feelings in turn led to an exaggerated perception of beleaguement and victimization.
This felt as if their security and prosperity were under attack by ruthless and vengeful
foes in the Middle East, especially in the Arab world.
Arab oil sheiks, they believed, were not only using their wealth to force changes in U.S.
foreign policy, but acquiring control over the American economy itself.
These fears, as we shall see, were greatly exaggerated.
Arab interests were indeed participating in the American economy, but hardly on the scale
that Americans feared.
More importantly, the oil shocks of the 1970s forced the societies of the industrialized
West to make crucial adjustments, controlling fuel consumption, finding new sources of oil,
and, to a lesser extent, developing alternative sources of energy that made them ultimately
less dependent on Middle Eastern oil.
By decades end, it was the oil-producing nations of the Middle East, much more than
those of the industrialized West, that were facing a new and daunting era of limits.
As I mentioned in an earlier lecture, in the first couple decades of the post-World War
II period, the world had experienced an oil glut, allowing for a buyer's market.
The oil companies could decide for themselves what the price of oil would be, and the oil-producing
states had little say in the matter.
But by the late 1960s, global demand for oil began to outstrip available supply, creating
a seller's market.
Now it was the oil-producing states that could dictate the price of oil.
By the early 1970s, the major oil companies had conceded that OPEC, the Organization of
Petroleum Exporting Countries, which consisted primarily but not exclusively of Middle Eastern
states, could set the price of oil.
Not surprisingly, OPEC countries began significantly raising their oil prices in an effort to increase
their national revenues.
The situation for the United States in particular had also undergone an important shift.
During the first quarter century following the end of World War II, the United States
had produced most of its own oil.
So America's situation was fundamentally different from that of Western Europe and Japan, which
from the late 1940s on had been overwhelmingly dependent on Middle Eastern oil.
So this is an important point to understand.
Throughout the post-war period, early easy access to Middle Eastern oil had been a fundamental
concern of the US government, but Washington had sought to ensure that access not on its
own behalf, but on behalf of its European and Japanese allies.
To be sure, the economic recovery of Western Europe and Japan was itself vital to American
security, but the United States was not directly dependent on foreign oil.
