The Israeli invasion of Lebanon was itself an outgrowth of the unresolved conflict between
Israel and the Palestinians.
In the late 1970s, through Jimmy Carter's Camp David process, Egypt had become the only
Arab country to make peace with Israel, for which Israel reciprocated by giving back the
Sinai Peninsula.
But because Camp David did not adequately address Israel's occupation of the West Bank and
Gaza, it was rejected by all other Arab countries and the PLO, and Anwar Sadat was himself assassinated
in the fall of 1981.
In the following year, 1982, Israel launched a massive invasion of Lebanon, its northern
neighbor.
The purpose of the invasion was to destroy the PLO, which had its headquarters in Beirut,
Lebanon's capital.
At the time, Israel claimed that its intervention in Lebanon had been prompted by the PLO's
rocket attacks on northern Israel.
But the reality is a bit more complicated than that.
In fact, for a full year preceding the Israeli invasion, a ceasefire had been in place between
Israel and the PLO, and most observers agreed that the PLO had generally abided by it.
The PLO did pose a real threat to Israel, but by the early 1980s that threat was primarily
political rather than military.
Although the United States refused to recognize the PLO in keeping with Henry Kissinger's
1975 pledge not to deal with that organization until it first recognized Israel, most other
countries in the world did recognize the PLO, and there was growing international pressure
on Israel to enter into a dialogue with the PLO itself, a dialogue that would ultimately
lead to a two-state settlement of the Palestine-Israel dispute, whereby Israel ended its occupation
of the West Bank and Gaza, and allowed an independent Palestinian state to be established
in those territories.
The Israelis were adamantly opposed to such an outcome, but pressure mounted on them to
reach an accommodation with the PLO.
By 1982, Menachem Begin, Israel's prime minister, had concluded that the only way to solve the
problem was to put the PLO out of business for good.
So in June 1982, he and his defense minister, Ariel Sharon, launched an invasion of Lebanon
aimed at destroying the PLO.
Begin and Sharon realized, however, that a full-scale invasion of Lebanon would not be
supported by either the U.S. government or the Israeli Knesset.
So they initially misled both the Reagan administration and the Knesset, saying that Israeli forces
would advance only about 25 miles into Lebanese territory, just far enough to put PLO rockets
out of range of northern Israel, not lay siege to Beirut itself.
On that basis, the Reagan administration gave its tacit approval to the Israeli move into
Lebanon.
But Begin and Sharon quickly reneged on their pledge, and within days Israeli forces had
advanced up through Lebanon and laid siege to Beirut, where the PLO was trapped along
with tens of thousands of Lebanese and Palestinian civilians.
For the rest of that summer, the Israelis relentlessly bombarded the capital in an effort
to force the PLO to surrender.
Although Reagan was strongly sympathetic to Israel, he and most of his advisors were
disturbed by Israel's actions in Lebanon, which went way beyond what Begin and Sharon
had predicted would occur.
Begin demanded that Begin stop bombarding Beirut, but Begin ignored him and kept up the attack.
One member of the Reagan administration, Secretary of State Alexander Haig, did support Israel's
actions, but this position was quite unpopular within the administration, and Haig was soon
forced to resign.
He was replaced by George Schultz, who would stay in that post for the rest of Reagan's
tenure.
Saying that the Israelis would keep bombarding Beirut as long as the PLO remained in the
city, Reagan sent a special envoy to Beirut to work out a resolution.
And after weeks of negotiating, the envoy finally brokered a settlement whereby the
PLO agreed to withdraw its forces from Lebanon and establish a new headquarters in Tunisia,
hundreds of miles away from Israel, and Israel in return agreed to stop bombarding Beirut
and eventually to withdraw from Lebanon.
In September 1982, the PLO started pulling out of Beirut.
Left behind were tens of thousands of Palestinian civilians living in refugee camps scattered
throughout Lebanon.
These civilians had previously been protected by the PLO, but now they were vulnerable to
outside attack.
