Over the next several months, Assad teamed up with a number of Lebanese factions to make
life miserable for the Americans, and especially for the U.S. Marines who are now stationed
in Beirut.
One Lebanese group that received Syrian support was a militant Shiite organization known as
Hezbollah, or Party of God.
The departure of the PLO had left a power vacuum in the country, which Hezbollah quickly
filled.
Hezbollah was deeply hostile to the United States, on account of America's support for
Israel during its invasion of Lebanon, which had devastated the country, resulting in about
15,000 deaths, most of them civilians.
The impoverished Shiite communities of southern Lebanon and the outskirts of Beirut, communities
from which Hezbollah drew its recruits, had been especially hard hit by the Israeli invasion.
Another reason Hezbollah hated the U.S. government was because the United States had an antagonistic
relationship with Iran, from which Hezbollah drew both inspiration and material aid.
Assad for his part saw Hezbollah as a useful instrument for pressuring the Americans, and
he began giving them support of his own.
Over the summer of 1983, Hezbollah and other Lebanese groups began sniping at, shelling,
and harassing the U.S. Marines in their compound in Beirut.
Lebanese groups also stepped up their attacks on Israeli occupying forces, prompting the
Israeli government to become disenchanted with the whole Lebanese adventure and to withdraw
its troops from the country.
Israeli forces continued, however, to occupy a so-called security zone in the southern part
of Lebanon, not vacating that area until the year 2000.
In the fall of 1983, Menachem Begin resigned his Lebanese policy in shambles.
In October 1983, a suicide bomber, apparently a Shiite militant supported by Syria, drove
a truck laden with explosives into the U.S. Marine barracks in Beirut, killing 241 Marines.
It was a devastating blow to Reagan's Middle East policy, and Democrats in Congress began
demanding that the Marines be pulled out of Lebanon.
But Reagan initially refused to withdraw the Marines, saying there was still a chance to
pacify the country and implement the peace treaty between Lebanon and Israel.
Reagan also insisted that withdrawing from Lebanon would be tantamount to giving the
Soviet Union, since Syria America's principal adversary in Lebanon was a client of the Soviets.
Indeed, for some months after the bombing of the Marine barracks, the U.S. military
engaged in escalating hostilities against Syria.
In late 1983, the U.S. battleship New Jersey shelled Syrian positions in the Lebanese mountains,
which were also attacked by U.S. Navy jets.
The Syrians managed to shoot down one of those jets and take the pilot prisoner, prompting
civil rights leader Jesse Jackson to fly to Syria to negotiate for his release.
Jackson succeeded in freeing the pilot, gaining a healthy dose of positive publicity, just
as he was launching his campaign for the Democratic Party nomination.
The U.S. Navy continued to blast away at Syrian positions in Lebanon, but these attacks
did little to weaken Syria and succeeded only in harming Lebanese civilians.
In early 1984, the Lebanese government, seeing the chaos that had resulted from the peace
treaty with Israel, formally repudiated the treaty.
Around the same time, the Reagan administration bowed to reality and withdrew the Marines
from Lebanon, essentially abandoning it to the Syrians and their radical Shiite allies.
But this was hardly the last of America's troubles in Lebanon.
More and more American citizens, mostly teachers and missionaries, continued to live in Beirut,
and they became increasingly vulnerable to anti-American reprisals, especially at the
hands of Hezbollah and other Shiite militant groups.
In the mid-1980s, there was a rash of kidnappings of Americans living in Beirut, some of whom
would remain in captivity for several years, and a couple of whom would actually be killed.
For the most part, the motivation for the kidnappings was achieving the release of Shiite militants
who had been jailed by pro-American Arab governments.
The hostage takers demanded that the Reagan administration pressure its Arab allies to
let the militants go.
