Indeed, it would be fair to say that these Shiite prisoners in Israel were hostages themselves
and that their captivity was no more legal than that of the passengers on TWA flight
847, since it is a violation of the 4th Geneva Convention for an occupying power to transfer
civilians from the territory it occupies to its own country.
And those Shiite young men were, for the most part, civilians.
But in the American media, the Shiites in Israel were always referred to as detainees,
not hostages.
The hostage crisis in Beirut lasted for about two weeks and became an enormous media extravaganza.
For although the TWA passengers were being held captive, they were allowed to give interviews
to the world's media.
This was generally beneficial to the hostage takers, since some of the captives became sympathetic
to the hijackers' demands and were willing to say so publicly.
At one point, the hostages even sent an open letter to Ronald Reagan, urging him to pressure
Israel to release the Shiite prisoners.
Eventually a deal was worked out whereby Israel did release the Shiite prisoners and the hijackers
released the TWA passengers.
Ironically, one of the parties that helped facilitate the deal was President Assad of
Syria, who was interested in improving relations with the Americans following his bitter confrontation
with them over Lebanon a couple years earlier.
A little more than a year later, the Reagan administration's secret dealings with Iran
became public knowledge.
In the fall of 1986, a Lebanese newspaper broke the story that U.S. officials had been negotiating
with Iran over the release of American hostages in Lebanon.
The revelation caused a huge outcry in the United States, since it totally negated the
Reagan administration's public position of adamantly refusing to negotiate with hostage
takers.
The American people were further shocked when it was revealed, this time by the Reagan administration
itself, which knew that the story was about to become public anyway, that profits from
the arms sales to Iran had been diverted to the Nicaraguan Contras in defiance of Congress's
ban on such aid.
Over the ensuing months, Reagan repeatedly denied that he had knowingly sold arms for
hostages or been aware of the diversion of funds to the Contras.
All he had done, he said, was to authorize general contacts between members of his administration
and so-called moderates in the Iranian government to explore the possibility of improved relations
between the countries.
But the Reagan administration was never able to tell us who these moderates were.
A decade later, genuine moderates would occupy positions of authority in Iran.
But in 1986 and 87, such figures were nowhere in sight.
In the summer of 1987, Congress held hearings on the Iran Contra affair, bringing a parade
of colorful witnesses before American television audiences.
There was Robert McFarlane, Reagan's national security advisor, who, it was revealed, had
secretly flown to Tehran to meet with Iranian leaders bearing gifts in the form of a Bible
and a birthday cake.
There was the ghost of William Casey, the director of the CIA and the apparent mastermind
of the whole operation, who had conveniently died just after the scandal had broken, making
him unavailable to testify before the Congressional Committee.
There was Fawn Hall, the young secretary to Oliver North, who when the scandal had started
to break had frantically shredded incriminating documents until the shredder broke down and
she was reduced to sneaking documents out of the national security agency by hiding them
in her underwear.
And then there was Ali North himself, the hyperpatriotic Marine who proudly owned up
to his secret activities, insisting that it had been necessary to defy the will of Congress
to keep the hope for freedom alive in Central America.
It was a very entertaining summer.
For much of 1987, the country was consumed by the Iran Contra scandal, and it even seemed
that Reagan's presidency was in jeopardy.
What saved Reagan's political hide was a dramatic improvement in 1986 and 87 in U.S.-Soviet
relations, which allowed Reagan to end his presidency on a far more statesman-like note.
In those same years, however, the Palestinian inhabitants of the West Bank and Gaza would
mount a major insurrection against Israeli rule, forcing the Reagan administration to
reassess its policy on that issue.
We'll look at the first Palestinian intifada in our next lecture.
Thank you.
