Lecture 20 The Gulf War
We left off last time in the summer of 1990 with the decision of the first Bush Administration
to end its diplomatic dialogue with the PLO.
Just weeks after that event, a sudden crisis occurred that yanked the world's attention
away from Israel-Palestine and focused it instead on the Persian Gulf region.
I'm referring, of course, to Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in August 1990, which set the stage
for a war that would dramatically transform the political landscape of the Middle East.
The Gulf War revealed the remarkable ability of the United States in the dawning post-Cold
War era to act decisively in the Middle East.
But the war also revealed America's commitment to the territorial status quo in the region.
Before getting into that event, let me say a couple words about the first President Bush
since I haven't yet had a chance to introduce him properly.
Bush 1 came to the presidency with broad foreign policy experience.
After serving as a congressman in the 1960s, he had in the 1970s been ambassador to the
United Nations, a special envoy to China, and director of the CIA.
As Reagan's vice president, Bush's foreign policy duties had consisted largely of attending
the funerals of foreign leaders, but he remained a shrewd observer of foreign affairs and
had developed definite opinions about them.
He'd also acquired an impressive array of diplomatic skills and personal acquaintances,
assets he would put to use in his handling of the diplomacy surrounding the Gulf War.
The Gulf War grew out of the Iran-Iraq War of the 1980s.
You will recall that back in 1980, Saddam Hussein, the president of Iraq, taking advantage
of the chaos created by the Iranian Revolution, attacked his old rival Iran.
In the ensuing Iran-Iraq War, which lasted for the next eight years and claimed a million
lives on both sides, the United States tilted in favor of Iraq.
The decision to sell arms to Iran in order to get American hostages freed was something
of an anomaly.
Although Saddam's regime was extremely unsavory, and although it received considerable support
from the Soviet Union, the United States saw revolutionary Iran as even worse.
Throughout the 1980s, the Reagan administration gave considerable assistance to Iraq.
It provided Iraq with tens of millions of dollars in agricultural credits, that is, loans
that enabled Iraq to buy agricultural products from American farmers.
The CIA gave Iraq satellite intelligence information on the position of Iranian forces, enabling
Iraq to wage its war more effectively.
A number of Western European countries, France in particular, went even further, directly
selling Iraq sophisticated weapons systems.
Another way the United States helped out Iraq was through the so-called reflagging of Kuwaiti
tankers.
During the Iran-Iraq War, Iraq received financial support from other Arab countries, especially
the conservative Gulf Sheikhthams that deeply feared revolutionary Iran.
One of Iran's biggest financial backers was Kuwait, a tiny but extremely oil-rich country
lying to its south.
In an effort to disrupt Kuwait's support for Iraq, Iranian gunboats began attacking
Kuwaiti tankers carrying oil through the Persian Gulf for sale abroad.
The idea was to prevent Kuwait from earning money from the sale of oil, thus preventing
it from giving financial support to Iraq.
In early 1987, the Reagan administration decided to reflag Kuwaiti tankers, that is, to permit
them to fly the American flag and thus become American vessels under international law.
That way, whenever Iranian gunboats moved to attack a Kuwaiti tanker, the U.S. Navy would
be justified in going after the Iranian gunboats.
And throughout 1987 and 1988, there were a series of naval skirmishes in the Gulf between
American and Iranian forces, the upshot of which was that the Gulf remained open to Kuwaiti
tankers.
