The first phase of the operation, which lasted from January 16th to February 23rd, was a series of air attacks against Iraqi positions both in Kuwait and in Iraq.
The principal targets were Iraqi command and control centers, anti-aircraft defenses, airfields, and other kinds of military installations.
Also destroyed were Iraqi communications and transportation systems, bridges, roads, railways, telephone lines, television and radio stations, as well as industrial targets like factories, warehouses, and electrical generators.
The aim was not just to destroy Iraq's fighting ability, but to cripple its infrastructure and economy as well.
In this sense, the first phase of the war can be seen as a form of sanctions from the air, and it was highly effective.
What the air war did to Iraq has been likened to severing the spinal cord of a living body.
The body remains alive, but it is unable to move its limbs on command.
For years thereafter, the Iraqi economy and society would be crippled on account of the damage Iraq suffered in those early weeks of 1991.
As I mentioned, Iraq's anti-aircraft capability was one of the first things to be taken out by the air war.
This left Iraq completely defenseless against further attack.
About all Iraq could do was shoot medium-range Soviet-built missiles known as scuds at neighboring countries in a desperate effort to break up the anti-Iraqi alliance.
For example, Saddam lobbed a number of scuds at Israel in the hopes of causing Israel to retaliate against Iraq.
If that happened, it would be politically impossible for any Arab countries to remain in the anti-Iraqi coalition.
But scuds are extremely inaccurate missiles, and while a handful of scuds did land in residential areas of Israel causing some fatalities, most of them did no damage.
At the time, the U.S. military claimed that it had shot down a large number of scuds in mid-flight using the so-called Patriot missiles.
But subsequent investigations revealed that this claim was vastly exaggerated.
It turned out that most of the scuds that appeared to have been shot down by Patriot missiles had actually disintegrated in mid-flight on their own.
The extravagant claims made on behalf of the Patriot missile was part of a more general phenomenon of the Gulf War, the attempt by the U.S. military to dazzle the American public with the technical wizardry of the air war.
Every afternoon, General Schwarzkopf or some other high-ranking official would brief the media on the day's events using a video monitor to show footage of America's high-tech weaponry at work.
Although much of the footage was indeed spectacular, there was also a good deal of exaggeration and hype, the purpose of which was not simply to drum up support for the war, but also it would seem to create a favorable political climate for increased congressional spending on weapons systems.
The fact that the Cold War was coming to an end had caused many officials, both in the military and in the Bush administration, to worry about congressional cutbacks in military spending.
In this respect, the Gulf War was a godsend for the Bush administration and the military, since it gave them an opportunity to demonstrate the virtues of expensive high-tech weaponry.
Despite the beating Iraq was taking in the air war, it still refused to withdraw from Kuwait, so on February 23rd the coalition forces launched a ground war to directly expel Iraqi forces from Kuwait.
Earlier Saddam had boasted that a ground war would result in the mother of all battles, in which tens of thousands of Americans would die.
But when the ground war was launched, Iraqi forces put up virtually no fight, surrendering by the score to coalition forces.
On February 27th, exactly 100 hours after the offensive had begun, Bush announced the liberation of Kuwait.
Just how many Iraqi soldiers were killed in the fighting will probably never be known.
Initial Pentagon estimates were as high as 100,000, though in recent years that figure has been revised drastically downward to something on the order of 10,000 or 20,000.
Estimates for Iraqi civilians killed directly by explosions and gunfire range from 5,000 to 15,000.
Of course many more died of the disease and now nutrition, resulting from the collapse of Iraq's physical infrastructure.
