Lecture 21, The Rise and Fall of the Oslo Peace Process
The subject of today's lecture is the Rise and Fall of the Oslo Peace Process, a series
of events that unfolded in the decade from 1991 to 2001.
In these years, hopes were raised that a final resolution of the century-old conflict between
Palestinians and Israelis was at hand, and that the two peoples could finally devote their
considerable talents and resources to peaceful pursuits, perhaps even in cooperation with
each other.
This was a false hope, of course, and by 2001, Palestinians and Israelis were again engulfed
in violent conflict.
In retrospect, it's hard to see how it could have been otherwise, given the extremely shaky
foundations on which the peace process was established, and the reckless and thoughtless
manner in which the ensuing diplomacy was conducted.
These were failures for which Palestinians, Israelis, and Americans alike bear responsibility.
Before getting into the events of the peace process of the 1990s, let me quickly reiterate
a point I made in an earlier lecture concerning the motivations for Israel's ongoing interest
in maintaining control over the West Bank and Gaza.
Because occupying those territories in the Six-Day War, Israel had resisted the idea
of relinquishing them, primarily in my view for security reasons.
Prior to the Six-Day War, both areas had been sources of Palestinian commando and terrorist
raids against Israel, and the Israelis were, and are, adamant about not returning to that
state of affairs.
Whether Israel has the right to achieve physical security by permanently controlling the Palestinians
of the West Bank and Gaza is another question.
The consensus in international opinion is that Israel does not have that right, and that
it must find some other means of ensuring its own security.
But the security motive is real enough.
For some Israelis, of course, the imperative of holding on to the occupied territories is
ideological as well as security-related, based on the belief that the West Bank and
Gaza were given to the Jewish people by God.
Israelis taking this view, many of them settlers in the occupied territories, have considerable
influence in Israeli politics, but most Israelis are animated by security rather than strictly
ideological concerns.
An understanding of this perspective is necessary for making sense of Israel's strategy in
entering into the Oslo peace process, a strategy acquiesced in by the U.S. government.
Even after it entered into negotiations with the PLO in 1993, and even after it permitted
Yasser Arafat to establish a quasi-government in the occupied territories, the Israeli government
remained determined to exercise de facto control over the territories.
The failure of both the Israeli government and the PLO leadership to be honest about
this crucial fact lay at the heart of the Oslo process's ultimate failure.
Let me now get into the narrative.
As I mentioned in a previous lecture, in building up the coalition to oust Iraq from Kuwait,
the first President Bush had made a vague promise to revisit the Palestine-Israel issue
even though it could not be formally linked to the Kuwait issue.
In the months following the coalition victory in the Gulf War in early 1991, Bush did make
a serious effort to address the Palestine-Israel dispute.
A number of factors made 1991 a good year in which to push for such a settlement.
In the first place, Yasser Arafat had been weakened politically, and this made him more
susceptible to American pressure.
Arafat had damaged himself by supporting Iraq during the Gulf Crisis and War.
He had taken this position because the Palestinian people themselves had supported Saddam Hussein's
effort to link the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait with the Israeli occupation of the West Bank
in Gaza.
To most Palestinians, the proposal to link these issues made eminent good sense, and they
rallied to Saddam's support.
Arafat echoed this position so as to retain his own popularity with the Palestinian masses.
By supporting Saddam, Arafat did ingratiate himself with the Palestinian rank and file,
but he further alienated the United States, which emerged from the Gulf War in an extremely
powerful position.
Worse still, he infuriated oil-rich Gulf states like Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Abu Dhabi, and of
course Kuwait.
These countries had previously given billions of dollars in aid to the PLO, and they now
cut back on their assistance.
So now Arafat was scrambling to keep his organization afloat financially.
