Another distressing circumstance was that Arafat's Palestinian authority, or PA, turned out to be rather corrupt and dictatorial, arbitrarily arresting, imprisoning, and even torturing Palestinians who criticized it.
For all its cogency, however, this particular critique of the Oslo process got very little attention in the United States.
Throughout the 1990s, the most visible critics of Oslo, indeed the only ones that most Americans were aware of, were religious extremists on both sides.
On the Israeli side, right-wing Zionists, some in the Likud block, some to the right of it, attacked Oslo as a betrayal of the Zionist dream of regaining or rather gaining possession of all of historical Palestine.
These Israelis, many of them settlers in the occupied territories, denounced Rabin and the Labour Party as traitors to the Jewish people and vowed to overturn the Oslo agreement.
In late 1995, a young right-wing Israeli assassinated Prime Minister Rabin as he was leaving a peace rally.
Rabin's funeral was a major international event attended by all of the major leaders of the world, including several Arab heads of state, most of whom had never before set foot in Israel.
Even for critics of the Oslo process, at least for those who were not opposed to the very idea of Arab-Israeli reconciliation, it was a moving spectacle.
On the Palestinian side, the most violent opponents of Oslo were Muslim fundamentalists, especially members of a party known as Hamas, which means enthusiasm in Arabic.
Hamas was opposed to the very existence of a Jewish state in Palestine, condemning it as a usurpation of sacred Muslim ground.
Ironically, when Hamas first came into existence in the 1980s, it received indirect support from the Israelis, who, in an effort to weaken the PLO, which they saw as the real enemy at that time,
allowed Hamas to organize in the territories relatively unhindered.
By the 1990s, however, Hamas had become so strong that it was able to pose a real threat to the peace process.
In the mid-1990s, in an effort to derail the peace process, Hamas sponsored a series of terrorist attacks against civilian targets inside Israel.
The campaign was eventually brought under control by Arafat's Palestinian authority.
Under heavy pressure from Israel, the PA arrested about 2,000 Hamas militants, crippling the organization and putting it out of business for a time.
Politically, Arafat was able to take these steps because in those early post-Oslo days, the Palestinian population was still basically optimistic about the future.
Most Palestinians still believed that if the terrorism of Hamas could be brought to an end, the Israelis would be more willing to complete their withdrawal from the occupied territories,
and more accepting of the establishment of a Palestinian state.
Such optimism gave Arafat the political support he needed for cracking down on Hamas.
The PA's campaign against Hamas, which took place in 1996, did succeed in keeping the peace process from collapsing altogether.
And over the next few years, the Clinton administration brokered a series of interim agreements between Israel and the PA,
whereby Israel gradually withdrew from a few more Palestinian population centers and allowed the PA to administer them instead.
But all of the other activity I mentioned, the expansion of the settler population, the confiscation of property, the construction of bypass roads, and so forth, continued apace.
By the year 2000, most Palestinians lived under direct PA administration, but Israel had withdrawn from only about 40% of the territory.
Which brings us to the collapse of the peace process in the summer and fall of 2000.
I'll get into the specifics in a moment, but let me first give you my overall interpretation, and it is my interpretation, of why the Oslo process did collapse.
Essentially, what happened in the year 2000 was that a critical mass of both Palestinians and Israelis came to the conclusion that their own leaders were misleading them about the Oslo process.
Throughout the 1990s, both the Palestinian Authority and the Israeli government had tried to pacify their respective constituencies by painting extremely rosy pictures of the Oslo process.
What the Palestinian Authority told its people was, don't worry.
Even though the agreement we've signed seems incomplete on paper, it has set in motion an inexorable process that will ultimately lead to the creation of a fully sovereign Palestinian state in all of the occupied territories having East Jerusalem as its capital.
The Israelis won't like it, but they'll have to accept it.
