On the downside, all the sympathy generated toward the Kurds of Iraq caused the international
community to pay closer attention to the plight of Kurds in Turkey as well, and to criticize
the Turkish government for its mistreatment of them.
Worse still, the fact that Iraqi Kurds had achieved greater autonomy in their country
threatened to inspire Kurds inside Turkey to think that they could do the same.
On the positive side, from Turkey's perspective, the establishment of the no-fly zone stabilized
the situation in northern Iraq, preventing hundreds of thousands of Iraqi Kurdish refugees
from crossing the border into southern Turkey, which in turn could have caused an enormous
financial, political, and internal security problem for the Turkish government.
So Turkey grudgingly supported the creation of a no-fly zone in northern Iraq, allowing
the U.S. Air Force to police the zone from bases on Turkish soil.
But Turkey still had to deal with the challenge posed by the PKK, and over the course of the
1990s, the Turks continued their relentless campaign to root out and destroy the PKK within
Turkey.
As it had in the past, the United States continued to supply Turkey with the military hardware
to conduct this effort.
Diplomatically, Washington took a much more understanding attitude toward Turkey's position
than did most countries of Western Europe, which in some cases were harshly critical
of Turkey's rough tactics.
But despite its basic support for Turkey's position, the U.S. State Department often
angered Turkey by criticizing its human rights record, even though the State Department always
tempered this criticism with much harsher denunciations of the PKK, which it branded
a terrorist organization.
Some members of the U.S. Congress were far more critical of Turkey, but they could never
muster the votes to cut off military aid to Turkey, or to condition that aid on better
treatment of the Kurds.
The upshot of all this was that the Turkish government did succeed in the 1990s in neutralizing
the PKK as a military force.
The actual military defeat of the PKK took place in the first half of the 1990s, but
the most dramatic episode in the anti-PKK campaign occurred in 1998 to 1999, when Turkey
finally got its hands on Abdullah Ocalan, the PKK leader.
For most of the time he confronted the Turkish government, Ocalan operated not in Turkey
itself, but out of base camps in Syria.
Ocazal Assad, Syria's president, allowed Ocalan to operate in Syria as a way of putting pressure
on Turkey, a country with which Syria had long had antagonistic relations.
Since the 1930s, Syria and Turkey had disputed a strip of land on their common border, with
each country insisting that the land belonged to it.
Moreover, during the Cold War, Syria had been a client state of the Soviet Union, while
Turkey, of course, had been a member of NATO.
Even after the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991, Assad remained determined to resist American
hegemony and thus continue to be hostile to America's ally, Turkey.
And one way of harassing Turkey was by allowing Ocalan to operate base camps in Syria.
The Turks were, of course, outraged by Assad's behavior and insisted that he close down Ocalan's
camps.
Militarily, Syria was much weaker than Turkey, but Assad was a master at the diplomatic game
and was able to evade the Turks' demand for years.
At first, Assad denied that Ocalan was in Syria at all, but this claim became harder
to maintain when Ocalan started showing up in Damascus and giving interviews to the foreign
media.
So, Assad admitted that Ocalan was in Syria and agreed to shut down his camps in the country.
Assad did shut down the camps, but he allowed Ocalan to establish new camps in Lebanon, which
was under Syria's de facto control.
When Syria complained, Assad protested that Lebanon was a sovereign country capable of
making its own decisions and that Syria was powerless to do anything about it.
Finally, the Turks got really mad and began warning that if Assad didn't put Ocalan out
of business for good, there could well be military action against Syria.
Unless Syria collects its wits about it, the Turkish prime minister publicly declared, it
will be a holy duty for us to bring the world crashing down on its head.
