The attack on Afghanistan proved to be ineffectual.
Bin Laden and his top commanders escaped from the camps before they were struck.
The attack on Sudan was worse than ineffectual.
To all appearances, it was a reckless spasm of violence directed at what may well have been an innocent party.
U.S. officials were soon forced to admit that they had no evidence of a link between the pharmaceutical factory and Bin Laden.
The Clinton administration also refused to turn over for international inspection a soil sample taken from the wreckage of the factory
that supposedly contained traces of a chemical agent necessary for the manufacturing of nerve gas.
The whole affair became a huge embarrassment for U.S. officials,
none of whom seemed able to explain why it had been necessary to bomb that pharmaceutical factory and to do so in such haste.
The event was all the more disturbing because Sudan was an extremely poor country
and the factory in Khartoum was the only facility in Sudan manufacturing medicines.
Although only one person was killed in the rocket attack itself,
it is likely that many more people subsequently died as a result of diseases that could have been prevented by the medicines the factory was halted from manufacturing.
Although this dimension of the attack received little attention in the United States,
it generated a storm of outrage throughout the Arab and Muslim worlds
where tens of thousands of ordinary people took to the streets to vent their fury against Washington's high-handed action
and, in some cases, to sing the praises of Osama bin Laden.
So while it's obvious that Clinton did not manufacture the bin Laden threat,
it is possible that he speeded up his response to that threat in order to change the subject at home.
Of course, all he succeeded in doing was increasing the level of anti-American feeling in the Muslim world
and enhancing the reputation of Osama bin Laden.
Over the next couple years, as Clinton's presidency wound down,
bin Laden continued to sponsor attacks against the United States.
In December 1999, an Algerian man later shown to have ties to Al Qaeda
was apprehended at the border between Canada and Washington State
with 130 pounds of explosives in his car.
It turned out that he had been planning to bomb LA Airport.
In October 2000, two men rammed a small boat packed with explosives into the USS Cole,
which was being refueled off the coast of Yemen.
The explosion blew a 40-by-60-foot hole in the side of the ship, killing 17 American soldiers.
Bin Laden's role in the attack on the Cole has yet to be determined,
but he made a point of rejoicing in the operation and praising the attackers.
By the summer of 2001, there were strong indications that another major Al Qaeda attack was in the works.
In June, bin Laden released a recruiting videotape that was widely circulated throughout the Middle East.
The tape was an artfully edited montage in which bin Laden's words and image were interspersed
with footage of Al Qaeda militants undergoing training,
along with inflammatory images of Palestinian demonstrators in the occupied territories
being shot down by Israeli troops using US-supplied weapons.
Bin Laden had gotten into the habit of forecasting his attacks
by issuing vague and ominous warnings beforehand,
and many US officials were convinced that Al Qaeda was on the verge of striking again.
The maddening thing was that there was no way of telling, or at least there seemed no way at the time,
where and how Al Qaeda might strike next.
It had struck in so many different places using so many different techniques
and in connection with so many different Arab and Muslim causes
that it was difficult to know where to look for clues.
This range in Al Qaeda's activities suggested the group's considerable organizational
and technological sophistication, its ability to harness the techniques of globalization
in its campaign to thwart the globalizing West.
Al Qaeda also clearly benefited from the complacency of the US government,
whose response to the attacks had been sporadic and misdirected,
and whose component agencies were poorly organized for sharing information.
The attacks of September 11th put an end to that complacency,
but they did more than that.
They also brought the United States to a fundamental crossroads in its dealings with the Middle East,
and indeed with the whole world.
A phenomenon we'll explore in our next and final lecture.
Thank you.
