Hey guys this is Abil.
I am going to show you today how can you create a basic Babylon JS scene.
We will see how we can clone an object then we will add skybox and finally we will add
some fog in our scene.
So let's start part one of this tutorial.
This is my HTML code from my previous video.
The only change is Babylon.max.js.map file.
You can download the file from Babylon.js GitHub page.
Open Visual Studio.
We need to access project folder, press and hold shift and right click at the same time
then open partial command line.
Let's create a basic HTTP server.
If this doesn't make sense to you please watch my previous tutorial.
Now open your browser and access the folder.
If you inspect the page you can see our code is working.
Now let's understand how Babylon JS works.
In our HTML page we need a placeholder where the Babylon JS code will take effect.
This placeholder is called canvas.
Let's go back in Visual Studio and create a new canvas tag.
Save and go back to our browser, refresh and here you can see our canvas tag is working.
In the inspector you can see canvas is not full width.
Now go back to Visual Studio and let's add some CSS for both HTML, body and render canvas.
Create the browser again and here we can see canvas is full width now.
Now that our canvas is ready let's open main.js file and start writing our Babylon JS code.
First let's create a variable to store our render canvas.
Next we need to add an event listener which will fire a function when the DOM content is
loaded.
Let's complete the start game function.
Next store our HTML canvas in our newly created variable canvas.
Now for the next step we need another variable let's create it.
In engine variable we will store Babylon engine.
Don't forget to look at the suggestion given by Visual Studio.
Now we need to create our scene.
Again we will create a variable to store the create scene function too.
Let's now complete the create scene function.
At this point our scene is ready.
Let's create a single box in our scene.
You might notice I am storing everything inside a variable.
We are doing this so that we can simply call it later if we need it again.
Here you can see we need couple of parameter for our box.
Let's keep following instruction.
We need a name, size and our scene which we already stored in a variable.
Now check our code in browser.
Well it's not working because we created the scene but we didn't ask Babylon to render
it.
We need to ask Babylon to render our scene we need to call render loop function.
Then simply instruct Babylon to render all the objects inside our scene.
Let's try again in our browser and we can see it's not working again.
It's because we didn't return the scene.
Let's add the code and try again.
This time we can see it's somewhat working but there is still an error which is asking
for a camera.
Let's go back and create a camera.
We are going to create a arc-rotated camera for this example and to create it we need some
parameter to fill.
Let's set this parameter.
First we need a name.
I am going to call it camera.
You can call it whatever you wish.
Next we need to set a number for alpha.
A alpha is the rotation value of camera along its longitude axis.
Next we need to set a number for beta.
Beta defines the camera rotation along the latitude axis.
Next radius which is the distance of camera from its target.
Which is a vector value meaning we need to define a single point in space.
Finally it needs a scene name in which the camera belongs to.
The best way to learn about this parameter is Babylon.js documentation.
Try in browser again.
You can see this time it's working.
Also I am noticing when I am resizing the browser window the box is scaling in weird
way.
Let's fix the browser resizing issue first.
To fix it we need to add an event listener for engine resize.
Refresh and now you can see the box is scaling properly.
But if you click and drag the camera it should rotate now.
But it's not.
That means we missed something.
Well I found it.
We created the camera but did not activated it.
Let's tell Babylon we want our camera as active camera of the scene.
Now open the browser and now we can rotate our camera nice.
So this is the basic code structure for Babylon.js scene.
Now to further development we will just add our code inside the create scene function.
You might want to save this code separately so that you don't have to write this every
time.
So far our scene contains only one box which is not fun at all.
Let's run a basic follow.
Here I am changing the box position by multiplying its x value with i.
So in each loop we will have different position for different box.
I made a mistake here.
These should be semicolon not comma.
Now you can see we have several box and our camera is rotating perfectly.
But our box is black.
This is because our scene contains no light and without light everything is black.
