So Anne, the floor is yours.
We already see your slides.
So put the spotlight on the floor, welcome.
Yeah, thank you very much.
Before I start my talk and dive into,
I just would like to know
what your personal academic background is.
So you do not have to talk too much,
just everybody who's from the STEM field
should please raise her or his or their arms
so that I know whether anybody, okay.
So we have one STEM person, two STEM persons,
three STEM persons, four STEM persons, thank you very much.
And is there anybody of the humanities
and social science background of philosophy also?
Okay, wonderful, okay.
So since there are more people who are
in the STEM background than not,
I will just briefly give in two sentences,
I try to let you know what we are actually doing
as anthropologists because as I once met a very old physicist
who still has been raised in the tradition of
Werner Heisenbach and others,
many people think anthropology is something
that everybody can do,
but actually anthropology is involving also
a huge set of methodology
and is a year-long training of doing fieldwork amongst people.
And some people do fieldwork in foreign cultures
to themselves, other do fieldwork within their home cultures.
And the third people do a fieldwork in knowledge cultures.
And I'm an anthropologist of physics and computer science.
That means that I'm actually living with
and have been living with physicists
and computer scientists for the past eight years.
And I'm really diving into their world.
I'm learning their language.
I'm experiencing what they experience
and experience is also the most central term
of what we're doing as anthropologists.
That means that we already know very much
that what we see is biased by our own observations
and that of course everything we observed
within the real world can be just described
as approximation by ourselves.
So when we do fieldwork,
we have developed over the past 150 years,
a toolset that allows us to differentiate
what is our own perceptual bias.
And on the other hand, what we can see in the field
and where we actually invent the field.
And that's very much important
because there's very often, especially from the STEM field,
the question when we're not working with numbers
and we stop working with statistics predominantly,
we have been and do work with statistics.
We call that mixed methods,
but we predominantly work with interviews,
with language, with listening to the people.
With actually experiencing their lives.
And anthropologists, therefore, is a training
and since we are time-bound human deadly beings,
it takes time to become an anthropologist.
So that's what we actually do.
And that allows us to live with the people
and to understand what's their concern.
And what I'm going to do today with you
is to tell you out of my research
that I did in the last years
and dive into the question of future.
And I think that's very much of importance,
especially when you work with
within the field of quantum mechanics,
artificial intelligence and so on and so on,
because these fields are really shaping the digital era
and transforming the whole world
and the whole communities we're living in.
And that's something that's rather my turf.
So I'm looking very much forward also
to the discussions that we have and we will have.
In the last years, I have been, for example,
publishing last year, came out a book first in German,
The Translations in Process,
where I did an ethnography of the computer simulation
of the quantum mechanical double slit experiment
in a single event-based computer simulation
at the research center in Jülich
and compared it with the quantum mechanical double slit
experiments conducted in Vienna today.
And came out with a comparison, actually,
but about the Schrödinger equation on the one hand
and on the other hand, computer simulation.
So different forms of approximating reality
on the one hand based on first principles in mathematics,
on the other hand based on the approximation to truth
by a single event computer simulation.
And these produce different forms of reality
or interpretations of reality,
which doesn't mean that there isn't any truth anymore,
but the problem of course is,
and you're more aware than I am that with simulation,
you can actually show everything that you want to
and then everything that could be considered as reality
can be put into equality with what is actually
the real reality itself.
And that was quite a challenge and also a lot of fun
because quantum mechanics is something that is posing
all these questions and shattering
the understanding of nature more than anything else.
Something that wasn't so bizarre to us as anthropologists
because for us, the world is itself always either or,
and not neither or, but neither nor
and has these kinds of entanglements.
So what we found out in the last years
resonates very well with what quantum mechanics
and other disciplines found out.
And in the last years also I dealt a lot
with anthropology of play and games,
with the interrelations of facts and fictions
and how cosmologies are made
and what role science has these days
where fictions are shattering the world of fact-making.
In the next 45 minutes, so I will first of all
bring you onto a journey
and in the field of humanities and social sciences
where I'm classically trained,
we very often read written texts.
We are text-based and written hermeneutical disciplines.
We love writing and so please lay back
and bear that it was important to me to write down for you
and what I have been saying because it mattered so much
to me what I wanted to tell you
that I tried to put it into my rusty German English
because more I'm not able to do than rusty German English.
And in this journey, I will first tell you
how I actually ended up at CERN,
how I came to this field work that I did
and that I'm going to present you.
And then I will dive into the question of uncertainty
that stem scientists encounter on all levels.
And what we actually as anthropologists can see
and observe how rhythms of mechanical technology
and algorithmic and also human uncertainty
are going into an interplay
which transform each individual
that is doing actually science
within an experimental field
turns it from an individual
into something that I call intravisual
and how I'm coming to that point
and to describe how this collaboration
of different people doing field work
turning from individuals in entanglement with others
to intravisuals to actually produce science
and to make things happen.
That's something I wanna take you onto a journey with
in the next minutes.
So far, any questions from your side?
Wonderful.
So, field work is a form of memoir making.
Reminds us anthropologist Ruth Behr.
From that perspective, it is a cultural fact-making
of a future yet to come.
Maybe that explains why anthropologists
did not focus on future as a cultural fact
until Arjun Apadurai reminded the discipline.
We were blinded by our own deformation professionel
by the obvious movement of our own way of knowledge production
with field notes and recorded interviews
and tempted by collective interests
and individuals need to know where we
or they are coming from.
Because as already in Odysseys,
people want to know where they're living
and where they're coming from.
But since the future is uncertain,
that's something we do not actually investigate so much with
because we are not fortune tellers.
But it becomes more and more important
in a time of computer simulation
where you actually have to foresee and you can
and you have tools to foresee and estimate futures
quite precisely.
And that is where anthropology becomes interesting
when you think about the future
and how the future is made.
A long time ago, anthropology was a space bound
and historiography a time bound discipline.
Anthropology deals with futures and realities
and what is happening in the now.
And historiography is looking into the past.
The first anthropology mistrusted by design
how the past is made through archival sources
because who chooses what is going into the archives?
Who chooses the truth of the past?
Why the latter, historiography,
mistrusted any investigations of the contemporary
as already the philosopher Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel summed it up,
the flight of my nervous old is blind in the now.
We cannot understand the now
because we are part of the present.
And it was this Hegel's challenge encountered
by the ethnographers attempt to understand
what is going on right now that turned me
into an anthropologist from historiography coming.
And it is this challenge that drives me from now on
to the days that are coming.
I always was drawn to understand
what humans make out of this being in
and beyond space, time and matter.
And that is what I will talk about.
In the following minutes, I want to contribute
to the question how different futures are being practiced,
narrated, placed and made tangible in everyday life worlds.
I'm doing so by reflecting upon ethnographic insights.
I gathered over the past eight years
in the falling empire that discursively
and technically reigned what Karen Barat,
a philosopher and physicist called, I quote,
imperialism of universal space and time.
I'm talking about physics
and to be more precise, high energy physics.
Why I consider this a falling empire
and not a reigning empire we can talk about later.
I'm very curious about it.
And I'm also taking up the challenge to discuss this.
I'm telling tales how physicists deal with resistances
of materiality and masculinity.
I'm not aiming to explain to you again
the cosmology and technologies of physics
with the help of feminist science and technology studies
or to retell you how physicists do their job.
I did this elsewhere.
And I think there are enough people in this room
who know much better and more about this than I do.
And others actually did this already,
like Sharon Trawig, Karen Knott-Cetina
or the Belgian philosopher Isabel Stengers.
Rather, I try to give an account
out of one of the centers of the ruined
and ruinous places of Europe,
this de-centered and misplaced territory of Gaia
as Pernullatou and others would call it.
It is an account of how people deal with uncertainty
out of concern and care for what they love most,
which is in this case, an experimental system of physics.
I'm looking for what is a wondrous future to them,
which is to understand what constitutes our cosmos,
I quote, from a physical point of view
and collaborate in a common universal enterprise
that includes everything and excludes exclusivity in the end.
My ethnography is the account of a most cis,
hetero and male white dominant field.
Its origins of organization and community
are dating back to war, to the Second World War,
the atom bomb plus alamos, physics people did learn
to love the bomb when it just existed as a vague plan.
In fact, they made it up.
These people are Stanley Kubrick's blueprints
and they are not.
For where is normativity and power,
there is resistance and subversion also
and foremost amongst physicists.
And even physicists' identities aren't either all
or especially physicists' identities aren't dualist,
but carefully monitored and risk-managed.
Yes, these guys, as even women in the field often call themselves,
are separating nature and culture.
Yes, they seem to be hopeless platonics,
believing and proving mathematics idealism
and helpless Aristotelians observing and measuring nature,
making up categories and models.
They mistrust their data and falsify hypothesis.
They pushed ethics into another department,
but didn't we as anthropologists in Germany too,
when we decided not to be a political discipline
after the Second World War,
and what we are actually doing is transforming again
into a political discipline.
And that's very fascinating,
but from a decolonial perspective,
in times of identity crisis of Europe all over Europe.
You see, I will be talking from a West German
wide middle upper class perspective,
not of my choice, but of discursive attribution.
I like to see from any other point of view,
but I come from these privileged worlds
and thus unlearn every day to look
and loosen up conceptions I grew up with.
Thus, addicts met us to me on many levels
and rethinking the world from this ruined and ruinous place
employed by the university of Jena
that granted Karl Marx his PhD
and allowed Hegel to write his phenomenology of perception,
just pushes me to understand local specificities
and global peculiarities
in ever more solidarity-needing world
that craves for togetherness
and a sense of Guyon community,
but fragments in small communities of indigenities
that lose the big picture on the one hand,
and in the meantime on the other,
Elon Musk and Jeff Bezos battle
for the shuttle service to the moon.
Whatever we learned, no matter what we see,
intraactions, and I'm deploying here the term of Karen Barat
that she developed
out of the Copenhagen interpretation of Nils Bohr,
intraactions of realities,
that means phenomena are emerging out of the interaction
within the moment and aren't pre-disposed.
Interactions of realities
build the fundament of our disciplinary insights.
Experiences are not human-made alone.
And chance, as we all patients,
as well as patients, are our most important assets
for doing a good analysis of our own empirical insight.
That's right.
Yeah?
They're not based on the truth.
Excuse me.
Should I continue?
Just for the...
Are you still there?
Yes, yes.
Okay.
So...
All right.
So, I rather prefer not to talk about humans anymore,
and we as an anthropology,
and that's also very interesting, our stop and reflect
of how to call actually our new alliances within the world.
And that makes it even more interesting
because physics is dealing by definition with what is not living,
while biology and so on is dealing with what is alive.
And we are shattering these kind of conceptions
out of different reasons.
On the one hand, because there are many cosmologies
like Southern American cosmologies
or Antarctic cosmologies and people who live
in these regions who would never distinct
between living and un-living.
And on the other hand, because...
And on the other hand, because...
And made the others after the Gaia development
of James Lovelock and so on,
come to another perception of understanding the Earth
and humans within the Earth when they took the perspective
out of the extraterrestrial perspective on Earth
that emerged with the Kodak picture of 1972
of the Apollo Kodak picture of Earth.
So, I like the word Terence, which is a new term,
a post-humanist term,
deployed by Deborah Danowski, Bruno Latour
and Eduardo Vivero Stikasto
for those aware and grounded beings
and things opposing modern just humans
and their objectifications.
And that allows me to understand anthropology in a new way.
I study Anthropos and its ethnoi,
so their people and communities on all scales,
but I stopped to think this kind of kinship
that we traditionally had just amongst humans.
There are new modes of kin, kin with Earth,
kin with trees, other forms of relations,
and that makes it all interesting.
And from an alien point of view,
we are all Earthlings or Terence.
And it seems to me that this message
is the most important one one can share out of my field
of studying the so-called reasonable physicists
because physicists actually have quite a similar perception
on these things.
And they are, on the other hand,
gatekeepers of modern humanism,
inventors of the worldwide web protocol
and main forces in the development of computer simulations.
To dare to think from a futurist's perspective,
to turn science fiction into contemporary every day
was for me one of the most fascinating aspects
I observed at CERN.
CERN is a collaborative digital enterprise.
Each individual is connected to various media
and is transforming into something else,
not only into a digital divideral,
that's a concept that emerged by Marilyn's CERN
to understand Papua New Guinea societies,
which do not have people there,
do not have an individualist concept
as we do have here in Europe.
But actually it seems to me into something
what I want to call with the help of quantum mechanical
natural philosophy, intra-vigral.
So I'm connecting the intra and the inner of the individual
on the one hand with the collectivity.
And it turns that in these kind of scientific collaborations
that are based on digital tools,
the solitary of the single researcher
becomes a solitary being
with all its productive and destructive forces and dynamics.
And what is really fascinating is that physicists
are all the time not only trying to deal
and resonate with science fiction as a fixtures metaphor,
but really try to think the future
and have to think the future
because their experiments are happening in the future.
I will come to this in the following.
In order to make this point,
I get down to Earth with you
into the everyday of fictions of science
or how bugs, Martin and screw and others
are intervening everyday physics
and how the biggest resistance is coming from materiality
and also interestingly enough,
a certain type of masculinity
and discursive practice and rights.
Physics can still teach us something about the future,
especially how to deal with that, what we do not know,
and yet how to deal with expectations and power relations.
But first, I want to tell you how I ended up at CERN
and what brought me into the situation
where I'm in right now.
In my first field, I was doing research in Vienna.
I was discussing with local artists and writers in Austria
about the relation of words and worlds
and what to make of it
when it comes to cultural identity politics.
From a German speaking case, that's very fascinating
because some of you might know that Hitler was Austrian,
but he became the leader of the German Empire.
And after the Second World War,
the Austrians had to become actually an own nation state
and they are a good example of successful nation building.
So the successful creation of a collective identity
and writers played in a very important role
when it came up to deal with the atrocities committed
in the name of the German people
that Austrians tried to push away from themselves
but had to made aware, of course,
because anti-Semitism and everything that went along
with the atrocities committed
and the crimes committed in the name of the German people
were also committed in and by Austrians and from Austrians, too.
And that fascinated me a lot.
And I came into this field and did this research
and one wonders how do I end up at CERN
and there are many, many different reasons why.
But one of them was actually an epistemic problem.
And the epistemic problem was the question
how to deal and understand what I said in the beginning,
how to understand in real time in the now something
that is happening while I'm part of what is part of the system.
And it was the hottest summer in Vienna,
a steel melting heat near the New River.
And one afternoon, the sky was filled with baroque clouds
and rain was about to come.
And the wind blew through the streets.
I watched it from my window and it all sounds very poetic.
But also I started to think.
A tree just beneath the house waved its crown
and I started to watch the leaves.
And from the whole of the leaves,
I tried to follow the movement of each one of the leaves,
tried to perceive all different movements of each leaf
of this one tree waving in the wind back and forth
at the same time.
I don't know whether the thought that we as humans
are like these leaves on the Gaia tree
or whether the thousand movements of the tree
in the wind came first.
But I understood in that moment why any observer,
even the most unentangled sitting on a window
and staring into the streets or onto this tree,
is not able to capture historical time
and its complexity.
For this tree is moved by the wind,
but the thermodynamics are transforming each micro area
into another zone and each leaf is a leaf on its own
and left alone while at the same time connected to the tree.
You see where I'm going
and maybe understand this allegory.
Why I thought that I had to head into the world of physics
to give the spatial concept of ethnographic fields
and observer another temporal dimension.
Since then, I wonder why Bronislav Malinovsky,
one of the founding figures of anthropology
who studied physics first in Kraków,
did not follow quantum mechanics
and did not include into his concepts of ethnography
at that time the experimental insights
that actually shattered the world of the 1920s
and 1930s in physics.
It was the tree in front
of my first Viennese field department,
Albert Gassevillon 20, Sieb der Bezirk,
that led me to a fatal book choice
in my favorite book shop of that time, Buchhandlung Posch.
I was sitting on a wooden chair
where many famous Austrian writers said before
as the owner of the shop reminded me
as part of his peculiar Viennese sales psychology,
which always mixes a sense of clients' unwelcoming,
owners' entitlement and traditionality
disguised in ancienité
to give things a value beyond its market price.
I saw Lisa Randall's book, Theoretical Physicist,
Warp Passages, unraveling the mysteries
of the university's hidden dimensions.
And back then I didn't know that I one day
would become friends with Lisa Randall and climb with her,
but I was really surprised
because the way nature was made
in her pop scientific account
and how culture and cultural ideas were deployed
in a, to me, very uncareful way really just puzzled me.
And from that moment I knew I had to get
to know physicists better because they shape the world
and they have a very strong cosmology
and they use cultural ideas in a way
that really are surprising for me as a cultural scientist.
And it was clear to me where I had to go after
and to learn more about the culture
after I was studying poets.
It was the wind and the tree
that led me into the world of physics.
And then I went to CERN.
At CERN though, I encountered different ways
of dealing with space and time.
And actually what time as such could be
and was did not bother anybody near Lake Geneva.
As Isabelle Stengers put it, I quote her,
clearly a certain type of prophetic physics exists today,
but if we must speak of physics,
wouldn't it be preferable to approach it
from the viewpoint of the new undertaking
known as big science?
International financing,
the construction of large scale instruments,
management of an experiment
over a period of several years,
the organization of large numbers of colleagues,
the division of labor,
these are the kind of practical questions
that preoccupied cutting edge physicists today
far more than the ideal questions of physicists vocation.
And so today, I want to share with you
what we can learn from contemporary physics
when it comes to deal with the futures
in our anthropology as well.
And this encompasses foremost a way
of dealing with uncertainties of all kinds,
focusing on hardware, software
and dealing with a certain type of practiced masculinity.
It means of transformation of individualist perspective
into an intra-visualist vision.
I owe these insights to my field
and especially to the women in physics.
Some of them became friends of mine,
male and female, and I'm very glad about that.
Before I entered, people were warning me
that I quote should not ask the gender question,
end of quotation, that it is the quote death question
end of quotation.
And I never had to ask it.
It was always answered without asking me for it.
Since it's such an important and dominant topic,
people just started to talk about themselves
without that I even put it up.
But before I'm diving into the gender question,
I want to show you some of those levels of uncertainty
that exists at CERN
and why actually thinking the future
and rules are so important at this research site.
The pictures that you see are either taken by myself
or you find them on the website of the CERN collaboration.
Multiple agents weave the fabric of uncertainty
in a data-driven workspace,
at the same time orchestrating the ubiquitous phantasma
of certainty in an ever more unstable
economical, political, global reality.
In this talk, I will look at the current condition
going beyond the entanglement of hardware,
software, algorithm and infrastructure
as it has been done already.
What interests me is how humans interact with one another
when interacting with machines
in liberal structures of patriarchy,
so fundamental in the shaping of the data-driven world.
I put a particular emphasis on the rhythms of doing things
by investigating the importance of cuts and ruptures,
disturbing and destabilizing seemingly stable infrastructures.
Because when actually the infrastructure falls apart,
some hidden structures become visible
and that is something that fascinates me
when I talked about the subversion, for example, initially.
I will briefly mention uncertainties of hardware
and materialities as well as software
to come to the main point of this talk
dealing with reasonable humans and power.
One of the most political ones in times
of so-called gender wars
and heated discussions about identity politics
versus cultural dominations,
where the realms of universality and exclusivity
are renegotiated.
I will end my talk with the introduction of another neologism,
the individual that I already introduced to you
and reflect upon anthropologists
as trailblazing pathfinders of futures beyond the standard now,
because that is what actually makes us so special
amongst the humanities and social sciences.
We're really able to take a little piece of the future
and just talk about it and drag it into what's actually going on
because we are listening carefully to the people.
I'm interested today, especially in the questions of human relations
to one another within such apparatuses
regarding gender and race politics as dominant aspect
of what is about to come.
How does the servant manipulate the master to frame it he-like?
In turning from an individual to something I call intravigil,
a concerned being that foresees the future
and plots in companionship with an agent multiplicity.
This is where subaltern studies
in complex flat hierarchies lead,
for certain prides itself to have flat hierarchies,
but in fact, no hierarchy is flat when white males
and their tools are on the run to assert risk management.
And why does this matter again?
Why do I put up this whole question?
Because high energy physics relies on big data interpreted
and calculated using methods like those implemented
in assessing stock market value.
The constant flow of knowledge and human resources
from the scientific institution to the financial sector
is one of the arguments legitimizing the existence of CERN.
And the big bank companies of Geneva, of course,
are profiting from the flow of PhD grad students
that are flowing from CERN directly into the banking system
or to Google and so on and so on.
The human factor is the most crucial element
to understand uncertainty in a data-driven world.
The future of our economic system
is bound to research and sciences of many sorts.
It does not only matter with whom we are thinking thoughts,
but how we learn to responsibly use media and tools.
When it comes to what will happen,
uncertainty is the eternal constant of humanity's concern.
Uncertainty is encountered on all levels of experimental research,
from planning over construction and coding to measuring nature.
A few questions remain.
What and how do people learn to interact socially
when dealing with data and computing environments?
And what kind of uncertainties are they exposed to
in data-driven spaces?
The hardware is always uncertain.
Those who follow the developments of grand scientific experiments
might remember that the start of the Large Hadron Collider in 2008,
the world's biggest physics experiment
had been delayed by one year because of a loose screw.
And here you see the picture of the explosion
that was just happening
because one screw wasn't tightened well enough.
A tiny physical object caused a gargantuan obstacle to the machine,
whose maintenance costs exceed one billion euros per year,
and each citizen of the European Union, by the way,
pays five euros per year to CERN when you take your tax money.
Meanwhile, all the algorithms, when this happens, did still.
And a tiny, seemingly unimportant object shattered magnets
and within the dreams of the first data harvest of the Higgs boson.
For those of you who are not champs in Big Bang Theory at school,
the Higgs boson is a particle within the standard model
which gives mass to other particles
and helps to explain why our universe is not just made out of light and energy.
The Higgs, of course, is much smaller than the screw,
and unlike the screw, it is invisible to the human eye.
Paradoxically, the screw was neither seen nor foreseen
and that it would break,
delaying the experiment by one year,
while the Higgs, on the other hand, was foreseen,
simulated and calculated long before the digital experimental system.
Actually, the whole Large Hadron Collider is a big bet
that was made up in the 1960s when Peter Higgs came up with this theory.
With the help of pseudo-random Monte Carlo simulations
and incorporating and unthinking and ontologically consolidating random
to put it bluntly, physics is actually creating
futurist imaginaries through its theories
and physicists are serving as modern future tellers, fortune tellers.
Like historians, physicists interpret temporal traces,
but this is called a histogram, as most of you know.
So, histogram, it is a grammatics of the history of the Higgs particle
that you can see here and the events actually that were piling up
to show the existence of the Higgs particle.
That's something that physicists work with, not with the beautiful images
we know from the Higgs boson, maybe.
So, like historians, physicists interpret temporal traces,
but unlike historians, they simulate the events beforehand
and check afterwards what might have happened,
to say it with Leopold Ranke.
High energy physics is a security-driven world investigating nature,
which on the one hand is determined by laws
and on the other characterized by random behaviors, the uncertainty.
The drive to make data on measurements as certain as possible
exerts an influence on how information is perceived.
This road to scientific certainty, however,
is paved with present uncertainties of all kinds.
I have written about incidents like the one of the screw elsewhere
and if you're interested, I'm happy to send you a copy of this article,
which deals not only with the screw screwed, the start of the Higgs,
but also how a martin, a bird, bugs,
and finally the physical resistance of materiality itself
are constant factors to deal with
when planning and dealing with an experiment that will run for decades.
I came to the conclusion that physicists are unconsciously acting out
like the most prolific historiographic theorists of,
like, for example, Reinhard Kozellik,
envisioning human beings in historicity on the one hand,
hermeneutically tracing patterns of the past by simulating it beforehand,
and on the other by constantly pushing the space of experience
into horizons of expectation.
Physicists love to think of the future.
I sometimes wonder whether ever and if,
but in addition of anthropology today in 2123,
of, for example, anthropology would look like,
but physics today exists and that is really fascinating.
Physicists are giving up or writing journals
and wonder how physics in 100 years' look would look like.
Anthropologists, I couldn't imagine any of our discipline
being that bold to actually envision anthropology in 100 years.
The second degree of uncertainty after the materiality
that I just presented to you with a screw may be found in software.
Not only lose screws pose danger to the stability
of experimental infrastructure, but also bugs,
those of the digital kind needless to say.
The software used at CERN needs to be programmed,
but more importantly, constantly maintained.
This daily care defines the work rhythms of high-energy physicists
to spend most of their time hunting down bugs
and keeping digital storage in order.
Individual human visions need to be aligned to reach a common goal.
The gathered data on particles stored on farms all over the world
is analyzed by collaborations with the help of a network called GRID,
which spans the globe.
It guarantees that heaps of data can be processed.
Since machine learning algorithms help to analyze
the pattern recognition of physical events,
feeding the nodes with the right input is crucial to the frame
to the most surveilled uncertainty
within current informatics apparatuses.
The X4 factor brought out into the game
through artificial intelligences of utmost importance
and interest is something I think some of you are dealing with
in person also in your work.
Each human task is registered by the so-called ticket on GitHub,
a software development and management platform.
The memory of the task will be gone as soon as the ticket on GitHub
is solved and resolved.
If the code is working, computers do not need to keep the memory
of human actions, do not need to have a trace of historicity
how a failure came into being and was resolved.
In that sense, bugs produce a certain form of casualty,
which happens from case to case, casualité, not causality,
from case to case, from one solve ticket to the other.
Once the chain of problem is solved,
however, there are no casual traces left
and so the origins of the bug are forgotten.
To keep the otherwise lost socio-technical memory,
physicists keep personal lab books,
make nodes not unlike anthropologists keep field diaries.
Scheming capital M guy.
While some people are great in solving bug problems,
others seem to be much better in coding bugs into the system,
often without being held accountable for their mistakes
or causing a pile of additional work
by misinterpreting the work schedule.
The first ones are usually devoted graduate students
who solve the problems and the latter ones,
often long time ago grads, older, politically experienced,
predominantly white male members of the collaboration.
Even in the cosmopolitan experimental group
such as the Large Hadron Collider of CERN,
where hierarchies are allegedly flat,
age, gender, experience and national allegiance matter
and people reflect upon this all the time, as I will show now.
In hierarchical environments of highly specialized
and distributed work spheres,
where complex problems need to be solved
in short bursts of time and goals reached,
human often need to plot, not only scientific diagrams,
but also intrigues of all kinds, politics,
as you all know who work at the university, matter most.
This often happens because leading positions are occupied
by older physicists, elderlies, who are politically experienced,
but not anymore up to date with the most recent applied work,
like programming itself.
Anat Singh anthropologist refers to the representatives
of these groups as the so-called capital man guy,
capital M, big M guy.
At CERN, the capital M guys are predominantly,
I quote another Harvard professor of particle physics,
a female, reasonable European man,
adding that she could not breathe at CERN
because of their omnipresence.
The data-driven world is full of capital M guys.
To deal with the amount of uncertainty,
they create an armament of strategic tools
that need to be brought in to manipulate
those experienced power-driven manipulators.
It would have even impressed military strategists
such as Sun Tzu or Karl von Klausowitz.
The trick is to play the game with closed cards,
but along the rules at the same time,
weaving alliances behind their back
and winning the right authorities figures over.
So I'm going to show you now how actually
what kind of subversive strategies people,
PhD students, grad students, deploy
to come and reach their goals,
although they are not in the power positions.
The PhD students at CERN learn to play those double games
along with the mastery of code at the same time.
The social skills then they are wandering into,
and these social skills,
and that's fascinating,
are wandering into the financially
and into the financial and into the technical sectors.
So they take what they learn at CERN
and bring this kind of work culture
into the other work cultures,
which are not anymore in science and at the university.
I assume each workspace
generates its own terroir of scheming,
but CERN can be, I quote,
a true vipers nest,
as physicists with years of experience
once said to me,
or a cog association,
as a female grad student said to another
when listening to her latest sister's
truce meeting experience.
I quote,
Interestingly, when I'm talking to male grad students,
they all seem not to experience such incidents,
but all females have had the same experience.
How can you measure something
that can't be nailed through worlds?
Asks Mia Ferrari,
one of my closest interlocutors
who turned into a friend of mine later.
In supremacist environments,
cunningness is the most important virtue.
Documenting is documenting is key,
and social engineering is an everyday common
that starts even before the moments when the gates
to the research sites are crossed.
The case of Claire.
I had the chance to record a small episode
demonstrating this daily phenomenon
with the help of Claire Covet,
a grad student from North America.
I promised her to be as vague as possible
about the technicalities of her workgroup
since the specific community is small,
and Covet was, I quote,
on the market this fall and graduating next year
when I conducted the interview.
Claire is working on the upgrade
of one of the LHC detectors when I met her
and had to guarantee its efficiency
for the third season in the game of bosons,
as some Cerenes love to call it,
when energy and luminosity is about to be increased
during the next run of the LHC,
which started last year in 2022.
In her work, Claire discovered
that some calculations had not been made correctly
under the guidance of the team leader of her group.
He is known for losing his temper
and not able to admit a mistake.
As a result, she needs to prove
the correctness of her calculations
and falsify the statements of her peer.
But she's not the one that makes the meeting schedules.
Her main goal was therefore to make space
for her cause during the precious online meetings
because she wanted that the system is running,
that the experimental system will work at the end.
To discuss her case,
I met Covet in the upper section
of her community building at CERN,
in an area that is quite enough
for recording and interview
and remote enough for not being overheard by anyone.
She chose the spot,
and whenever someone who looked familiar to her
seemed to come closer, she would tone down.
I quote.
Usually, oh, that's the wrong.
Usually you can do it privately.
Usually you do not need to do this.
This particular guy is known for being difficult.
Even now, his strategy in the meeting
was to essentially force the issue offline,
which we knew would happen.
I already talked to the coordinators
to get the relevant data to the team in the US
so that they could do the calculations
and send them back as quickly as possible
to this other guy.
Solving problems informally and offline
means that there are no official records
of how and if things are done.
The off record space is a dangerous
and difficult territory for those
who are not having a say.
Without heavy weights in the collaboration,
nothing can be moved.
But it's certainly not less dangerous
as any other on the record turf.
Claire argues that her boss is someone
who needs to be addressed indirectly
in a way that she describes as, I quote,
backstage work.
I knew I had to call out this guy and his team.
I had opinions on him from the various people
I know from heart rate so they could say
what kind of play we had to make.
I made sure when to send the slides out
and I did not invite him to the meeting
but the authorities figures did.
The activity coordinators made sure
that he would come to the meeting.
Claire describes precisely how she had
to weave alliances, winning authority figures.
The whole plotting took time in consideration
that she might have used more effectively
for technical problems.
I quote, I spread it about a period
over two weeks and it took me
maybe five hours of work
but it is built on something.
We have been talking about the coordinate system
problem actually a year.
I went back into the stack of my notebooks.
I flipped back to find the relative facts
and I started tracking this problem
explicitly in detail on February 14th,
2017, presented it
on February 14th, 2018.
So one year today I made
my first measurements of the problem
in December 2016 and we had
been talking about it since February 2017.
So that's the period of time
it actually takes
to win over
when you're coming from the other side.
In a language that
oscillates between theater,
American football
and computer game vernacular,
Claire describes her social engineering
in order to solve a technical problem.
She ends the episode by emphasizing
that the whole issue has been caused
because everyone has so many things to do
explaining not without pride
how she attracted long-term attention
becoming a respectable member of
the team despite being a woman.
It is less an issue of breakdown
and communication and more an issue
of priority. People
have so many things to do all the time
that unless you put something on top of their priority list
things will not work. I caused a scene.
Now it's in the meeting notes.
It has memories.
They will not forget a young female graduate
student calling out a senior member
of the community. That's ballsy.
So in doing that I reminded
people what happened and I gave
the touchdowns.
It got to people's memories
and next time we will have the meeting.
They will ask what has been done
with this.
That's her workplace.
The place of Claire Kovetz
chose for telling me the story.
The constant control that exercised
to check whether we were potentially spotted
in the moment. Later on her cleaner
to be too precise about her work
environment shows in the first place
the uncertainty young graduate students are living in
when working for a wide reasonable European
man and the pressure of high-end
institutions such as CERN.
It exemplifies the unpredictably
and vanity of leading authority
figures and how the second and also
the thirst and the drive
for power and also
how the second and third
row of workers stabilize the system
preventing ruptures and
failures caused by the self
and tight uncertainty of the capital M guy.
Uncertainty
is augmented by potential infrastructural
ruptures caused by human failed
attempt to overcome technical, physical
or social obstacles.
Synchronization, prioritization
and the right rhythm
to cut and resume communication
in order to install a memory
of an action seem to be
essential in securing position and
balancing the common goal of the collaboration
and that has nothing
interestingly enough to do with the kind of
rhythms and memories of the computer.
Preventing ruptures
means circumventing and uncertainties
means to exchange individuality
against what I call intraviguality.
CERN's case
in the end was solved successfully.
In her little area
of caring concern everything was fine
and on time once the LHC
started in the season
last year in 2022.
Since we had our conversation
that I shared with you today
Claire got a prestigious postdoc position
at an American elite university
and is now an assistant professor
at a renowned university in Europe.
Her ability to become an intravigual
her cunningness and consistency
her notes, calculations and devotion
and a big portion of chance
secured her a place in the future of high
energy physics.
Awards in anthropology in the future.
Screws as hardware and bugs
as software may be considered agents
of ruptures, schemers of cuts.
They may be seen as vital forces
shaping human dynamics in a data
driven work environment.
Scheming intrigues, plots and weaving
the future in the now by dealing
cunningly with collective group memory
and gaining attention for future
actions turns into a political tool.
Differentiating between cuts
and ruptures helps to distinguish
between different modes of action
and physically different actors as
I learned from and with my colleague
Lucas Meyerhofer physicist himself.
It visualizes that hardware, software
and humans are in seemingly seamless
spaces always on the verge of disruption.
It shows how people care
within and about data driven worlds
and above all it exemplifies
that actions are happening in the
fields of social forces
and how the discurface structures
influence actions especially actions
in the digital era.
It shows how we evolved from individuals
to individuals to
intraviduals when living in our complex
digital worlds.
Anthropology as I understand
our crafty discipline is bound
to empirical insights
but as well to theoretical concepts
no matter how much we put empirical
fields in our inventory powers at the
center and it matters what thoughts
I am thinking and with whom I am
thinking my thoughts with as Donna
Haraway reminds us.
No matter how much we understand
the discursive structures of truthful
dispositions, no matter how much we
are tricked by unconscious drives
language is the trickster
and sound can play with meaning.
Alterity is key
the rhythm changes everything
communication is misunderstanding
and eps cons from economies
of growth. Alterity
is key.
Thinking about a future that does
not forget where we are coming from
but understands the horizons
of our Indo-European spatiotemporal
housings and movements.
So where we and how we talk
and how we frame things
allows us to recalibrate our own
being on the planet and asks
how we transform from humans into
something we could consider as Terrence.
Since I am convinced that
at the core of our problems within
the Anthropocene lies our ways
of how we perceive space, time and
materiality and that is very closely
tied to our Indo-European language
system. There are other ways
to be in the future and we
as anthropologists are looking for
traces that lead us there.
I want to visualize this
by sharing with you some diagrams
I made. One inspired through
re-reading Nikolai Sorin-Tchaikov's
Two Lenins, a brief anthropology of time
and the other contemporary
works in anthropology that
I try to engage with
two
philosophers that I really admire
very much, Maurice Meloponte
and Jacques Derrida.
So in this you can actually
see it's like a babushka model
an onion model of how
we are engaging
with temporalities and there are different
ideas of temporality. There's the geopolitical
temporality or time that you see
on the outside in the black
frame and then there's the violet frame
you could say it's a media technological
dispositive or apparatus
that is also creating a certain
temporality and rhythm.
These rhythms are going along with each other
they create already a certain resonance
a certain form of harmony. Then you have
a certain temporality, the thought
styles and the epistemic ways
of being together so different thought
collectives to put it with Ludwig Fleck
who have again their own temporality
and then you have the yellow
frame which is the experimental time
so time of the experiment of the Large Hadron Collider
where a certain amount of data is taking
within the time and the fourth
is actually the knowledge that is
coming out of this so the gift
of nature that is appearing
within the collision of the experiment
itself. So all these different
layers of temporality are intersecting
and in between you have the materiality
that maybe cuts and you have the
politics that happening and that's the rhythm
and that's the bead itself
that actually is so interesting to
understand and to describe in anthropology
itself.
And on the other hand
you can see here that's a very classical
imaginary actually
how Maurice Maloponte tried to
show how the past is an
overlay, it's overlaid
by different present times.
So you have here
the black
and red line which is
the timeline, the physical timeline
and that we have in the Newtonian
world and the blue
lines are actually the cuts
of the now when you go back
and the black lines that go
diagonal
through the blue lines are showing that
actually each spot when you would
go into the past are an overlay
of endlessly amounts of
past time points of the now
so that shows what I said initially
how complex the capturing
of the past actually is for historiography.
And on the other hand
when you do physics and we do this
hermeneutical cuts as anthropologists
and the historians when we are
looking into the past.
But on the other hand, physicists are trying
to push this kind of
experience, space of experience
when they simulate experiments
beforehand
and push the experiential space
of the experiment into the future
and have these two
horizons. On the one hand
the horizon of theory and on the other hand
the horizon of the experiment itself.
And to see this kind of
congruence with between thinking how
physicists and computer science
actually makes us and allows us to rethink
the horizons of future is
something that I find very fruitful for my own
discipline and where I learned a lot of
physics and computer science and such.
I did this to remind at the end
of this talk diagrammatically that it does not
only matter with whom we are thinking
thoughts with but also what kind of
geometries, architectures, diagrams
and compositions we build when we approach
any phenomenon including the
futures and futurities.
And also in order to question whether some of
the new materialist
conceptions about future are actually
that new.
Karen Barad's quantum mechanically inspired
concept of interaction harmonizes
with historiographical theories
very well who by definition
aim to reconsider space, time, materiality
humans and non-humans alike
and how things come into being.
When it comes to study futures
we need to work with what we have now
and what we find here.
We are not living in eternal time-free
space a place the Greeks called
Koura filled with eternal
Aion, the Ian, the eternal.
We are mortals in this whole game
depending on chance, kairos,
luck. No matter how much we travel
beyond space and time.
At CERN I observed solitary beings of all
kind interacting and becoming
solitary beings which brings me
back to the tree I observed 12 years ago
in Vienna. The observer
me in the window acknowledged exclusive
moments of each leaf but
the summer wind just as historical time
touched all of us.
As part of one tree these leaves
are part of one universal.
I as observer was audience.
We together were a many world
already. I listened
to the sound of leaves
they brought me to CERN
and this place to understand what our task
in virtue as anthropologists is
when we are doing fieldwork.
That we are sniffling futures.
Our binding leaves through words and finding
traces with forests by summoning
space and time without
imperial aims by piecing fragments
together a part into a unitary
multiplicity.
The modernity, the individual, the
digitality and the future
is about individual individuality.
Is the old blind
in the anthropocene?
Today, anthropology
no matter what field it engage in
is an historically aware discipline.
That's why it's about
when you think of current debates on
restitution of artifacts
stolen within colonial context maybe this
happens also in Brussels. It matters
how you gather your knowledge
and I do not steal from people at CERN.
They do exactly know what I'm doing there
and they're sharing with me because
they know I care for them and they care for me.
And it's important
to know who has a say or the right
for a history of her own.
For what has happened to the pyramids what will
be. In times of
reconsidering apocal cuts in historical
rhythmizations due to the anthropocene
anthropologists have to roam all fields
as trailblazing tracers.
I presented you scenes of vulnerability
all of them physical, one
material, the screw, the other virtual
the bugs and the third a discursive one
which I framed in the term of
masculinity and subversive actions.
I tell you ethnographic fictions
of science based on empirical
encounters to set your minds in places
to open horizons of experience
to take you along my
storytelling and leave you
to your own horizons of experience
to engage in empathy and taking
the others point of view. For that matters
matters more than any
property or appropriation
in fights, any kind
of neoliberal
dispositive of existence we are actually
all the time treadmilling in.
We anthropologists are collaborators
in exchanges, translators
and voice gippers. We acknowledge
respect and the value of the other
as discipline a priori.
We learned it the hard way
for empathy is the evergreen
of world of many worlds.
Think like a stone long with
Beth Provenelli or like a
margulis.
Think like a mushroom along with
anatzin or like vertebrae
in companionship with Donna Haraway.
See the world from a quantum perspective
together with Karen Barat
but let those things in their
thinness, those beings in their
beingness be themselves and
relate as Helen Verand does.
Take the aliens point of view
and acknowledge the own alien within
yourself. Be an interdependent
member of Arturo Escobar's
pluriverse and acknowledge your
individuality along with the
physicists of my field.
I finished this talk with the
question I would love to discuss with you
and hints of positivist
teleology put aside and
that I learned today to ask in
and through physics. What could
an interdisciplinary
collaboration look like in 21-23
and how would you
folks think an interdisciplinary
collaboration across cultures
of knowledge would be useful
and fruitful.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Ann.
Is it okay that we close this
screen sure that we see each other?
Everybody sees everybody?
Will it make sense? Okay,
that's nice. Just let me
open this on the...
How do I do that?
Thank you
for your patience.
It was 10 minutes overdue
but I hope you didn't lose the
attention.
We are all here. So who would like
to start commenting question?
Francis. And let's use
the mic in the row.
Well, I would like to
make a very provocative statement
but before I do so
I will introduce myself in order to make it
a little bit less provocative.
I'm the director here
of the Centre-Layer Postal.
I very much agree
with people like Karen Barat
about intra-action.
I've been studying quantum mechanics.
I've been developing an ontology
that I call relational agency
that can be used for post-humanism.
So I all agree
about different agency,
about diversity, about
the fact that an institute
like a CERN should be
as diverse as possible.
But now comes my provocative statement
that is that your analysis to me
sounds quite racist
and sexist
because you are analysing
an ordinary event
a younger junior person
who points out a mistake in some
senior person and the senior person
not immediately picking it up or not
being very happy to hear about that
to me that seems like
general anthropology
that would happen in any context
white or black, masculine
or feminine
science or non-science
if some younger member
of a tribe would question
an indigenous elder
that would also not be taken as seriously
what happened to Clare Covert
as far as I understood was nothing bad
she just was not immediately
listened to. I think
these kind of events happen all the time
in all circumstances
that this is a masculine
white European environment
is actually making
a racist and sexist assumption
namely that in non-white
non-European, non-masculine
environments this would not happen
imagine that you would have said
this is an environment
with mostly Jews
and this thing happened there
people would immediately tell you
that you are an anti-Semite
but if you say they are white European males
somehow it is considered to be
non-racist, non-sexist
well I think it is
yeah thank you very much
I think there must be a basic misunderstanding
because I have been quoting people
I have been quoting and framing
what people were saying
so it's not me who says that
but it's actually the statement of the people themselves
they were calling it
in these terms
I have been just quoting
and if you consider rightfully
this as racist and sexist
then you have to call out
these women who
perceive it that way
so it's not me, I am just here the modest witness
of their quotations
and what was of concern to them
you could
definitely push this back
and I perceive this also
as a pushback
but
I just can tell you
this is just one little piece
of data of many many many
and
if people from the US
would perceive a certain style
of reasoning in Europe predominant
and voice this in
records it's not me who came up with this
it's not me who
is bringing this into
so yes it is racist
yes it is sexist but that's
the data of the people
and not my own quotation
and if people are perceiving
what you were saying this is something
if you downplaying actually you are downplaying
Claire
because for Claire this was very traumatic
and she is a PhD student
and that really concerned her
and I have been spending time with her
sitting at the restaurant and many people have spent time
with her and she couldn't sleep
and she had heart race beating
very strongly
to meet this person
that she was frightened on because he would really scream
within the team meetings
and so
actually I just perceive
I don't think that you just simply got
the initial
thing I'm on your side
but actually that's the data
if you say this is not this is something very
common she has been hurt she had to plot
and if you're
then I have to say to you provocatively
that you actually take the master's perspective
of the head of an institution
who is not seeing how those
people who are servants behind your back
are actually playing you all the time
that would be my
provocative reply to you because
really that's not my data that's not my words
that's not my framing that's the framing of the people
I have been working with and that's not
a tribe
that is calling out in elderly
but these are physicists and that's
a quite a reductionist
comparison
and also playing down the complexities
of what we call and do not anymore
actually called tribal societies
sorry
well I
I believe that what you described
that I very much understand that
somebody would be traumatized I have
had similar experiences
both in the case of myself
not being listened to
by an elderly when I was younger
and vice versa
I think these things happen all the time
and they are traumatic but they are part
of human nature
implying that it's only
white males who do it I think is
very unrealistic
the white males it will be
we are on the same side
my dear I also do not think
that it's just like a male white thing
that's how these people perceive it
and that's interesting as a symptom
doesn't mean that it's the reality
that's how these people perceive it
and actually the question is
why do they perceive it that way
why do young women in physics
perceive it this way
why would they actually
be sexist and call it out
and we have
also at CERN there's something we call
the queen bee phenomenon
you maybe know it from physics or from any other field
so it's saying that there are few
women who have come up in leading positions
and they are queen bees
that means they can work very well together with
men but not so well with women
and they are killing other bee queens
and at CERN you could study
for example also very well the queen bee phenomenon
and
as I just said that's the death question
and I just provocatively
provocatively put it into you
but
as the so-called
diversity and
gender equality representative
of the philosophical faculty of my university
I can tell you women
and men play the same games and it doesn't matter
what kind of religion, race, class
ethnicity they have as a background
doesn't matter
but still that's the sources and CERN
has to deal with this
and also what I find
interesting and you know that's not what I want to talk about
what I find interesting is the more interesting part
is to put this
aside and get away
from this kind of how they perceive it
be it the capital M guy
and blaming men and blaming whiteness
whatever I don't care I just
don't think that's useful for us
what I found fascinating is how she actually
tries to solve a problem
and steps back from
her individual perspective
acknowledges there's a certain leading figure
who cannot step away
from his individual's narcissist needs
and becomes an
individual playing along
with other people together
to come to a common goal and to reach it
as you did when you were actually young
and that's something where I think
what you initially called the relational agency
and the post humanist
diversity that you're engaging with
is something that you actually embodied
as a sensitive young
man who did research and experienced
the same traumatic downplaying
as Claire in her case
gendered in your case not gendered
well in my case
actually I have been downplayed
by women professors when I was young
but so I don't mind
it doesn't matter the gender
is not relevant everybody plays these
political games as soon as they get in
a position of power
I really don't think that
whiteness, Europeaness
or gender plays a role
all situations where there is
an ability to move up in
a power hierarchy they play political games
which means that the ones at the higher level
of the hierarchy don't like to be
criticised by the ones lower on
it's universal I don't think it needs
to be gendered or Europeanized
or muscularized or whatever
you have to say this
to the people I did research with
and not to me I mean like that's not my point
it's not I
I don't think that it has to be gendered
I just said to you I think
it doesn't matter who does this people love
power plays no matter
but then that's the
data I just gathered
it's the data it's not me
I'm just
the modest witness here and that's the part
of the field that I didn't construct but I try
to show you as an anthropologist is actually
how
individuality comes into being
how although hierarchy is
preventing a certain functioning
individual interacting
and engagement in your times
a relational agency
is allowing that things at the end work out
so
so we have 40s and then
Schema 40s
I cannot
40s you are muted
not connected to Mike
so
okay so maybe we move to Schema
and meanwhile you will figure it out okay
for this
can you hear me
yes yes
thank you very much for your
interesting presentation
I wonder if you
can elaborate a little bit on
some sort of like incentive models
that you think can be put into place
for promoting
this kind of like
intra individualization
especially in interdisciplinary research
because most of the problems we are facing right now
you rightly also mentioned
in your presentation
are so complex that I think
we need to move toward this kind of
perspective
though I also want to say like
some part of like this
profile of mail
I think it's kind of present
in some disciplines
especially like STEM sciences I'm coming from
that background
I can see why these women probably
would witness this kind of like incidents
do I want to move
toward this kind of incentive models
like what kind of environment
what kind of like
team or
arrangements
should be put into place from your research
that can kind of promote
this kind of
approach and at the same time
if this is
like power dynamic
dynamics emerge from
somebody having more experiences
or having a different socio
technological
social background
what kind of like mechanisms
needs to be in place to prevent
the
power dynamics taking over
positive
collaborations thank you very much
thank you Shima
for these very fundamental questions
and I have been dealing with these questions myself
I just I hope
I can give you some of those
my thoughts that I think that would be useful
but that's just like hypothetical
what I would wish
so the good thing and the good news
about CERN is that it works very well
and what they did actually that it works
is that they were implementing
game theory elements
so certain type of competitiveness
within the work collaborations
and there are different styles
the Atlas collaboration who is
flatter in its hierarchy
and there's the CMS collaboration
which is more competitive and more hierarchical
so even there there are differences of course
and there are more or less
hierarchical
correlations and situations
so one cannot give one solution to all
and this kind of specific
sample that you showed I showed to you
is an example of I don't like
the term but I use it of a toxic
work group so a work group that doesn't function well
but of course there are also
work groups that function well
and I studied these work groups where it functioned well
when did it function well
it functioned well when first
there was a good communication between
the authority figures
the so-called leaders of the teams
and the PhD students and the early postdocs
and that was always
the case when the team leaders were
still also being part
of the programming
and also engaged in the
updates and upgrades and constantly
tried to go
along with the time so not becoming
just older and experience in politics
but also still knowing what
actually the younger ones doing when programming
and solving the problems on the code
so it actually asks
from the authority figures to say close
to what the younger ones do
that's one side and the other side
what I think that would be really good
on the long run would be
actually
a certain form of
social
therapeutic work groups where people are able
to say what they actually feel like
because if you ask
the guy that Claire
is calling out who is
problematic and who is this
authority figure that she says
it's a white male guy of Europe
if you ask this guy
who I think by his origin is German
if you ask this guy why he's
so choleric and screaming all the time
and cannot allow mistakes
cannot admit mistakes
you might see if he would
have time that he would say oh I have so
much responsibility to take
nobody listens to me I feel
I'm lost here I'm overworked there
and so on and so on so actually
it's a certain mode of taking
back which I would think would be very
useful for everybody of us working in
science and at universities
in general and that's something that's
missing a certain form of
mediation a certain form of
acknowledging the others that's what I also said at the
end you know listening to the other person
taking the other one's point of view also
what now the director
of Claire was saying I mean like what
you're saying is exactly what I wish
would be something that would be
implemented so this kind of
contained groups where people
could work with each other
so I think that would be something
as a that
would need to be implemented because
the pressure is so high
and on the other hand
what's very interesting and I think what would
be very useful is if you talk to people at CERN
I did talk to the psychologists at CERN
and if and
they have records they do not get everybody
but they have statistics
of the amount of anxieties of sleeplessness
as a really like
psychological psychosomatic
symptoms that appear within
a certain
high level research
environment and
I think what would really help to just
use all the technologies we have
from psychological therapeutics
to just implement this as mandatory
way of self-care
and also group care and then it would
definitely work better
but when it comes to the
fundamental exclusion of
certain groups who are privileged
or less privileged
then it really needs at least in the
German case we would need definitely
to support more people from working class
environments and so on from early on
and to change the whole curriculum
from early on to have a different standpoint
of how
those STEM fields are
taught
I hope this answers a little bit Shima
could you give me a small feedback
whether this is a bit helpful
Yes, it's very interesting
thank you very much for
an elaborate answer
I think
what I see is that probably
the kind of mix of highly competitive
environments and
I think to some extent also
maybe so more men
are actually present in STEM fields
this is kind of like statistics are out there
nobody can basically
ignore them more men are actually
attracted to these fields
not just because the field
promotes men I think it's kind of
something that is there are so many
complex reasons that are happening
that are there that actually causing
women
choosing other fields rather than STEM
fields and I think
in any kind of field when you have
this proportionate gender representation
you can get into some sort of
like a maladaptive
dynamics so I think
this is kind of like
promoting more women and I think
what you mentioned I think listening is very
important I really liked what you mentioned
bringing more of these
critical skills like listening, empathy
and putting yourself in somebody
else's perspective is I think so fundamental
in technical fields
and thank you very much for your
very interesting presentation
thank you
Thank you Shima, just one little thing I want to add
I asked the leading also
the director general
back then at CERN and others
how they actually deal with this problem
and they are not very happy that they have just 20%
women at CERN
and the problem is that they also
have just 20% students
coming to physics
also it's like the problem
starts in school
and they say
they would love to have more
female and that's again
quite sexist as a statement when you think
about that in the backdrop
because they say women are
tending to care more
active and care more
about the experiment while males
are more interested in their own
success
so that's also a self description
which I found
super sexist and that's
what I found also very interesting
and I think that's the point where you nailed
it is so impressive
when you go to a place like CERN
where people really highly fight
to have a diverse
reality
at the end of the day
it becomes again
ethnicist, essentializing
and sexist and racist
and it even comes to the point
where Italians are cooking
their food and the Russians
are sticking together with
the Russians and the Bulgarians
are having their Bulgarian meeting
and so on and so on
it's really fascinating how people deal with this
in a cosmopolitan space
that has actually the goal
of a space gender
sex class
that do not matter
and I think that's
important because if you have
an ideal of relational
agency and of a post human
diversity
then in a way it's a universal
goal
it's a universal hope
and any universalist
approach
is fragmented
and it becomes a plurality
when you go to a certain
specific place and I think that's something
that I also try to make visible
and if you are producing these kind
of individual certain
communities then you actually could solve
these problems and I really hope
that we come to another solution
because we need different community models
we need different work models
because this kind of neoliberal work system
isn't healthy for anybody of us
and it will come, it has to come
at a certain point to end
maybe not in my lifetime but I hope
that I will still witness this
Thank you. For this, how is your sound now?
There is a message
Do you want to ask a question now?
You can hear me!
Oh, fantastic! I don't know what I have done
now I think it's already
past you
so I'm not going to ask
any question now, it's already been
addressed
No, please Hothis, you cannot
leave me that way, I feel like I'm sticking with you
I was wondering whether you have
ways of being of James Brittle
No
He's telling exactly the same thing you are
but
from another point of view he's also
read Barat
which I will receive
for Christmas on the tree
and
actually
he's trying to come to the same kind of
understanding but not on the academic level
but
at the post-human level
the world
with
not viewed from humans only
but to include everybody
everything
and to have
an idea of
how to find solutions to the fact that
everything is so binary
so that's also what's been
the point of this discussion
because it's very binary
it's male-female but you have
nobody is entirely male and entirely
female so you already have
different
ways of being
and he wants
he was talking about
having computers thinking
otherwise than binary
but he's not very concrete about it
so I don't know whether
at CERN there because I also
understood from his book that
also the computers
well the computer models they are using
at CERN are this carol
Monte Carlo
theory based so
actually they are based on
chance
and uncertainty so
I was wondering if they are thinking
about something else as computers
which might be more developed
than
whatever he points out in his book
no they don't
it works very well
and they are working very precisely
with their machine learning
algorithms and the Monte Carlo simulations
it's really astonishing what they are doing there actually
it's really amazing
what they are producing there
yeah but you are looking
again we are looking at uncertainty
yes they approximate
they approximate it
and that's where also the playfulness came into being
that's why I deal a lot with playing games
because they have lots of rules
and uncertainty and chance of playing along
but they are not looking for another
system beyond the binary model
they are not working on this
it's not their topic
would be maybe something they could engage with
but they are much more interested currently
in medical applications
of what they are doing because it's very useful
for example fighting cancer and so on
so that's something
they look into and also
saving energy
it's something they are really interested in
because CERN uses a lot of energy
but also has to deal with the energy problem
it tries to find solutions
so many people are engaging there thinking to solve that problem
also fighting fake news
it's something that is very important to them
and also what is a fun fact
is the Claire
that I interviewed later on
she came out as non-binary
I didn't say it in that moment
because she has been read as female
and she has been talking a lot about this
but later on she came out as non-binary
so non-binary is more
exists at CERN
but
I was very much fascinated
when I entered the STEM field
how much all of this
matters still
even if I wish it wouldn't
and also I think that
what I try to
what is very clear from you
is that it really doesn't
that's why I talked about Terrence
instead of humans
it is that there are alliances
and I'm really putting aside
the humans along with the algorithms
with the computer
or with a bug and so on
and I think that's very interesting
also to think along that way
and to step out of this
and from a physicist's perspective
you can start us, right?
Well, yes
That's clear
Thank you, Rockwantum
Yeah
Anna, thank you for your presentation
I just missed a part of the
discussion before as my internet
went down
I also want to say
Centro Karsch from Thomas
because he had an urgent meeting
to make it
but I was just thinking that
you just mentioned about
sort of this both humanist
perspective or maybe transhumanist
I don't know if you would call it
a sort of transhumanist perspective
like having also algorithms
and
hardware as an
equal being
Well, that's sometimes quite difficult
especially when talking about
AI or maybe advanced technologies
that sometimes these types
of human-made
artifacts are placed
above
or more there still
seems to be a hierarchy
that people are talking within these
sectors like
within STEM sectors
there seems to be a bit of a bias
between
technology and certain minorities
Do you sort of
what's your perspective on that?
My perspective on that
is now I give you a very fun
like please take this with a
big grain of irony
so in the 1970s
physics came
to a certain end
epistemically and technologically
and also as you might know
lots of
physicists were trained
and then there were many people who didn't have a job
but there was LSD
and there were other drugs
that allowed them to think further
and they really took these drugs and then Apple came
into being and many other funny things
like for example string theory
and I think what you describe right now is
a time where we are living in a
hyper realistic time
where these kind of mind expanding
experiences where you understand
as when people
who have taken LSD they would always describe
this kind of we are one world
and this postal humanist perspective is something
that they are really seeing when they
are taking these kind of
mushroom derivatives
that we are living
in a time where we're coming through technology
and that's fascinating to the same point
because the transhumanist perspective
and the post humanist terminology
emerged by Andrew Pickering and others
who studied in the 1990s physics
high energy physics
and what you describe in the hierarchy
I think is still a narcissist mirroring
so they look at the stuff they created
and since they want to be
big and taller than they are
actually they make what they
created bigger and taller as it
actually is and I think
this will all be played
unfortunately due to the climate
crisis we are experiencing
and all the augmenting crisis
this will be put into place
and I am at this point
very how should I say
guarded optimistic
that although we are undergoing
these kind of challenges and undergoing
these kind of crazy fights
of identity
politics that I personally do not like
at all and people who
would be racist and
would be sexist and would be techno
optimist and so on say yes
we go to the Mars and so on
that we are coming back to a
perspective where what you're
following at the clear
is actually the future and that's
something that I'm also working on that's why I'm very
grateful that you invited me because
we are working on the same
topic and people around the world
are doing what you do what I
do and that's something where we have
to stick together and sometimes
we might have to go into subversion
and we have to use it to play
like Claire played the dominant
ruling society we're living
in but I think that at the
end of the day we will come to that point
and I really hope
for that one of when the research
that you do will also contribute
to that bigger goal
Thanks Anne, I hope so
I hope so as well
it will be this interesting thing
to touch on, thank you
I also feel like
in education or sort of
this identity politics
that even like through education
or people choosing a certain
that also in education there should be
a lot more trans-disciplinarity and I think also
what you talked about during
your talk that
technical people also
need humanities
sort of this whole
being able to place
things in a bigger perspective
and perhaps that would, I don't know
if it would help like if you have a trans-disciplinarity
team of trans-disciplinary
people that would also maybe
or that they might
be more
able to place themselves in another person
like be able to sort of see
or be
sort of mindful about having a different
perspective or that they are
biased in a certain way
or is this something that people need to
learn or
become aware of?
Yeah, I totally agree
I think that will be the future and it's hard
to accept for some
but
and I'm very happy that for example
the Centadio Apostol exists and that you brought it
into being Mr. Director, please excuse me
that I was
challenging your challenge
but
I really think that we will have
these kinds of trends, we need it, we need
humanities, we need to survive these days
because we are
not from an economical
neoliberal perspective, we do not seem
to be useful but in
10 to 20 years many computer scientists
will end up without
job because AI took their job
and then it comes back to interpretation
and then comes back to the
hermeneutics and then it comes back to the humanities
and social science because what
AI is producing is
boring, mediocre narratives
and when it comes out
comes to the point where it becomes
disturbing, where the human factor
plays into, that's something
where we come back into it
when resoric becomes again
important and also hermeneutical understanding
We have one question from the room
and then 40 seconds, okay?
First of all, thank you for
this interesting talk
Dr. Anne
my name is Fabrizio
I'm a student
and a PhD student here in CLEA
and I would like to ask
the next question
in a
disruptive technology where we live
right now
I think we could
use the
anthropology in order to
empower our workers
or workers
In your opinion
how would you use
the best of anthropology
in order to improve
the resilience
of
supply chains
as you know the supply chain
is a
group of business
excellence that are
integrated in a
network that works in a
like a one system
and that will be my question
how would you use the
best of anthropology
in order to improve the resilience
of the supply chain
thank you
Thank you very much again
the question is what kind of supply chains should be improved
some supply chains
I don't want to have improved
where I think they are not serving any goals
so whenever it comes to
the logic of growth
we're coming to an end
and whenever it comes to exploiting the earth
and having this idea that we're taking more
and more out it also comes to an end
because that's what we do also to ourselves
to the world out
so I think one thing is really to show
that a certain idea of burnout doesn't work anymore
burning out the energy
of ourselves or taking
extracting everything what we could do
and that's what we should actually cut
or say as anthropologists here as a rupture
that's the end it doesn't work anymore
we cannot relate anymore to the world
and the other would really bring us back
bring us back
with technologies of embodiment
with technologies that we
anthropologists when we do field work
because when we go into another society
and we do
transform we are prepared
and we have technologies to
to be resilient ourselves
to not fall or to survive
what we call the culture shock
and we experience usually culture shocks
after two months we have the field diary
we have certain forms of supervision and so on
and we have all of this also
in Europe already developed
we have a whole apparatus of care
and I think that's where
that's where I see a future
and that would also not only
say in an essential way
anthropology shows are people
from Belgium are that way
and if you're coming from Mexico
then you have to deal with the Belgians
this way and please Belgians
please acknowledge that you do not understand
how it feels to lose
your environment when you're from a
Amazonian society or so something like that
I think that's
not something where we are there
to just mediate or be the
testimonies of other cultures
but what we could do is just really
relate between the different perspectives
and help others to see themselves
I think that would be one possible solution
that's also where art comes into being
and in an ever more
entangled world
where people are coming from
all over the world to Europe
and Europe itself
is turning into deep
crisis one really has to ask also
what are the laws
the ideals
and the fights we in Europe have been fighting
and that's the good side also
that's also something I want to say
but this reasonable European man
that the Americans criticized
in this
Fieldburg snippets I presented to you
on the other hand CERN
is
the outcome of the Second World War
where physicists
from different nations fought
against each other
but instead of producing a bomb
they really want to find knowledge
and they want to show how cosmopolitan
work
is possible
how you really can pursue a goal
and I showed you the destructive
side of this the ruptures the cuts
where it doesn't work
but that doesn't mean that the ideas
and the goals that CERN produces
aren't something that I personally as a European think
I'm standing for democracy
the ideal of equality even
if it's not working criticizing
a certain non-democratic hierarchy
and so on and so on
so I think that's something that we also
have to do as anthropologists
to say okay that's a certain kind of
standard we have been working on
and even if we decolonize
everything we have to rethink
what kind of criticism
of colonial power relations
actually brought humanism into being
and where post-humanism
is a child of these kind
of developments as such
I hope that somehow
gives you a little bit of
an answer to this and I think that would
actually put a resilience to the
what you call supply chains
or the resilience to certain societies
that fight for the equality
of people and fight and have
also attained the equality
of for example women and men
or the equality
of voting no matter what kind
and how much money you have
or whether you are aristocrat or not
What is?
Yes, so I want to come back
to the question of trans-
trans-civil narrative
so I am doing a PhD
in philosophy on being
and becoming but it's
very much based on quantum
physics so I've been reaching
out to Rovalli and Tonnelli
at first
they
answered the questions I ask
and then when I asked
when they
and Rovalli even said
I don't know any philosopher being
occupied with
quantum physics
well he doesn't know Barrett
I didn't know her then either
so I pointed into Whitehead
but at one point in time when I say
do you want to get involved with my
PhD they don't have time
so much for trans-discipline
yeah
Yeah, that's a good
point I have been collaborating
with physicists in a
class of excellence at Hommel University
and it was very interesting
where you also would experience this hierarchy
of STEM versus humanities
philosophy and so on
and that comes back to what Flo
was actually saying and that's where I hope
for the future generation
and that's interesting I talked
to Lisa Randall
and she was very much open
and she waited for
news and wanted to engage
by Carlo Rovalli again
I somehow
have encountered many of
these physicists who are not
seeing that there is a ton of philosophy
engaging with this and what
I also tried to say
initially in my talk
nothing that quantum mechanics
has to give epistemologically
is new
to history nor anthropology
it is not
it's rather that actually
Schrödinger's cat
tried to prevent
to bring these two worlds together
for certain reasons of dominance
of physics and then you have the new
age movement and so on which is making
this thing fall apart and then again
people would say oh no we don't go into esoterics
but if you go today in science and
technology studies or if you go to
Hawaiian philosophers
and Hawaiian cosmologists as I just
have been last month at
a big 4S conference
you will find
the exact same idea
that you as a philosophy
of healing that is
combining the people of Hawaii
of people of aboriginal societies
in Australia, in New Zealand
or people who do quantum mechanics
and take this series
and transfer it into the world
and it's sad that Ovelli insists
on his position of power
but that relates again to the imperial
power position of physics
as such that is falling
as much
as you can see also with
the falling
part of believing in science as such
with the rise of all these
kind of destabilizations of fact
making through
all these people who believe in whatever
kind of piracies.
I suggest you
send me the email address of
the Lauren who is interested
and then another thing
is I do think
quantum physics
shakes ontology
What kind of ontology?
The ontology as we see it
as the philosophy of being
it makes it
dynamic instead of static
oh yes it does
and so
I think the ontological
implications
of quantum physics are more
important and if
you have an ontological
problem
you cannot even have an epistemology
you don't have anything anymore
so you have to go to another kind
of thinking about
life
which is no longer in being
but also in becoming
Yes
for example if you lead
Elizabeth Povinelli, geontologies of the
otherwise as anthropologists
would deal with this also Mackenzie
Warke
Molecular Red
It's a beautiful book
I suggest that I
ask Marta for your email address
and then you
send me your references because this is
not going to work here. Wonderful
Okay no I totally agree with you
it does and that's the beauty of it
I agree with you
Okay Francis
Let me
take the position which I
not used to take of
defending the STEM sciences here
I'm personally
with one foot in STEM one foot
in the humanities I'm
officially a philosopher
connected to the Department of Philosophy
my PhD is in physics
but it was actually more about the philosophy
of quantum mechanics
so I know the domain quite well
and I want to say that
it's not sufficient to say there is some similarity
between Hawaiian philosophy
or Daoist philosophy
and quantum mechanics to say that
well they are equal there at the same level
Quantum mechanics
is a highly technical
domain with a lot of deep
philosophical problems but the technical
domain means that there is quite a lot
of very hard mathematics in there
you can't do without it
it's thanks to these mathematics that we can
build all these
transistors and lasers
and all these incredible
technological applications of quantum mechanics
this is
something there are no shortcuts for that
it's not sufficient to say
I have heard
Hawaiian philosophy they say the same as quantum mechanics
maybe at some level
they say the same but if you want
to study quantum mechanics you have to go to
all the work
and it is a lot of work
I have done part of it I have given it up
at a certain moment and moved my career in a different
direction
Derek Arts who was the former director
of Claire is still working in quantum mechanics
he's still coming
with new ideas and he still
has to admit that there are lots of things
he doesn't understand so
it's not a question of saying yes but these people
they just work from
a position of authority
so they don't listen to people
who have new age ideas or who have
whatever ideas
no these people know that
to go into the depth you really
need to go
to all the hard
work all the mathematics
and at that level
you can't have a conversation just with a philosopher
if the philosopher goes
to all the hard work and goes to all the mathematics
then maybe you can go
more deeply into the
what quantum mechanics really means
because as Feynman said
if you believe you understand quantum mechanics
you haven't understood it
Yes Francis you are opening
many doors and I really think that
you're just listening half of what I'm
saying sometimes because
that's exactly what I'm thinking
I totally agree
and I cannot agree more after spending
eight years with physicists
studying at the university
sitting there
taking classes in the history of physics
taking classes in physics
of different levels
and also spending time with quantum mechanics
people with computer simulations
people and high energy physics people
and that's why I'm sometimes also very
careful when I see people
who are perceiving themselves as Hawaiian
cosmologists as indigenous cosmologists
saying
what people in quantum mechanics
say
that's actually what we are also saying
I wrote an article on ontological opportunism
where I
describe exactly that kind of communication
between a Lakuta Su
cosmologist on the one hand
and a physicist at CERN
where the Lakuta Su
would actually see in the exchange particle
Iktomi
the trickster god
and would study
from his perspective
quantum mechanics
physicists try to translate and get into
resonance with this
and
there is no doubt
that one thing is mathematics
and as you said also Feynman was saying
when you think you have understood it
you're not understanding quantum mechanics
that's one thing
and the second thing is that something I asked
always theoretical physicists
when I interviewed them was
has mathematics been
invented or found
and the most witty answer
to this question was by Lisa Randall
because she wasn't sure about it
whether it's invented or found
and she said if we have
invented it then we found
a very good thing
with mathematics
so I totally agree with you
and I think one has to be aware of this
but now we are
coming to strategic
alliances again
and the strategic alliance
between the way
quantum mechanics allows to understand
the world even if you do not get it
on the basis of mathematics on the one hand
and those indigenous cosmologies
are very useful and necessary
to save Gaia
so it's just a strategic alliance
discussing
who has here what kind of
you know deeper foundation
for me not my point
I just want to have a strategic alliance to save this planet
and to come to a better living together
that's all what I want
so thank you Francis for pointing this out
because that's at most important
Zlatka
Thank you
for your
interesting presentation
I first would like to
second one what
Fotis
