Yeah, I hear some echoes of people could. Yeah, I think we have to mute. It's us probably.
So I will mute myself before once you start. So, okay, we were having now like Michael
talk. And I think, where is your screen share? Are you sharing a screen?
Correct. I'm already sharing the screen. Yeah.
Can people not see my screen? We don't we don't see your screen, but it might be.
You don't see this? Are people not seeing the slides? It's us. It's us that we are not
swap video. There you go. Okay. So now we have you. And let's confirm with the other. Yeah,
the audience can see it. So we are fine. Okay. Welcome, Michael. Thank you for participating
in our conference and workshop and the stage is yours. Very good. Thank you so much for inviting
me. This has been an extremely interesting workshop. Lots of new ideas. And I look forward to sharing
some more information with you and some thoughts. All of the primary papers and if you need to get
in touch with me, these two websites, you can reach me all the papers, the data, the software,
everything is there. What I'm going to tell you about today is a framework that I've been developing
based on our empirical data. So probably about 15 years of work at the intersection of developmental
biology and computer science that has driven my attempt to pull together some deep ideas
for how to understand this and how to move it forward. And I call this TAME, T-A-M-E, that
stands for technological approach to mind everywhere. And basically it's a framework for
understanding truly diverse intelligences. You'll see what I mean by that based on fundamentals
of a kind of goal directed behavior in unconventional agents. So the main points
that I would like to transmit today are these. First, that the question of how much agency
or cognition is to be attributed to a particular system has to be treated as an engineering
problem, not philosophical pronouncements of what various systems can and can't have,
but actually an empirical approach to find the optimum level of description to enable control
and prediction of that system. And I'm going to talk about the fact that very diverse intelligences
can actually be directly compared with each other and placed in a sort of the same space.
If we think about the spatiotemporal scale of the goals that these systems are capable of working
towards. So this gives rise to a kind of a model of what I call the cognitive light cone
based on the types of goals that these systems are able to represent and pursue.
And I'm going to show you that synthetic bioengineering and some advances in biology
provide an incredibly large option space for new bodies and new minds. These new creatures don't
have standard evolutionary backstories in this. They are a very important set of systems for
impacting our understanding of evolution of what the genome actually does and so on.
And I'm going to show you some very specific examples from developmental biology looking at
morphogenesis as a kind of unconventional collective intelligence, meaning the collective
intelligence of cells, solving problems in morpho space. That will be the example in which I'm
going to illustrate some of these concepts, but I think they're much, much broader than that.
And I'm going to show you some data showing that developmental bioelectricity provides
an interesting window on the scaling of cognition both during development and during evolution.
So I started this framework prompted by a really interesting conference at the
Diverse Intelligence Summer Institute that Templeton Foundation put on
where we were asked to come up with a way to compare truly diverse intelligences. And this
isn't just humans, apes, birds, and maybe octopus, things like that, but it's actually,
it needs to, a good framework is going to enable us to compare and contrast really unusual creatures,
colonial organisms, swarms like ants and bees and so on, but also synthetic biology, so engineered
novel life forms that never existed before, both unicellular and multicellular. We should be able
to use the same framework with AI, so artificial intelligences, whether embodied or purely software
or whatever. And of course, exobiological agents that we may find during exploration of off the
planet if that ever happens. And the key to this framework is that it has to move experiments
forward. It cannot be pure philosophy, it has to actually suggest, make predictions and suggest
novel capabilities. So the outline for today's talk, I'm going to, isn't basically in three parts.
First, I'm just going to talk about some examples and some, some, some, some ways in which we should
broaden typical cognitive science approaches. Then I will talk about this, this framework,
the philosophical principles, and then some very specific hypotheses for how we can define
selves and how cognition can scale. And then I'm going to show you the vast majority of the talk
is data. So I'm going to show you how we've been using these ideas to understand and control
morphogenesis as a collective intelligence. And then I'm going to show you some novel synthetic
organisms that, that have never existed before. And these are called xenobots. So the first thing
I want to think about is the fact that when we usually think about intelligence and, and, and
cognition and agency, we think about the subject of all of those things, the self. So the self is
this construct that is the owner of complex memories of credit assignment among the individual parts
that function together to, to provide positive and negative outcomes. It's the, it's the owner
of goals and, and preferences and things like that. And the interesting thing about this is that
biology shows us that these, these selves are extremely malleable. They change over time,
not just evolutionary time, but actually during the time of the, the time of the organism.
So for example, here's, here's one example. So this is a caterpillar. And it's a creature,
it's a soft bodied kind of creature that crawls and chews plants. And it needs to turn into this
very different type of creature that flies and drinks nectar. And because of that, the brain
is completely different. So the caterpillar brain is quite different from the, from the,
of butterfly or moth brain. And during this process of metamorphosis, that brain is largely
liquefied, the cells, many of the cells die, most of the synaptic connections are broken.
And a completely new brain is rearranged. This is all during the lifetime of the agent. So if,
you know, if you're philosophically minded, you can ask yourself what it's like to be an agent
during, during the time that your brain is completely reorganized. One of the most amazing
things about this is that the memories, which caterpillars have, in fact, persist through
this process. So the butterfly remembers training that the caterpillars underwent and there's,
there's some nice data on this, you can see reviews of that here. But this is, this is in
fact, not just for, for unusual metamorphosing creatures, all of us made the journey of the
Cartesian cut from a single cell. So we all started life as a single fertilized egg. This is
something that molecular biologists would look and say, this is a machine, this is, you know,
it's a molecular machine. It has lots of biochemical components functioning according to
rules. It's a very nice, you know, it's a very nice piece of physics. And then at some point,
this, this self assembled into one of many creatures in some of which, at least or
possibly all of them have what we consider to be cognition, let's say human in the case of a human
embryo. So all of us went from undertook this journey. And so, so one thing that is clear in
biology is that there is no sharp line that is supportable, where you can say this was just
physics and then something happened and now you have a cognitive being. So, so we have to understand
how, how cognition scales gradually across these kind of scales and it modifies gradually, both
during evolutionary time scales and the animals own development. So this is another way in which
ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny because we all take this, take this journey. So in fact,
we like to think of ourselves as integrated beings, true intelligences, and then maybe
ants and bees have some sort of collective intelligence. But actually, we are all collective
intelligences. We are all made of parts. We are, in particular, we have collections of neurons
and various other cells. And so when you look through, through life forms, you see that they
are made of nested subunits, not only structurally, we all know that we are made of organs made of
tissues, which are made of cells and so on, not just structurally, but actually functionally and
cognitively because there's this evolution uses this multi scale competency architecture,
where every layer solves problems. So from the swarm to the individual animal to the organs to the
cells in the subcellular components, all of these systems solve various kinds of problems in
diverse spaces. Now, what evolution does is reuse some of the same problem solving tricks
in different spaces. Now, we are all very familiar with understanding intelligence when we see it as
operating in three dimensional space, behavioral space. So we see these birds, they know how to
pick up cigarette butts and receive a reward. And we say, okay, that's pretty intelligent,
the bird has learned something. All of our sense organs point outwards. And so we are very familiar
and many animals are very good at detecting agency in the outside world. But if we had
sense organs pointing inwards, let's say a kind of biofeedback where at every step of your life
from childhood, you knew exactly what your liver or your pancreas was doing with respect to what are
the physiological states, what are the actions that it takes, we would then have no problem
recognizing some of their behavior as intelligence. And what I mean by intelligence is simply problem
solving and to move to better regions of some state space. And these spaces might be the space of
all gene expression, of course, these are all very high dimensional spaces, I sort of collapse
everything into two spaces here. But the space of all possible gene expression, morpheus space,
which we'll spend the most of the talk about, which is the space of possible configurations
of the body. So anatomy, anatomical space, and physiological space. There are many examples,
your organs and your cells are solving problems in these spaces all the time.
And we should be humble about the fact that when we look at a system and try to understand
how much and what kind of intelligence it has, we are ourselves taking an IQ test because recognizing
goal directed problem solving behavior in a system requires us to be smart enough to notice it,
to notice the appropriate space, and to understand what is the system doing. And many times when we
don't see that, we need to ask ourselves if we're in fact missing something important.
So one of the things we can say about intelligence in all these spaces is basically that a kind of
a generic statement is basically that it's proportional to the ability to stay out of
local minima, to have a kind of a wider view of what actions you should take. So that, for example,
you know, this from here to here is the most direct path where this dog can get to where it
wants to go. But actually, if it was willing to have some patience and walk away from it for a while,
it could then do much better. And so there's this sort of local energy barrier that the more
intelligent you are, the more you're able to overcome these kinds of things. And one of the
things that we now are able to do with chimeric and bioengineering technologies is take this
multi-scale biological system and replace any, at any level, replace components of this with
new components that might be engineered, and they might be other cells or molecules of other
creatures. And so we can build these composite beings that are not standard issue evolved creatures.
So we can replace any level of organization, we can replace with components that are somewhere
on this scale somewhere between evolved and designed. So maybe they're natural, maybe they're
modified, maybe they're completely engineered, and they will have some degree of intelligence,
maybe they're just pure mechanism in the sense of the very passive mechanisms, or maybe they will
be quite intelligent problem solving components. And already we start to see this, right? So you
have humans with various appliances, so basically early stage cyborgs, we have bioengineered animals,
we have synthetic machines like hybrids, which are brains driving robotic bodies and so on.
And so you can see this at every portion, we can start to replace these components, right,
whether with DNA or with tissues and so on. And all of these are going to be somewhere
on this hierarchy. See, what's important about this is once we start changing all of these things,
we can no longer use the familiar touchstones of phylogeny. We can't say, well, this kind of looks
like a fish, so therefore I expect fish level sophistication of cognition, because all of these
synthetic and we'll come back to this, these synthetic creations are not going to have
origins or components that make it very easy to say what's going on. So we need a kind of
cybernetic understanding of cognition that isn't based on what you're made of or how you got here,
but it's actually based on much deeper principles of what your cognition is like.
And so that is the beginning of how we started thinking about this approach. And
let's talk a little bit about some of the theory now and then we'll get to the data.
So the foundations, and I only say this because I like to make this explicit, you're going to see
all of this in the next sections, but I'd like to make the philosophical
underpinnings of all this completely explicit, so we all know what's going on. Nothing is hidden here.
The first thing is that I think we need to take evolution and developmental biology very seriously,
and that means doing away with binary categories. When we talk, is it really cognitive? Is it just
physics or does it have real memories? There are no sharp categories here. Everything is very
gradual and we'll talk about that. The point here is that we're not trying to anthropomorphize
simple systems. In fact, nowadays, now that we understand evolution and bioengineering,
I'm not sure there's any such thing as anthropomorphizing in the sense that humans have some sort
of magical properties that can be incorrectly attributed to other types of beings. I don't
think that exists. I think as long as you're appropriately scaling your model to whatever
system you're working with and it's giving you empirical advantages, that's how we have to do
this because there's no other way to do it. I'm going to stick very closely to an engineering
approach where I'm not worried about talking about goals in the cybernetic sense. I'm not
talking about trying to avoid attributing too much agency to things because attributing too much
agency is just as bad as not attributing enough to an engineer. These are identical errors.
We'll talk about the fact that agents are a patchwork of multiple unconventional intelligences
at different levels. I don't believe there's any magic in the material. There's nothing really
magic about synapses or protoplasm or anything else. We're going to be material independent
here. I really want to understand biology, which Chris Langton refers to as life as it can be.
Not zoology, not just the types of plants and animals we have here now, but actually
what's unique and important about all cognitive systems. One of the things that
this framework does from an engineering perspective is simply say that there's a
continuum, a smooth continuum with some waypoints along this journey, where the way that you
understand the cognitive capacity of whatever system you're dealing with is really defined by
what is the most efficient, most optimal way to interact with that system, the way to
change the way the system functions. If you're dealing with a certain class of hardware systems,
like clocks, for example, your only option is modification of the hardware at the lowest level.
You're not going to teach it anything. You're not going to convince it of anything. Hardware
modification is your only option. Then there's a more interesting class of devices like
thermostats, which are a little further along because they have an encoded setpoint. They spend
energy to maintain a specific goal state, and you can interact with them in a very interesting way.
You can rewrite or alter the goal state, and then the machine will now pursue that goal,
let's say a different temperature range, without you having to rewire the hardware. You don't have
to change the hardware of the system. In fact, you don't even have to know about the hardware.
You don't have to know how it works. As long as you know what the setpoint is,
you can recognize where it's encoded and so on. Then there's a whole other class of systems
like this, where you actually need to know even less about what's going on because you can train
them. Human beings have been training animals for thousands of years without knowing any neuroscience,
because they appreciated the important fact that systems like this can be modified based on
stimuli, based on rewards and punishments, and you can actually rely on the system itself to
reconfigure its own internal mechanisms in terms of plasticity and various other things,
and you don't need to do that. You don't need to micromanage it. You don't even need to know
how it works. You just need to understand how to motivate the system, how to communicate with the
system. Then we get to some very advanced creatures here, where you can actually communicate not
simply with rewards and punishments but actually with cogent reasons for doing things. This is a
very engineering approach because the idea is not to have philosophical feelings about whether
thermostats do or do not have real desires. The point is actually for any given system,
well in any given let's say novel biological or novel engineered system, the task is very simple.
Which kind of model gives you the best prediction of control? Using these kind of models on these
systems will give you nothing of use, but actually using these kind of models on sophisticated systems
actually leaves a lot on the table as far as capabilities, and this is one of the limitations
of modern molecular medicine, is that the assumption is that everything is a piece of passive
hardware like this and must be dealt with at the hardware level. Genomic editing,
rewiring, pathways, protein engineering, everything is focused on the hardware. We've
actually done a lot of work showing that some of these other approaches are much more powerful
in medical kinds of circumstances where you're trying to get the system to do something complex.
One way to think about how all of these different very diverse types of systems can be related to
each other is simply to try to map, and again I've collapsed space into one dimension. This is
almost like an Minkowski kind of diagram where we can plot on a diagram of space and time what is
the scale of the goals that a given system is able to pursue. Now remember this is not a diagram of
how far a system can sense or how far away it can act, but actually the size of the goals that a
system is able to pursue. So if you're a bacterium or something or a tick or something like that,
you are only interested in very local concentrations of certain compounds. You may have a little bit
of memory going backwards, you may have a little predictive capacity going forwards,
but everything you're doing is in a very small radius of goal-directed activity. You're only
interested in very local things, and in fact you're not capable of caring about things that are very
far away. So it forms a kind of cognitive light cone of the things that your cognitive system is
capable of doing, and so we can think about other animals that may have some pretty good memory going
backwards, a little bit of predictive capacity going forwards, but still unable to really care
about things that are going to happen two months from now in the next town. It's just impossible
for some of these, but if you're a human, for example, you might have an enormous light cone.
In fact, uniquely among animals, you might care about things that will for sure take longer than
your lifespan. Some of your goals are actually not achievable because your lifespan is not as
big as your goal space, and then we can imagine all sorts of other shapes for possible alien or
synthetic kinds of creatures, and of course, all of this is nested. So we are a patchwork of
modules within modules, each of which is capable, whether in physiological space or anatomical space
or behavioral space, contain various sizes of goals, very large, very small, and so on.
Now, what's really interesting is that the scale of these cells can change quite rapidly.
So here, this is one cell. This is a lacrimaria. There's no brain. There's no nervous system.
This is one cell that is handling all of its anatomical, physiological, behavioral, metabolic
needs at the level of a single cell. Now, these cells, you know, relatives of these single cells
can collaborate together to work on very large things. Here, you see a multicellular body.
This is a salamander. If you amputate the limb, the cells immediately begin to grow. They will
continue to grow and shape a new limb until it's complete, and then they stop. So we'll talk in
a minute about what this is. This is an anatomical homeostasis where the setpoint is very large. All
of these cells are solving a problem in anatomical space. They start out in a region of anatomical
space that's not good. They want to get to the much better region. That is their goal,
and they know how to, the collective is able to get there. So that's the scaling of goals that
occurs during evolution, but there's actually a reduction that takes place, and we call that cancer.
So what happens is when individual cells, and this is a human glioblastoma, when individual cells
become disconnected, functionally disconnected, I'll show you how this works, functionally
disconnected from these large-scale goals, they revert back to an ancient unicellular amoeba-like
lifestyle where their only goals are to reproduce and to optimize certain metabolic functions,
which means migrate wherever life is good. So the boundary between self and world,
in this case, these cells basically treat the rest of the body as just an external environment.
They're not more selfish than any other biological construct. They're equally selfish,
just that the self is not very small. So that boundary between self and world can grow and
shrink. And so the way you can schematize it is simply this, that you have individual cells,
and this takes place at many layers. I'm just going to introduce this with this example of cells.
So individual cells have some degree of being able to compute and remember and make predictions about
states of their local environment. But when they join into networks, these, and in particular,
I'm going to talk about electrical networks, these networks are actually have a lot, have higher IQ.
They're not only measuring information from wider spatial areas, meaning they're
integrating lots of signal spatially, but they actually have higher computational capacity,
and they're able to have larger scale goals. And so this is what we see. You can sort of
track the width and space and time of what these cells are concerned with. And here's a very important
component of this, which is stress, this idea that what stresses different kind of agents
is basically a delta between your goal states and the state you're in now. Stress is what drives you
to make changes, whether it be through gene expression or physiology or behavior, to get
closer to your goals. So stress is a kind of metric. But what's very interesting about stress
isn't just that delta, stress is the ability to export that delta to your neighbors.
So the idea is that all of these cells are able to measure states much larger than what
individual cells can care about, and thus reduce the delta for much more complex states.
So one can say that if you tell me what you're stressed about, I can make a pretty good guess
about your cognitive sophistication. So if the most complicated thing that could possibly stress
you is local glucose level, then you're probably something like a bacterium. If you're stressed
about the state of the economy on earth, then you're probably a human level or above. Being able
to be stressed by complex large scales of events is a very strong driver of sophistication. And so
what you can see, now let's look at some data here. What you can do is you can introduce oncogenes,
in particular human oncogenes, into normal cells in this frog embryo. This is a tadpole. So here's
the eye, here's the gut, the spinal cord is back here. So we can introduce these oncogenes.
And what you can see, the first thing that happens when these oncogenes are active is they
cause the cells to detach electrically from their neighbors and to enter an aberrant bioelectrical
state. This is a voltage map, and I'll show you in a minute, we use this a lot. We map the electrical
state of these cells. And here they are, you can actually catch them converting to this kind of
ancient amoeba-like state. And the most important thing is that you can actually suppress this
process, despite the fact that the oncogene is there. If you grab control of the bioelectric
state of the cell by co-injecting an ion channel, that's going to, even though the oncogene is very
strongly expressed, there may be no tumor because you're managing the goals that these cells are
going to follow. They are now connected to their neighbors, and they're all working towards making
a nice skin muscle and everything else. One of the most important things that evolution discovered
to do that is this thing called a gap junction. So gap junction is this, it's a primitive synapse,
it's an electrical synapse used throughout the body that enables cells to directly communicate
with each other to directly connect their intercellular miliars. And what that means is that
traditional signaling like this, you have one cell and it produces some kind of signaling factor,
and it diffuses and this cell can feel it. It's very easy for these cells to remain separate
and keep their identity because once you receive a signal like this, you know it came from the
outside. And so you can ignore it, you can remember it or you can not remember it. This
cell has its set of memories and this cell has its set of memories about past events that have
happened, and it's very easy for them to be separate. But once cells become coupled by these
gap junctions, something very interesting happens, the information that comes across does not have
any metadata about the owner. So anything that happens to this cell that triggers some kind of
second messenger response that serves as a memory engram of that experience,
once that propagates into this cell, this cell now has no way to tell whether that information
originated related to this cell or in fact it came from this cell. So all of the experiences
and prior history of this cell are now shared by them both. They cannot separate who's who,
it's a kind of mind meld, so to speak, because their internal miliures are linked in an important
way. And so now a lot of their individuality is really stripped, right? You now get this one
system with a larger network, larger IQ, lots of memory of what happened to both cells,
but it's no longer possible to keep that very strict separation and this is how goals scale.
So what you can do, and we're making some very rigorous models of this, is you can start with
very simple homeostatic loops, single cells, all they do, let's say pH, right? All they do is they
sort of, they measure the pH, they compare to set point, and then they either load, acid load,
or efflux, that's it. And so these very small, very humble goals, once you start connecting
these cells by gap junctions, you have a bioelectrical medium, you have this excitable medium
that's able to store and process very large states as goals. And this is something that's
been worked a lot in Hopfield Networks and other kinds of systems. So we are making those kind
of models to understand large scale memories, in particular pattern memories, as a scaling of
simple homeostatic units in electrical networks, right? It's a kind of a connectionist approach.
So let's look at some real data and let's see what you can do with all this.
And so we'll do two things. We'll talk about morphogenesis as a collective intelligence,
and then we'll look at this novel proto-organism, okay? And we're going to try to understand
how these goal memories are actually stored and processed, so the mechanisms
by which collective intelligences of cells store set point information. So the first thing
I just want to mention is that there are, there's huge plasticity in living things,
which has really important implications for evolution. This is a tadpole that we've made.
There are no eyes in the primary where they're supposed to go. So these are nostrils, here's
the brain, here's the gut. So what we've done is we suppressed the primary eyes, but we've,
we induced an eye on the tail, and we can have a separate discussion about how we do that,
we do that through the techniques that I'm talking about today. We induce the eye on the tail,
and we have this machine that tests these animals for visual learning and basically trains them for
certain behaviors and visual cues. We find out that these animals can see perfectly well.
This eye synapses onto the spinal cord, not the brain, and their behavior is quite normal.
They can learn, they can see, they have very nice, very nice visual behaviors,
and so what this means is that the ability of evolution to explore the various configurations
is greatly potentiated by the fact that if things happen, let's say there's a mutation that moves
the eye, no problem, your behavioral repertoire doesn't automatically fall apart such that now
your fitness is very low. In fact, the animal can, the animal can still function, and then you can
explore other consequences of that mutation. So this is really important, and this ability,
this plasticity, and this ability to handle novel circumstances, that's the key here,
is the novelty. This animal evolved for millions of years to process visual input from the eye
fields, but one changed and it can handle this. This is another example of problem solving in
physiological space. So here's a flatworm, these are plenarium, I'm going to show you much more
of this. These flatworms have this amazing property of regeneration. So if you cut off their heads,
for example, they will regrow a new head. In fact, they regrow everything. So what we found is that
if you take one of these plenarians and you expose them to barium chloride, so barium is a non-specific
potassium channel blocker, it's a really bad problem because now these cells can't pass potassium.
So the heads of these plenaria literally explode. Overnight they just go head deep
progression, they literally explode. But what's incredible is that over the next couple of weeks,
if you leave the animal in the barium, they will regrow brand new heads that are completely normal,
that are barium adapted. They have no problem with barium whatsoever. So what we did was we
did some transcriptomic analysis to simply ask the question, what new genes are expressed in
these animals that are not expressed in these animals? How is it that they're barium adapted?
What happened? And it turns out it's actually a very small number of genes that was changed
in order to do this. So now think about the critical part here is two things. One is that
barium is not anything that plenaria find in nature. So there's never been evolutionary selection
to put up with barium. That's a completely novel. And the other thing is that cells in the system
don't reproduce quickly the way bacteria do. So you can't use some sort of a selectionist
explanation that basically everybody tries random sets of gene expression and whoever survives,
repopulates the head. There's no time for that. These cells don't turn over that fast.
So it's almost a problem here. Think about this problem. You have tens of thousands of different
genes that you can turn on and off. I visualize this as a nuclear reactor control room. Your cells
are poisoned. You have this physiological stressor. The cells are poisoned. Everything's melting down.
You have to find a very small number of genes that you're going to up and down regulate to solve
this problem. You've never seen this problem before. How do you know which genes you're going
to turn on and off? And so part of that might be some sort of generalization from other problems
you've had that may have been similar. For example, excitotoxicity, epilepsy, things like
that may be similar to this, but it requires an incredible amount of problem-solving ability to
navigate that transcriptional space, that space of all gene expression, to find exactly what you're
looking for. So that's an example in physiology. Now let's look at examples in anatomy. So this
here is a cross-section through the kidney tubule of a nut of a salamander. And if you look, the
normal tubule has eight to 10 cells or so that work together to build a lumen of a particular
size. These tubules have a particular diameter. What you can do is you can make these nuts with
progressively larger cells. And you do that by inducing extra copy numbers of their chromosomes.
Amazingly, the cells put up with it and they just simply get bigger. The cells get bigger.
As the cells get bigger, what you will see, and this isn't our work. This goes back to the 40s,
what you will see is that fewer and fewer cells are now working together to make basically the
same size lumen. So they're adjusting the number of cells based on this really novel and unexpected
outcome of having to build a salamander with much larger bricks. So if we had robotics building
something, you could give it a completely different size of brick and it would make adjustments and
things would still work. We don't have anything like that. The most amazing part of this is that
if you make cells that are truly enormous, what will happen is just one cell will bend
around itself and achieve the same outcome. So completely different molecular mechanisms,
not cell-to-cell communication, but now cytoskeletal bending that gets you to the same place using a
different set of molecular components in service of a large-scale anatomical feature. So this is
very much looks like a kind of top-down control where the goal of making a tubule can be implemented
with diverse, it's got that degeneracy, it can be implemented with diverse molecular mechanisms
and the system executes whatever it needs at the lower levels to maintain the correct region of
anatomical space at the higher levels. We don't understand how this works, but it fits nicely
William James' definition of intelligence, which is same goal through different means,
the ability to reach your goal when things are changing, including in this case, not just changes
of external environment, but changes of your own components. Your cells are now way bigger than
evolution prepared you for and you can still do what you need to do. Here's another example,
this is a frog. Frogs, unlike salamanders, normally do not regenerate their legs and so
what we've done is in some of our work that aims towards regenerative medicine, we've figured out
how to make them regenerate their legs. When you do that, something very interesting happens. This
is an early leg. Here's a toenail, here's some toes. These early legs don't look anything like
the way that legs normally develop. Eventually, they get to the same place and they make a very
nice frog leg at the end, but the intermediate paths are not like developmental strategies at
all. In fact, they look kind of like a plant really. It's just a different way to navigate
morpho space to get to the same outcome. What you see here is the biology has this incredible
plasticity of behavior, of physiology, and of anatomical construction to get to the same goals
via very different paths and as I'm going to show you in a minute, also from diverse starting
positions. That plasticity, that intelligence of these systems is really important to understand
and as we think about shape, we have a very basic question. Where is anatomy specified in the first
place? You start life as a collection of blastomeres, your bunch of cells descended from the egg and
this is a cross-section of a human torso. This is amazing. Look at this incredible and variant
order. All of the cells, the organs, everything is in the right position, the right orientation,
the right location relative to each other. How does it know where these things should actually go?
People naturally say the genome, but of course, we know how to read genomes now and what's in
the genome is the specification of the micro-level hardware. DNA specifies the proteins. There's
nothing in the genome that directly talks about anatomical size, shape, symmetry type. It's all
about the micro-level hardware. We need to understand how does this order arise? We need to understand
if part of it is missing. How do we repair or edit this? How do we get the cells to rebuild?
And then as engineers, we want to go one step further and ask, well, what else could these cells
build and how could we convince them to build something completely different than their default
outcome? And so I've already shown you this, that these individual cells are very competent
on their individual cell scale, but it gets much more interesting in examples like this.
This here, what you're seeing here is that this is a normal tappel. So here are the eyes, here's
the brain, here's the gut, and these tappels need to become a frog. In order for a tappel to become
a frog, they have to rearrange their face. So this means that they have to move their jaws,
have to move forward, their eyes have to move inward, everything has to move. And it was thought
previously that somehow the genetics basically tells each organ the direction and the amount to
move because then you can always go from a standard tappel to a standard frog. So what we did was we
made these, we call them Picasso frogs. They are completely mixed up. Everything is in the wrong
place. The jaws are off to the side. The eyes are on the back of the head. Everything is moved
around. And when you do this, what you find out is that they still make largely quite normal
frogs because all of these organs will move around in unnatural paths. In fact, sometimes
they go too far and they actually have to have to come back. They will keep moving until a correct
frog face is built. So what the system actually does is the genetics doesn't specify the movements.
The genetics specifies the seed that constructs a machine that minimizes error. It's able to,
from novel starting configurations, it's progressively able to minimize the delta
between where we are now and what the correct face is, which obviously raises some important
questions. How does it know what the correct frog face looks like? So in my group, what we've been
doing is this is kind of the standard model of developmental biology where you have gene
regulatory networks that turn each other on and off. Some of these genes make proteins that are
sticky or they diffuse or they're doing various things. So then there's this parallel physics
that goes on and then there's this process of emergence where if lots of individual pieces
do execute these local rules, then eventually something very complex happens like this nice
style manner. So this is all true. This is all happens. Of course, there is a feed forward,
a emergent component to this, but there's actually also a very important set of feedbacks
that occur both at the level of physics and genetics and we're going to talk about the
physical one here today that basically executes a loop of anatomical homeostasis
when the system is perturbed from its normal target morphology and this might be with injury,
with pre-cancerous conversions, with teratogens, mutation, anything that takes the system away
from that's correct shape kick starts cascades that will try to get back to the correct location
in morpho space. So what we needed to know was can we find the storage mechanism for the set
point, right? Every homeostatic process has a set point and so what you want to do is you want to
find the storage mechanism of the set point and you want to know how to change it. Can we learn
to read and write these set points and this is very important for the kind of biomedical approaches
that we're really focused on in my group because making changes here, which is what all of molecular
medicine tries to do is to make changes somewhere down here is incredibly difficult as a means of
changing what we really care about which is anatomy, which is solving birth defects and
traumatic injury and aging and things like this because reversing this to be able to decide what
changes do you need to make is incredibly hard. This is an inverse problem that's probably
unsolvable to try to in general to try to reverse this highly non-linear highly recursive process
to say what do I need to do at the micro level to get me to a desired system level state.
So what we would like to do is we'd like to change the set point, leave all of this intact. The cells
are very good at implementing different set points. We just like to change the set points. So where is
it encoded? So we took our inspiration from the brain. We know how this works in brain brains are
an excellent system for maintaining behavioral set points and being intelligent about getting to
those set points. So we said, how does this work in the brain? Well, in the brain, you've got some
cellular hardware that basically is a set of electrical networks that is the home of the
interesting electrical dynamics, which you might call the software because it's able to be changed
by experience and so on. And what people in neuroscience are doing is this project called
neural decoding. So the commitment is that if you were to read and be able to decode all of the
electrical activity in the brain, you could infer the the memories, the preferences, the
goal states, you know, that's where it's all encoded. It's all encoded in the electrochemical
dynamics of what this hardware is doing. And what the nervous system is using all this for is to
coordinate muscles in three dimensional space so that you can move around and do various things.
What did evolution, where did this come from? You know, in evolution, this is a brain didn't
just appear out of nowhere. These electrical systems are actually ancient, even bacterial
biofilms have all of this stuff. So what did this look like before we had brains before we had
muscles for large scale behavior? It looked actually surprisingly similar. It we have the
exact same scheme. So you have all cells in the body are actually producing these these electrical
dynamics through the network. And what you can do and this is a video of a early frog embryo,
we're tracking the voltage, this is not a model or a simulation, this is real data,
you're looking at all the electrical dynamics, as you might when you look at a brain,
that we could try to read and we could test the hypothesis that these electrical dynamics
are the medium in which the collective intelligence of these cells is making decisions,
who's going to be anterior, posterior, left, right, how many heads do we have and things like
that. So it's a very parallel project to what neuroscience is doing, but taken away from sort
of generalized away from neurons and asked about all cells. So just again, to nail this down,
all cells, this is developmental bio electricity, all cells have ion channels,
all cells set electrical resting potentials, they communicate those through gap junctions,
which we met a few slides ago, that can communicate them through to their to their neighbors using
the exact same mechanisms. And here you can you can read about how we think that that that
coordinating problems in morphospace was the basis of intelligence in behavior when evolution
pivoted from just coordinating the body shape to actually running around in three dimensional
space by using muscles and sense organs and things like that. So let's let's think about
how then if I'm making the claim that that these bio electrical patterns are a kind of cognitive
proto cognitive medium for making decisions in anatomical space and I'm just going to show you
want some examples of that. So here's our planarian, here's the flatworm, here are the eyes, the head,
here's the tail. What we can do is we can first ask, let's look at gene expression, which of these
cells think they're part of the head? Well, it's this one, these blue cells here, right? So there's
anterior gene expression in the head, there's none in the tail, that's very good. So it's supposed
to be when you cut off the head and the tail, this middle fragment remembers exactly what goes at
each end and pretty soon you have a new planarian, one head, one tail, fine. Now here's another planarian,
again, one head, one tail, again, anterior gene expression in the in the head, that's fine.
When you cut this guy, you get something amazing, which is a two headed form. Now this is not photoshop,
these are these are real animals. Now, why would this animal with normal gene expression and normal
anatomy, why would this animal suddenly, by the way, this process is 100% of fidelity, you know,
it's habit, it's very hard to make them make a mistake, they always basically do this correctly.
Why would they suddenly make a two headed animal? Because in the meantime, what we did was we looked
at a bioelectrical circuit that, oops, that we looked at this, this bioelectrical circuit,
and we realized that there might be some, there might be a gradient, some electrical communication
that allows these cells to remember how many heads they're supposed to have and where the heads go.
And so what we did was we learned to, to, to suppress this, and this is not with applied
electric fields or magnets or anything like that, this is by using RNA interference and specific
drugs to target ion channels, target the native machinery by which these cells produce the voltage
gradients. And what we found is that these animals actually make two headed to these,
these, what, once, once the electric circuit is perturbed in a very specific way,
actually make two headed animals. And one of the most amazing aspects of these,
of these two headed animals is that, and I keep calling this a memory, here's why,
if you were to recut this animal again, in plain water, no more manipulations of any kind. So
you chop off the primary head, you get rid of this ectopic secondary head, if you thought some of
these cells were, you know, epigenetically reprogrammed to be ahead, fine, they, we throw them away,
all we leave is this nice normal gut fragment. And that was nothing weird about that, about
this gut fragment that the genetics are unchanged. And so you might think that it should just
regenerate a normal planarian, but that's not what happens. They regenerate these two headed
forms. And if you cut those, they still regenerate as two headed forms. And this is basically
permanent. And we now know how to change that circuit back with a, with another brief, bi-electrical
drug stimulation, change it back to being one headed. So the question of how many heads a
planarian has, or is supposed to have, is quite interesting. The default that, that the hardware
specified by the genome will make is one, but that's not really where the information is stored.
The information is stored, as I'll show you momentarily, in the real time electrical state of a
circuit that tells these cells what the target morphology of a correct planarian is. It is the
set point. And that set point is not genetic. The genetics here are untouched. We didn't edit
the genome or anything like that. We, we changed the encoding of what the correct state is
considered by these cells when they are injured. And so this meets all the properties of memory.
It's long-term stable. It's rewritable. It has conditional recall, which looks like this. So
the reason that, that this guy made a two headed animal is that we looked at the bi-electrical
circuit. Here's what a normal one state looks like. The voltage here just tells you one head.
And what we did was we altered it. And it's a little messy. The technology is still being worked
out. But basically what we did was we induced a different pattern memory in the exact same kind
of body. So this says when you are injured, you will build to the target morphology. And this
is what the correct planarian target morphology looks like. Make two heads. And that's what it does.
So to be super clear, this electrical map is not the memory of this existing animal.
This is a memory of this one headed animal. So a one headed body, a normal, a normal body can
store at least one of two different representations of what a correct planarian should look like.
So this is what I mean when I say the bi-electrical state is the
protocognitive medium of this collective intelligence. The cells are literally keeping
a representation, a visible, I mean, we can read this now and we can rewrite it,
a visible bi-electric representation of what they should do if they get injured. Until they get
injured, this pattern is ignored. It's a latent memory. It doesn't do anything. Once it gets injured,
then you see what it is because it guides them to make this two headed one. Now,
this kind of approach can make ectopic heads of the same species. And that's kind of
sufficiently surprising. But we can go further than this. And it turns out that what you can
also do is push the tissue to recall memories that belong to different species. So here is
one planarian species that has a triangular head. You chop off the head. You perturb the electrical
network in a particular way where you basically prevent the cells from communicating with each
other very well for 48 hours. During that time, everything gets kind of confused. You withdraw
the drug, the network settles back down to a stable attractor. When it does, that attractor
sometimes is the correct one. So sometimes you get a nice triangular head. Other times it lands
in the wrong attractor that actually belongs to other species of worms. So you can get round heads
like this S-Mediterrania. You can get flat heads like this Pifelina. And it's not just the shape
of the head, but actually the shape of the brain is changed to be just like these other species.
And the distribution of the stem cells is changed. And again, no genetic change here. We didn't do
anything to alter the hardware. We altered the ability of this electrical network to remember
what the correct pattern is during regeneration. And the idea here is not just to make weird-looking
worms and frogs. There's a lot of biomedical implications to all of this, where we're looking
for optimal control of these kinds of outcomes in a way that doesn't require us to try to micromanage
gene expression and so on, which I don't think will be doable in our lifetime. So
there's applications here for cancer, obviously, both diagnostics and for normalization strategy,
so not chemotherapy, but normalization. And of course, for regeneration, using triggers to
regenerate complex organs such as limbs. And so in the last few minutes, I just want to show you
a step away from natural bodies to show you the real plasticity of cells and how remarkable this is.
So evolution provides standard animals with a set of instincts that operate in anatomical
morpho space. These are default outcomes. This is why acorns make oak trees and zebrafish
eggs make zebrafish, right? There's a default outcome. But much like in the nervous system,
there is a lot of reprogrammability here. And so we wanted to understand how much plasticity there is.
And so we wanted these new pattern memories. We wanted to see if they could form very rapidly,
and we want to understand where they come from. So this is the work of a staff scientist in my
group, Doug Blackiston. We have a collaboration through this new institute with Josh Bongard's lab
at the University of Vermont. And his student, Sam Kriegman, now a postdoc in my group.
And what they were doing is computational analysis of the following situation.
If you take cells and you liberate them from their normal environment, right, from the normal
set of instructive interactions that the other cells are telling them to do,
this larger network that has these bigger goals, would they reboot their multicellularity?
What would they do? Would they cooperate? And if so, what is it that they would build?
So we did this simple experiment. Here's a frog embryo. We take some skin cells off of the top
of this early embryo. So these are these are ectodermal cells. We dissociate them. And then we
put them in a little, in a little depression, you can, you can see that here. So basically,
we just dissociate them, and then we just pipet them down into this little hole. And so over the
next, over the next 24 hours, they will simply compact like this. Okay, you can see them,
they compact together, right? And then here, this is actually the flashing you see is actually
calcium signaling. It's some very interesting signaling dynamics, but they make this, this,
this round sort of thing. Now, they could have made lots of, they could have done lots of
different things. They could have crawled away from each other, they could have died,
they could have formed a monolayer, like you see in cell culture, could have done lots of things.
Instead, what they do is they form something we call a xenobot. Xenobot for Xenopus lavis,
that's the name of the frog, and it's a bio bot platform. So first of all, what you see here
is that they are self motile. So here it is swimming along, they have cilia the way the
reason they move is they have little, little hairs known as known as cilia that that they use to,
to, to, to row against, against the medium. And so, and so they, they, they swim along,
the cilia are normally used on the skin to, to move pathogens and mucus off of the, off of the
surface of the frog. And you can see here that, that they have all kinds of behaviors. This one
goes in the circle, this one sort of patrols back and forth, right? Here is some tracking data on
a group of them. This one's going on kind of a longer journey. This one is going in circles,
these two are interacting with each other. These skin cells normally are restricted to a very
boring two dimensional life sitting on the outside of a tackle by the rest, by the instructive
signals from the rest of the animal. When liberated from this, they, it turns out,
they have a completely different capacity to cooperate and make a new sort of little proto
animal. We didn't add anything, we didn't edit the genome, this is, we didn't induce, we didn't
put any, any trans genes, there are no nanomaterials. All we did was take something away. We took away
the restrictive instructive signals that the rest of the cells impose and we asked these
cells, what do they want to do? So now you're starting to see this, this, this multi-scale,
multi-scale competency architecture where the plasticities that, that I've been showing you
about being able to correct for all sorts of defects and so on is because all of the components
have their own agendas, which can be modified by the larger scale network that they're a part of,
but you can start to see this when, when some of those are lifted. Now here is, here it is in a
maze. This is filled with still water. So there's no water flow, it's completely closed. So you can
see it, it, it takes the corner without bumping into the edge. It then decides to turn around and
come back where it came from. Okay. So some sort of internal dynamic. So here it is, I'm swimming
along. It can, it can take this corner without having to bump into the opposite edge. So it
somehow knows that there's a possibility to take a corner here and then, and then it turns around.
We don't know why it turns around. They have all sorts of spontaneous behaviors, right, in this
system. They have the interesting capacity to regenerate themselves. So if you cut them in
half, this one was basically like pinched in half, you can see here over this 180 degree,
that hinge right there, right over that, that 180 degree, the forces, the forces must be, must be
really strong, but was able to do is able to try and fold itself back up into its new shape, into
its new xenobot shape. And if you actually pay attention to the calcium dynamics, you can see
it's very brain-like. They have, this is, you know, this is basically what, what calcium looks like
in, in, in brains. When you image living, living animals, there are no neurons here. This is just
skin. Everything that you've seen was just skin cells cooperating towards a new kind of morphology,
right? They have another very interesting behavior that we first saw. That's a kind of herding behavior
where they operate in groups like this and they, they, they do these kind of circular, these kind
of circular behaviors to make little piles. And, and why do they make little piles? Well, the most
amazing thing is that these little piles, if these little piles are themselves skin cells,
then what they will do is they will push them together into these little piles. Guess what the
little piles become? The little piles become the next generation of xenobots. So there's,
there's a couple of interesting things going on here. First of all,
this is a kind of replication. It's not a real lineage. They don't have strong heredity yet,
but it's a kind of replication because given components in the environment, they will make copies
of themselves. This is much closer to Von Neumann's idea of reproducing machines than to the way that
any other organism reproduces, right? So they will, they will go around, they will make, you know,
multiple generations of these little balls and the little balls become xenobots and continue the
cycle and keep doing it again and again. One interesting thing is that what's happened here
is that when we made it impossible for these cells to reproduce in their normal fashion,
within 48 hours, they have found a new way to pretty much do the same thing that has never
existed, as to our knowledge, never existed in evolution. No other, no other animal does this.
And so this is an amazing example, I think, an amazing example of problem solving and
plasticity. When you can't do things the original way, you can repurpose your existing hardware
to swim around to, and then to undergo behaviors that will actually do things that you can't do
the normal way. That's the first thing. The second thing to note here is that when we made these
xenobots, we, it was very much a collaboration between us and the cells themselves. We don't
know how to tell cells to assume a particular shape yet. All we were able to do was to remove some
constraints and put them in the new environment. The cells did all the rest after that, all the
heavy lifting. And we, and this is, this is very important because it's a new kind of
robotics and engineering where your material is not passive. It is not active. It's more than that.
It's an agential material, right? The new, I think the future of bioengineering is,
of engineering in general, is working with parts that are themselves some sort of simple,
or maybe not so simple, homeostatic agent. So that what you're doing is you're not engineering
the way we normally engineer. You micromanage every part. You have to know how to do everything.
You are actually signaling to, you know, you're trying to shift the way that your parts are
going to behave because they have their own behavior. And evolution does exactly that.
When these, when these bots make the next generation of bots, this only works because
the material they are working with, the cells that they are working with is itself an agential
material and is going to do the same things on its own. That's the only reason this works.
And that's, and the same is true of evolution. When you, when you try to change an organism,
you have to motivate and affect its guided self-assembly, the cells that you're working with.
They have their own, they have their own agendas. And so when you see these Xenobots,
they have a normal frog genome. And these Xenobots don't have a straightforward evolutionary
backstory. If you ask, why do Xenobots have a particular behavior and structure, the answer
is not because for millions of years they were selected to be good Xenobots. There's never
been any Xenobots. So the cells themselves were part of the evolutionary stream on Earth,
but they were selected for a completely different set of functions. So we really need to understand
how it is that evolution doesn't make, it doesn't find solutions to specific problems. It finds
machines that solve problems in novel ways. Right. So here's the, here's the unique developmental
sequence of a Xenobot. This is what normal frogs do. They are, they look like this and they look
like that. Then they run around like this. This is what Xenobots do. They make a, they make a body
like this. Eventually they will transition in, you know, two months later, they transition into
something that looks like that. Where does that come from? That's never existed before
during evolution. So just to close up, here's, here's the, the, the summary of what I tried to
say is that there is a framework which is really focused on a continuum of agency, not binary
categories. It's very engineering focused in terms of finding the best most appropriate models
for, to explain the scaling of, of cognition. The materials don't matter. There is no privileged
substrate. One useful way to think about systems is as the scale of goals that they are capable of,
of, of pursuing, we can think of intelligence as problem solving and abstract spaces.
And developmental bio electricity is a great way to start to look at how competent individuals
can scale their goals. And I think that's exactly what, what evolution did. And we can certainly
do that. Evolution is hugely potentiated, sped up by this kind of multi-scale competency
architecture. And the biggest, to me, one of the biggest questions going forward is,
where do these goals come from? It's not going to be selection. Where else can they come from?
And I just want to remind people that now with the new technologies, everything that every, every
organism you've ever heard of, right? Everything that Darwin meant when he said, endless forms,
most beautiful, all of that is a tiny little corner of this incredibly large state space of,
of cyborgs and hybrids and, and chimeras and all, all possible combinations of evolved material,
engineered material and artificial intelligence. And we're going to have to be able to relate in
some way to these things when we're not able to say what it is and what it's capable of based
on what it looks like and where it came from. So lots of, lots of papers on all these things.
I'm happy to send, send things out. These are the, the people that did all of the, the hard work
of the things that I showed you today. So I thank them. I thank our collaborators, our funders,
of course, and the model systems, which, which always do the heavy lifting. And I will stop here
and thank you. Okay.
Can you hear us, Michael? Yeah, yeah, okay. Well, amazing talk. What can I say? I'm, I'm really,
really impressed. I knew some of your research personally, but now that I see more, I want to
know more. Very, very nice attractor of topics. What we start with the question round. Anybody
has questions, comments? Yeah, Francis. Well, I think what this illustrates is that agency
is something very primitive in life. And agency is not just adaptation, as you say, to very specific
selective pressures, but it's adaptation to a wide range of things. So it's the plasticity,
it's the flexibility, it's the adaptivity that has been selected. So I assume that these cells
have some general agential behaviors, which adapt to the circumstances and when the circumstances
are very different, like in the case of these Xenobots, I assume there is still enough agency
left that they can do things that look kind of intelligent, even though they are completely
different from what they normally do. So it reinforces a little bit my proposal in my talk
that I said that the first step is of the salt maintenance. It's a zillions where zillions means
expanding your basin of attraction, it means expanding the space in which you can solve problems.
So what these things probably have learned a valuable time ago before they were folks,
is to expand this space for problems they could solve so that now if you take them out of their
normal space where they are in the folks body, they can still do things in this completely
different space because they have most this kind of generic agency you might want.
Yeah, I think that's absolutely correct. Of course, one of the big mysteries that we
now have to address, and we're doing this in computational models and at the bench,
is to really understand how evolution is able to produce this because the standard story is
that evolution is supposed to always pick the immediate short-term benefit and how it is that
it maximizes this incredible ability to problem solve instead of a very hard wire, and certainly
there are animals that act hardwired in various ways, you know, C. elegans and things like that,
but the majority are exactly as you just said, and so how that arises from evolutionary dynamics
that we're always told are very kind of short-sighted and always taking the immediate benefit,
it's not clear and that represents a huge area for research.
Well, my hypothesis is that when we think about evolution, we're thinking about
organisms that are already very highly specialized and then they are already so well
optimized for certain things that they can't afford to take risks to make too many changes,
but if you think about the origin of life and you think about all the catalytic systems
where there are all kinds of molecules coming and going and temperatures changing and water
entering and drying out, these very first thoughts, they had to be extremely non-specialized,
they had to be extremely resilient, they had to be extremely adaptive and probably these properties
are just properties that define life to have to get to the first living cells, you had to have this
extreme adaptivity and then once you had this more specialized organism, you didn't need
all these functions anymore, but they are still there because they can be the essence of life.
More comments, questions? No? Well, I have a little question here, this hand has a little question.
Oh, it's frozen even better.
So, as I understand, you are using the electrical field on the cell,
or what electrical what is the voltage, you measure the voltages, but what would be like the
real object that is being measured there? Yeah, what we're measuring is the voltage difference
between the inside and the outside of the cell, so every cell has a membrane and there's an
electrical potential between zero and let's say 80 millivolts, that's between the inside and the
outside, so what we're looking at is if you think about a neural network or an artificial neural
network where every node has an activation level, and so what we're looking at is the electrical
state of every individual cell, but that's not actually where the information is, the information
is in the flow of electrical computations through the whole network, so what we're measuring is the
spatial pattern and then over time we would take videos of each individual activation weight, it's
exactly like neuroscience except that the time is greatly slowed down, so you can take almost
any neuroscience paper and just do a fine to replace and Microsoft Word replace the words
neuron with the word cell, replace millisecond with hour and everything else basically works,
it's the same kind of thing. Yeah, so these patterns that are across multiple cells then
it's not the, oh yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, no that's critical, that's critical, it's not individual cells, yeah.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, so okay, so yeah, yeah, okay, and I have, sorry, sorry, did it,
when, yeah, yeah, but continue first. It's the, it's the, it's where I'm getting to the question, so,
so you are using now, there is this genetic information that is kind of like the hardware
you were mentioning, then you have the electrical field which is the electrical component which
encodes an extra mechanism which has been kind of like overlooked by evolutionary morphogenesis or
like by the fields you were mentioning and then I wonder, like this is, my wonder is like
might there be other forces at play? Have you have, have you studied or measured or why would
have to be only electrical? So, so that's the, since there are many other physical quantities
that might have similar dynamics and play a role in transmission and so on. Sure, sure, sure,
there, there are many others and many people study them, there's biomechanical forces,
there is ultra-weak photon emission, there are of course chemical gradients that everybody
studies, all of these exist. My claim is not that they're not important or that bioelectricity
does everything, no, but, but bioelectricity is where the only data that I know of has been
obtained where those bioelectrical dynamics are actually the memory medium of this collective
intelligence. It's possible that, you know, 10 years from now somebody will find out that the
biomechanical stress patterns are also storing the same thing, entirely possible, but it hasn't
been done. The only, you know, these other, these other forces have been treated as,
as pieces of physics at the lowest level that need to be tracked to, to understand the system
and their bioelectricity is exactly like all these others, but what we have shown, I think,
is that bioelectricity has a really important role as the, as the, as the actual medium of the
computation. So it's like, you know, you can look at a computer and okay, yep, there are stress
forces, there are vibrations, there are, you know, heat gradients, all kinds of things going on, but
if you want to really understand what computations they're doing, the bioelectric, the, you know,
the electric patterns through the circuits have a privileged status and maybe these other modalities
will have the same thing. It's entirely possible, maybe evolution uses them all, but it's, but it's
not known. It's only known at this point for the bioelectrics. Yeah, yeah, that was my, my question.
Please do it. Yeah, very amazing talk, first of all, and I knew your work already, so, but okay,
it was nice to see all these little details explained carefully. No, I, I, I'm a counter
physicist. So electricity is, is thought over. So in a certain way, I wonder actually,
certainly because you have this memory effect. So there is something new being revealed here,
I think, that has not been really identified. And that is difficult to, to explain out of Darwinian
evolution, even in, in, in an easy way at least in a straightforward way. Well, that's also the
message which was a little bit in your talk, I think. So I wonder whether, because it would be too
long to, to, to tell you the details now, but I could send you some, some, some material there. But
let's say we are working on, on an integration of quantum physics where this would fit in in some
way, you see, that would be things happening on the quantum level in, in, in, in, in photon clouds,
which, which, which were not, which not have been revealed yet, yet clearly that have to do with,
with meaning, meaning that would be stored in, in, in light in some way. And so, so it's amazing,
it's amazing, these experiments. Thank you. I knew them already. So it was not the first time that
I saw them. But let's say that. Yeah. Yeah, I'd be very happy to, yeah, please send me, yeah, send
me, send me what you have. I will send you an email because this would take too long to make
my own explanation. Exactly the kind of things that we want to, want to happen, that we connect
with each other and also the online audience can also bring, bring connections. And why not keep,
keep discussing. I'm totally interested in this. And I know some people who will be interested too.
So I'm kind of new to the topic, but it's extremely, extremely interesting as for me as well. Please,
Francis. Another thing that I find very interesting in your work I had heard about it is before this
idea of the cognitive boundary, where you use the metaphor of the light cone, but I'm not sure
that's a very good metaphor because the light kind of extends in this way while yours comes together
so maybe more something like a cognitive horizon, I would say the horizon is as far as you can see.
And I personally have been using the concept already for years of prospect, the prospect is
what you can see ahead of you and what you can imagine to be good or bad. So prospect is both
an anticipation and a notion of good or bad or value. The prospect is the things you see
potentially that you may go to or that you may want to avoid. And I think your notion of cognitive
bond is very similar to my notion of prospect. And indeed, the term in evolution, you might say,
is to extant the prospect because the larger the prospect, the easier it becomes to find something
valuable to go towards a goal that is worthwhile and the easier it also becomes to see the potential
dangers and to avoid them. So I just heard a commentary about Thtre de Chardin, who had
a kind of a mystical philosophy, but he had very good intuitions. He had this law of complexity
consciousness where he says during evolution, complexity and consciousness increase at the
same time. And this notion of consciousness was a little bit like this notion of the cognitive
boundary. As evolution progresses, the systems can see farther and can see wider around them.
And that comes with the idea of the north here, by the internet. Now we can all in a sense see
what's happening all around the world. So it's this extension of the cognitive boundary. I think
all what I call prospect, I think that's a very important idea.
Yeah, I agree. Can I say something? Can you hear me? I can hear you. Yeah. Yeah. Great.
Thank you very much. Yes, for this amazing talk. I just want to make a make a make a notion in
terms of interdisciplinarity. Because what you said, I find super interesting and super
amazing where where is the shape defined or located in the first place? This is the one
question you put in the the other one was how does it the system knows when it is right,
the the the forming of the shape and these two questions are exactly the crucial crucial
questions in in design in the in the artistic process. So this did really strike me when you
were saying this. So where are these and is it possible to find these set points?
And so I think this this this this happens on on on on many different levels. These I think these
are two very, very deep and important questions. This is just what I want to to to say. Yeah.
Really, thank you. Thank you so much. Yeah, I took a bunch of notes during your talk. So I will
be I will be emailing you afterwards. I completely agree. There are some nice nice similarities
here. Yeah, great. Thank you. Okay, amazing. Then we will take a little break and have some coffee
on this side of the of the universe. And then we'll see you back for our last talk, where
Maximiliano Sanin will tell us about transport networks and why they modeling is the wrong way.
So I will stop the recording now and then stop the call so the videos can be
generated. So see you in nearly 15 minutes. Okay, thank you guys. Until soon. Thanks, Michael.
