We will start the seminar. I think most people know me here. I'm Francis Heligand. I'm presently the director of the Centre-Léon Apostle.
And I'm going to talk about a topic which I consider to be very important. Of course, you would like to believe that all the topics you speak about are important, but this one for me is more important than other talks I have given in the centre.
I think it's a kind of a unification of a very large number of things I have been doing and not only a unification of things I have been doing, but as I hope to argue, a unification actually potentially for the whole of science.
That's why I call it a new ontology for a transdisciplinary unification.
So relational agency, it's a recent term. I'm not 100% sure that I will stick to that term. There may be better terms, but I think it captures very well what this new ontology is about.
So let me start by saying what is an ontology.
Okay.
So, starting with the term ontology, which may not be common to everybody.
So an ontology originally was a term in philosophy that was speaking about being on the things that exist.
More practically an ontology is a theory about the fundamental constituents of reality. Whatever world you have, you assume that reality is constituted at the basis of something extremely fundamental, the essential, the elements or the building blocks of the things that exist.
So any kind of a worldview or metaphysics must have an ontology at its foundations and often the ontology is implicit.
But lately, more and more people are interested in looking explicitly at ontology because changing the ontology changes your whole worldview.
So there are some classical ontologies, for example, materialism is that the idea that at the bottom everything consists of matter, but then there is idealism that says no in the end everything consists of ideas.
And there are some other versions like social constructivism where everything after all is a social construction.
I'm not going to detail the different ontologies that exist, but go to the ontology which is kind of the most standard, the most default one, the most classical Western ontology.
Not that I claim that this is purely Western.
This ontology I'm pretty sure also in other world views, but it's the one that we associate it most with the scientific Western world view.
And more specifically by what I have called in my research, the Newtonian world view, the Newtonian world view that meets the world view of classical mechanics.
And this ontology is implicitly since most scientific theories later developed on the basis of this Newtonian world view, most scientific theories kind of implicitly assume this ontology.
And this ontology why is it so widespread, because it's simple, because it's concrete, because it's intuitive, and because you can express it very nicely in mathematical ways.
And that's what I call the ontology of objects.
So, we can say that as the whole Western world view originated really with the ancient Greeks.
These two come from ancient Greek philosophy, and one philosopher there was Parmenides, who had something against change, who was saying that change is an illusion, the only thing that exists are eternal permanent things.
Prater was looking at these eternal permanent things as what he called absolute forms, IDs, so the IDs are there eternally.
And finally you had Aristotle, who was a student of Prater and Aristotle was more practical was more empirically minded.
He of course was not going to deny that objects could change, but he still kept his idea of the absolute essential form by speaking about objects having essential properties.
So the essential properties, the essences are what define the object.
So this is the ontology of objects, you have objects that have certain essences that are in there.
So let's look at it more concretely, I have chosen here a picture of a break as kind of a default prototypical object.
What is this prototypical object, it's a thing that is this thing that means we can very clearly see where it begins and where it ends, it's located in space there is a border around it.
And it is inert, it just sits there.
It's independent, it's absolute, it just is.
It doesn't do anything or less some force moves it.
So what is standard object have as property is they just remain the way they are they have these essential properties.
They remain identical to themselves they keep these properties.
And of course we want to describe change and not all things are static in the world. So, what Aristotle did to solve that problem is that he distinguished between the essential properties the ones that do not change.
And what he called the accidental properties. And with accidental properties we think about things like the position of that break, or the speed with which you throw it so you can imagine that that break is moved in different orientations.
The position or the position with the witness, it's accidental, it's not essential, it does not define the break.
And if those accidental properties change, that is because something else, namely some outside force such as gravity has made the big move from one position to the own.
So the ontology of objects assume that objects are just their passive, they do not change on their own.
So, after Aristotle this ontology has developed further in the direction of materialism, and that is the ID objects are made from an inner substance a substance is kind of what carries the object, what shapes the object.
Substances can be remodelled or rearranged but the substances are assumed to be eternal to be always the same.
So a substance is something that just is there, it can't be created, can't be destroyed, it can't be transformed.
In our modern scientific world we assume that the fundamental substance of the world is what we call matter, so it's a materialistic world view.
And we assume that matter ultimately consists of particles which are kind of the smallest objects, the elementary units, the smallest possible objects.
So that's the basis of our traditional world view.
In this world view also entails this what we know as reductionism which does that, yeah, if everything consists of objects and objects themselves consist of smaller objects and these smaller objects, eventually consist of particles.
Well, actually that's all there is.
If you want to understand something.
You can get it as some arrangement or assembly of particles. And if you want to know what happens to that object, you just need to look at what these particles are doing, meaning how they are moving in space and time.
Why do they move, because there are forces, and there we have the essence of the Newtonian world view, you have massive objects that move under the influence of forces, such as gravity.
So in such a world view, yeah, actually you can't really have anything new.
Everything exists just out of these bits of matter, which are essentially identical, you may be rearranging them but nothing novel can emerge, there can be no evolution, there can be no creativity.
And moreover, in the Newtonian world view, you assume that all these changes, that's to say the forces acting on these objects, they are deterministic so there is no uncertainty, there is no indeterminacy, there is no freedom, and therefore there also cannot be
something like autonomy, free will or agency, objects cannot decide how they will react, they just are passively subjected to these forces.
So there the logical structure is consistent, we have all these objects subjected to forces, we can explain lots of things in terms of objects and particles, but then there is one thing which we clearly cannot explain.
Namely, if we assume that there are human observers who are looking at those objects and doing things with those objects, then we need to assume that these humans have something that the objects don't have, namely that these humans have agency that they are autonomous free
who can decide, consciously decide what they are going to do, so the brick may be subjective passively to the force of gravity, but I as a human can decide whether or not I will throw the brick or put the brick here or there.
So then we get that, that was the solution of the cat to that problem that humans must have something else, something that is not that matter, they must have some kind of a substance that he called mind, which led to the philosophy of mind,
whether dualism or mind body dualism, there is the mind which is something not material, and then there are the material objects, but immediately that creates a problem which is known as the mind body problem, if we assume that the body is material.
The material particles in the body are subjected to deterministic forces, while the mind has a free will and can interact with the body, then how can that be, it's a contradiction, either the matter is subjected to deterministic forces, or it's subjected to the free will of the mind it
is not about, so we have a problem there which is an unsolvable paradox that lots of philosophers have been lamented about.
So, for me, this paradox the only way to solve this is that you really need a different ontology, you should not make the distinction between passive objects, and active, a gentle minds that nobody understands quite what they are.
And that brings me to a different ontology that is also pretty old, that is the process ontology.
The process ontology against primal illness, we said that change is an illusion, process ontology on the contrary says change is the most basic thing.
The reality is not constituted out of static object, but out of things that change out of processes. And that is an old philosophy, it actually dates from before the Socratic philosophers before Pyramidus, and the best representative in Greek philosophy is Heraclitus,
who is famous with his statement that you can never step in the same river twice, a river is not a thing, it's not an object, a river is a flow, every time you step into the river, it's a different water that you're stepping in, but there is still this river.
And we see similar philosophies in Eastern philosophy, for example in Taoism, where you have this idea of the Tao as a kind of a flow that describes reality.
These ideas have been picked up in 20th century philosophy by a number of philosophers like Whitehead, Théâtre de Chardin and Bergson, but they have never really made much impact on science and I will later explain why that is.
So, rather than immediately going into this abstract process philosophy, I first want to come back to something that's even earlier than the Socratic philosophers.
And that is animism, animism is not an official philosophy, it's a way of describing how hunter-gatherers look at the world, it's a concept that was produced by anthropologists who were studying hunter-gatherers and who noticed that they tended to see
all the phenomena around them, the plants, the animals, the trees, the clouds, the rivers as animated.
That means they saw them as agents, not as passive objects, but as agents that have some spirit of their own and therefore the hunter-gatherers live, you might say, in harmony with nature in the sense that they see themselves as being imaged in this network of relationships.
They have relationships with all these natural agents.
Now, there are different attitudes towards animism and the traditional view in anthropology is that while animism is just some very primitive, naive view, a pre-scientific view where people attribute supernatural characteristics to these material objects.
They kind of tend to think that there is some kind of a spirit living in the tree and it's all very naive, it's just a projection of the internal theory of mind on those external things.
But since recently, since about 20 years, there's a new view developing in anthropology by anthropologists such as Noyd, Burt, David, Tim Ingold and Gavin Gehm-Harvey, who look at animism in a much more pragmatic manner.
That's to say, for them, animism is a natural way of adapting to the ecosystem in which you live.
That means understanding the ecosystem as indeed a network of agents and in which you as a human are just one of the agents among many, and you try to form good positive relationship with those agents.
And this is kind of a little bit of a symbolic depiction of animism. It's the idea that the tree is not just a piece of wood, but it has some kind of a spirit.
But we need to understand spirit here as that what animates it, not so much as some supernatural soul-like entity, the way it is depicted in dualistic philosophies, where there is the mind of the tree and there is the material of the tree,
where the two are separable, that dualism isn't there in animism. The spirit of the tree is in the tree, it's not something that you can take out of it and that you can see in some kind of a supernatural realm.
If animism is indeed this kind of very natural, intuitive way of relating to the world, then a good question to ask is, why are we no longer animists?
And many people nowadays, especially with ecological movement, have kind of lamented that we have lost our connection with nature, that people no longer have this kind of intuitive empathy with trees and with clouds and with rivers.
And that affects a lot of our modern problems of scarcity, exhaustion, pollution, can be explained by that because we treat nature no longer as a collection of agents with whom we are interrelated, we are treating it just as a bunch of raw materials of objects that are just there to be consumed and to be transformed whatever way we see fit.
Now I have discovered an extremely interesting author who is not that well known, that's why I want to emphasize that it's worth reading him, who is called David Abram, who is an anthropologist who has done some field studies in different countries.
Yeah, he's not a very traditional scientific anthropologist, he's more kind of what you might call an eco-philosophy, that means he tries to get into the mindset of these people he has been observing and he himself tries to recreate that kind of animistic consciousness.
He has published two books that are both written, which I made lots of different markings so that it gives you kind of a sign of how much they inspired me, and the titles kind of speak for themselves.
This first book is The Spell of the Sun, so he speaks about this sensuous, this embodied sensation of being in the world in nature and participating, feeling the wind, feeling the trees, hearing the birds.
And the other one he calls an becoming animal, yeah, it's recovering this sensitivity that animals have where animals walk to the woods and they will notice the slightest changes and noises that we westerners when we walk to the woods we will just ignore.
Now what's also interesting about Abram is that not only he gives you a sense of what this original animistic consciousness was, but he also has a hypothesis of why we lost that.
So his hypothesis, I'm not sure it explains everything but it's definitely words looking at is that we lost this consciousness when the invention of alphabetic writing, something that we get from the Hebrews and the Greeks and why is that by writing what you do is you describe something with a word but the word is disconnected from the thing.
The word just stays there, it's in a book, it goes into a library, it loses completely the connection with the context and a word by definition is something static.
Words do not change when you open your book it's still the same words in there, while the tree that the word refers to the tree will have changed in the meantime.
His idea is that when Plato started thinking in terms of essences, Plato was one of the first philosophers who was really using littered material was really using texts, that Plato kind of had this idea of eternal forms essences by looking at words.
And then when you go further and you start expressing these things not only in words but in mathematical formulas and you completely cut out the context, which means you make kind of a static abstract representation of it that is unchanging.
Now another aspect that is definitely very important also is that since Plato and even more since the hunter gathers, we are living in an artificial environment that means an environment mostly consists of artifacts, artifacts like cups and cups are passive objects.
There is nothing animated or a gentle in a cup, while in a piece of wood, you may say okay it's just a piece of wood, but if you come back two months later that piece of wood may have been eaten by alz or it may have eroded or it may have changed color.
There are differences between natural materials that are constantly adapting to circumstances and things like cups and all kind of artifacts. And if you look at this room here, there's nothing animated in here except people.
This dualistic worldview, it's logical that we make a distinction between material objects that are just passive like this, this table and animated people, which are all the rest, and there's nothing in between.
But if you look outside the window then you see the trees and then you see other things except objects and people.
So, I'm not the only person and Abraham is not the only person who has been thinking in this direction, and I might even say that there is a tendency now in science and philosophy to have a certain innocence of animism.
I will first look at the domain that I know best, the scientific models of agency and what is now very common are so called agent based models, what's an agent based model.
The computer simulation of some complex system could be a market could be a society could be an ecosystem. And you do that by defining agents where agents are entities that follow certain rules, and they interact with each other and with the environment to these rules.
The dimensions of course are abstractions, but because each agent acts on its own, and then interacts with the other. What you see is that the whole tends to develop very complex dynamics.
And then we come into the domain that has been called complex adaptive systems you see that these networks of agents start to self organize, and they develop all kind of emergent properties.
And this is an attempt that has been going on I would say at least for 30 years in the physical sciences in the computer sciences, but also in the social sciences and the humanities there is a certain revival of this, what I would call animistics spirit.
Also, there we see models of agents in networks and probably the most famous one is the actor network theory that was developed among others by the sociologist Bruno Latour, and I don't remember his first name Albert Cuyol.
What they do is they analyze complex social evolution as an interplay between many different what they call actors, but the actors are not just humans.
The actors can be institutions they can be technologies they can be even physical resources like uranium.
All of these are actors in the sense that their actions will have an effect on how this network develops, and what is coming out of it.
And this is not really my specialty but he has been here in the audience has worked on that the idea of the parliament of things.
There is not reason in that thing. In this reason you start to say well all these non human actors, maybe they also have some say maybe they should, we should give them some rights, and they have for example be attempts to give legal rights to rivers that has been a case like that that I know in New Zealand.
And that's one part of the influences of this new paradigm. And then there is a paradigm more in the humanities and in the so called cultural and critical studies that is called post humanism, which some of the authors are the famous Donna Haraway and Karen Barrett.
And here the idea that humanism puts humans central is the old idea of the cat, you have the humans that are rational, and that have this mind, and they are different from everything else.
They're different from the animals they're different from technologies, they are unique.
So post humanism says we should no longer take humans as the central part of everything humans are just one among many, and the border, the bond is between what is human and what is not human are often fuzzy.
And I think, for example, at technologies that support us, we become like cyborgs. And also if you think about symbiosis between humans and animals.
We can't just say that the human is a separate individual. So, what you need to do is to blur these boundaries between humans and the rest of the world and see humans as just one among many agents that are all living symbiotically.
So, all these movements they're going in the same direction but at the moment, you can't say that there is a really an integrated theory.
Each of these have different terminologies have different concept they have different assumptions they come from different traditions, like for example very simple idea that you speak about agents in the one and you speak about actors in the other.
You speak about individuals.
Obviously, there is a lot of incoherence still. So, what I'm trying to propose here is to unify the different approaches by developing a common ontology.
So we said that an ontology is a set of building blocks conceptual building blocks.
And we don't want to lose the ability of science to make mathematical models so we should ideally have buildings books conceptual building books that can also be formalize at least can be put into mathematical formulas that can be used for computer simulation.
So that is why I propose my new ontology which I call relational agency, and which is an extension of the process ontology.
Why do we need an extension of the process ontology. Well, if we look at the process metaphysics in the work of people like Whitehead and Berg so we see lots of inspiring ideas but we don't see very clearly, concretely applicable things.
These existing theories, they tend to be quite obscure, complicated, fake abstract.
They're also not, they also don't have a very clear definition, they say that everything is a process but then what is the process, then typical examples are kind of a process of evolution or process of development but these are incredibly complex processes where you can't really say where they begin or answer.
It's very difficult to model. So that is, I think why this process philosophies have not yet had much impact in science, because you can't, you don't know very well how to implement them, how to model them, how to analyze them.
And I propose an instance of starting from guns processes without borders. Let's start from the equivalent of elementary particles that we will call this elementary processes.
And these processes is elementary processes I call reactions.
These are our building blocks, and then when we need to go to more complex things and we will just build up more complex things as networks of such reactions.
So, a little bit for the people maybe with a background in physics.
When you go to quantum to you you see that actually these kind of elementary processes of these elementary actions are really the basis of everything.
So already the traditional quantum mechanics tells you that particles are not objects, the way we imagine them. They don't have essential properties that just are there.
Properties of particles, you, they get their properties to observations and what's an observation, it's an interaction.
And do not interact or do not act in quantum mechanics, they don't really have properties they don't even have a position in space in quantum mechanics you can't say that an electron is located in a particular position, it's only after you make an observation
you can't say, ah, it's there. But the moment after the observation, it has again diffuse and it's no longer there.
So that's already quantum mechanics we tells you that the properties of objects are not stable they're not permanent they're not absolute.
But the quantum field theory you come to the conclusion that even the objects themselves are not stable because particles are merely instantiations of fields and fields are descriptions of potential interactions.
The particles in quantum field theory, they are being destroyed by being created, they're being transformed.
So, if people need convincing that elementary processes are more fundamental than particles, I think quantum filter is the good reason.
Because quantum filter is the most fundamental theory we have in physics, and it's also the most accurate one because there are attempts to make more fundamental theories like string theory but these theories simply don't make any predictions whatsoever.
Or quantum filter makes very precise prediction that turned out to be very precisely correct.
So by defining these elementary reactions and this elementary reactions, I will use a formalism that is so simple that really, I mean a child could learn it.
So I want to have a formalism or language which is transdisciplinary can be applied to all possible cases.
So some of my languages of my language are what I call conditions, sometimes they also use other names like components or molecules, and the reactions that change conditions so what is the condition a condition is something that you can distinguish.
A condition could be its light or its dark and a reaction then is something that changes that condition.
You can see here the reaction.
L a that means something brings a into existence a appears.
I could, for example, say, I'm in the dark, and suddenly there is light a appears.
It's kind of like the simplest possible process you could imagine something distinguishable emerges appears.
So if something appears you can also disappear. That's the second case here a followed by an arrow a goes into emptiness a disappears if there was light and suddenly the light is switched off then the light is gone.
Of course that's not very interesting if you want to describe networks, you will need to have some relations between conditions.
So the next simplest reaction is a leads to be, which means I start in condition a and I go to condition be.
Maybe I go to form a situation where there is a little bit of light and then I go to a situation with a lot of light or maybe I go from a situation where there is yellow light and then the light changes into blue.
It's all very simple to get to the full power of the formalism.
You need to do to use a notation that is used in chemistry and in physics to describe elementary actions that is the A plus big if C plus the A plus B means a and B are both there, a conjunction of a and B, there are two conditions.
If these two conditions are there at the same time, then some other conditions will appear, for example, a leads to be could be the condition is dark clouds are gathering the process is, it starts raining.
So if I have two conditions if I have dark clouds are gathering and people are in the street, then it starts to rain and people will seek shelter.
So the process are just saying that you have two conditions.
And this level of formalism already allows me to define elementary agent, an agent is something that makes a process happen.
So the agent is the one that performs an action if you wish, that means that makes the process happen, and I can describe it here in this formalism I use see as an agent.
So A plus C turns into B plus C, that means the C still is there.
But the A is transformed into B, the C is a necessary condition to turn the A into a B, so C enables the reaction in the language of chemistry, C is a catalyst, a catalyst in chemistry is a molecule that makes a reaction happen, but that is not itself affected by the reaction.
So this catalyst C can be seen as the agent turning a into B, and the reaction that it performs can be interpreted as what in artificial intelligence is sometimes called a condition action rule.
That means the agent is sensitive to particular condition namely sensitive to the condition a, and when it never it is confronted with condition a, it will perform an action that turns this a into B.
So one agent can catalyze a reaction turning a into B, but it would also turn C into F, E into F, F and G together into H, B into E.
So generally an agent will catalyze different reaction that means an agent can perform different actions, and which action it will perform will depend on the initial conditions.
So if there is A, the agent will produce B, if there is B, the agent will produce E, if there is E, the agent will produce F, if there is F and there is also G, then the agent will produce H.
Agents have these kind of properties. It's particles, molecules are agents in that sense. Agents will react with certain things, and depending on what kind of agent it is, it will perform certain reactions and not others.
So agents have this kind of identity of being able to perform certain actions. Now, if you take all the reactions that an agent can perform together, they form what they form what in physics or mathematics is called a dynamical system.
The dynamical system is the equivalence of a force that means something that pushes things in a particular direction. It takes the A's turns them into B's, it takes the B's turns them into E's etc.
So it is pushing things. A dynamical system is something that pushes things in a certain direction.
Since we know that dynamical systems typically have attractors, that means that they push things into a region, but they don't push them out of that region, so they kind of accumulate in this attractor region.
And we can interpret that very simply that attractor is like the agent goal. The goal of the agent is to move whatever is there into this region.
Now, catalyst agent in that sense they play a little bit the role of the objects or the forces in the old ontology objects in the sense that they don't change during the reactions forces in the sense that they have an effect on the things they react with, but
they're not assumed to be eternal. They're not assumed to have these essential properties that remain forever.
Agents are just conditions like all the others which mean that there are certain reactions that destroy agents that consume agents that build agents.
Agents can play the role of objects and forces in the old ontology but they have this inbuilt dynamism they can change into something else they are not given you don't need to make this assumption that objects always need to be there.
Now if you reason in terms of natural selection you see this network of all kinds of reactions and reactions are constantly turning things into other things.
What remains after a while well all these things that are turned into other things are no longer there, but some things are not being turned into other things.
And so after a while, the ones that will remain are the ones where the available reactions are not turning them into other things.
So, the existence of things like stable particles.
So that's an effect of natural selection. In elementary particle physics you have lots, you have a zoo of hundreds of different particles and most of these particles are very unstable.
That mean they react with some other particle turning to two new particles which in turn fall apart or turn into new particles.
But from time to time you could produce a very stable particle like a proton.
And then, yeah, then the whole universe gets filled up with protons and gets filled up with neutrons, and these protons and neutrons from atoms and these atoms are also quite stable.
You just let the reaction soon after a while you stick typically with the most stable was there's a natural selection of the most stable one that explains why even though the world is at core a big process.
This process tends to produce locally stable entities that we call elementary agents.
In elementary agents like stable particles, they're not very interesting. When we think about agency more in the style of human agency we're thinking about something that we make all auto poetic agent so an auto poetic agent for music kind of a generalization of a living agent,
a living organism. Now what's the difference between a living agent and one of these physical agents like particles that is that a living agent is constituted out of processes.
The processes are going on. It's not a stable particle. It's particles that are being transformed into other particles are being transformed into other particles, but the whole is stable.
And here I have kind of thought of the simplest possible instantiation of such an auto poetic agent is an a turns into a B and a B turns into an a so they are forming each other.
And typically because there is always some losses because of thermodynamics some of the bees get lost some of the bees disappear and to replenish that you need to have some input of ace.
So, if you imagine this cycle a B as a simple living system.
The incoming ace is the food and the outgoing bees is the waste, but the two are constantly rebuilding each other.
Now, this is of course an extremely simple cycle.
To make it more realistic, you will need a bit of more sophisticated mathematics and the mathematics here that turns out to be extremely useful is called chemical organization theory.
This is because the inspirations come from chemical reactions but actually does not speak specifically about chemistry it speaks about all kind of reactions.
And it is a very simple and elegant mathematical model of these kind of auto poetic system that means system that are producing themselves that are in a constant flow of self maintenance.
The definition of an organization or a chemical organization is a set of components or conditions and the actions that is has two properties close that means the reactions working on the components produced new components.
But after a while the new components are the same component that were already there so the system is close in the sense that it's only producing things that are already there.
And it's also self maintaining that means that whatever is consumed by reaction must be produced again.
So whatever disappears appears again, and nothing new is added.
So, an organization is something that reproduces all its components, it keeps the process alive.
Just to give you a little bit of a graphical depiction, this is a bit of a more complex organization and the one I had.
The triangles here are the reactions are three.
The letters here are the components that are being consumed and transformed.
I'm not going to go into any details here.
I want to give you a much more intuitive example. And this is a very nice kind of thing that you can actually buy over the weapon I'm considering buying what it's called an eco sphere.
It is an aquarium that is completely closed so it's a glass sphere where nothing enters except light.
No air that can escape, there is no water that goes in or goes out.
And in that eco sphere there are a number of organisms that stay alive and the organism we will look at here are the shrimps.
You see these little red things are shrimps, the green things are algae, and then the third one which you can't see because they are too small bacteria.
And how come that these things can stay alive in a completely closed atmosphere.
That is because they have reactions that are self maintaining they form an auto poetic system. This is a kind of an ecosystem at a very small scale that is producing itself and what is the production.
You have an input of light because the plants need energy to go.
So, then you will have the shrimps that will consume the algae and also consume the oxygen that's there.
And they do that basically to survive so the shrimps don't change in the process, but they produce waste.
They have carbon dioxide, and they produce a little bit of heat.
So if they would just be shrimps, well after a while all the algae would be eaten, all the oxygen would be taken up.
There would be an accumulation of waste and CO2, the shrimps would die, the whole thing would stop.
But at least for the waste, we see the bacteria will take the waste and they will also use a little bit of oxygen and they change these waste into nutrients.
They also produce a little bit of carbon dioxide so if they would be just shrimps and bacteria, the system would also not be able to survive.
But then we see that the algae, when they get light as an input, they can turn the CO2 and the nutrients which were produced by the bacteria into more algae.
So the algae multiply themselves through this process and because there are now more algae, the shrimps can again eat the additional algae and the whole cycle starts anew.
So what you see here is that the system is self-maintaining and at the same time it's a process, so it's a self-maintaining process.
Everything changes, everything is being consumed, everything is being produced, but the whole survives.
Now this is a commercial thing that you can buy in a shop, but you can also make one yourself and I have already done that.
So what do you do? You take a big glass jar, you go to a pond, you collect all kinds of things from the pond, a little bit of dirty water, some mud, some plants, some animals typically will be snails, insects, maybe tadpoles, some worms.
You put it all together and then you see what happens and well, initially it may not go very well, I'm pretty sure that some of your organisms will die because they are not adapted to this particular ecosystem.
But after a while, you see that it comes to some equilibrium, that means there will be some species that will survive and it will go, so there will be fit, that means there will be adapted to this closed ecosystem.
And it is a dynamical system that means things go up and down, there will be fluctuations, sometimes there will be more algae and sometimes there will be more snails.
But if there are more algae and not enough snails, then the snails will have more to eat, they will eat more of the algae, so the number of algae will diminish, the number of snails will increase.
If there are too many snails, there would not be enough algae left to feed all the snails, so some of the snails will die.
So there will be kind of a negative feedback that whenever some species grows too much, the feedback will be that it again diminishes or vice versa, whenever one diminishes, there will be a feedback so that in the next state it will again grow.
So these systems tend to self-organize.
Now we can use the same principle by zooming out to the very large scale, namely the scale of the whole planet.
And if we look at the whole planet, the whole planet is kind of like an ecosphere, it is a closed system.
The only thing that enters is light from the sun, the only thing that goes off is heat that is radiated in space, but all this is in the planet.
And yeah, it has adapted the planet as a whole is stable.
Of course there are fluctuations, there are occasional darts, there are sometimes species that get extinguished, there are sometimes new species that arise.
But as a whole, the system is stable, is self-maintaining.
And if you would write down the reactions, you will see that the reactions are actually the way I wrote them down are almost the same as the actions with the shrimps, except that now I have replaced shrimps, specifically by animals in general.
I have replaced algae specifically by plants in general. I have replaced bacteria specifically by decomposes all these kinds of animals, bacteria and other decompose organic stuff.
And basically the same system, it just at a much larger scale, much more complex.
So what you see in there, yes?
So I was wondering if we can make it a little bit more abstract, thinking that the role of what an animal is for us is not the same role that it plays there, because even ways could turn to be as animal as the animal in this view.
So what you see at the point?
In this particular model.
In this particular model, the animals are agents because animals appear both in the beginning and in the input and in the output of the reaction, while the waste is not.
I'm going to show that if you would make a more detailed model at some level, waste may be an agent as well.
So the agent in my definition is the one that participates in the action without being consumed by that reaction. So in this case, the animals are agents, the plants are agents.
Not because the waste is just for the for the oxygen is just being consumed and produced. It does not stay.
I mean, that since you were doing examples of different spatial, time spatial levels, or less the same structure is kept. So that doesn't cause my attention that then the dynamical growth in the process, being an agent for being playing the role of what we understand normally its waste,
would be more like a process forward than a way of being an object.
So it's going to be more abstract.
Yeah, like, like, we are the ways of another process, besides being an agent we are and that relates to what you never think you were saying.
It's a good question that I'm wondering whether there is a fundamental distinction, always between agents and the other side sometimes costs resources resources are things that are being transformed into other resources.
While agents are the ones that perform the transformation but are not themselves affected by the transformation. Don't the other agents also will be transformed by other agents.
But they, it could be that there are resources are just resources that do not do anything active. I don't know.
Yeah, I have a question. So considering that like an idea can exist before the reaction and exist after the reaction. So can an idea also be an agent. Yes.
And so, and so also then an archetype can be an agent.
It's like a kind of governing idea for culture that persists through time.
And that could be there.
The first thing should persist during the reaction and it should be necessary for the reaction.
So if certain things would only happen if the architect is there and the architect itself is not affected, then you would say that the architect is the agent of that process.
Basically, yeah. So like for a religious culture like the ultimate agent, we got to be the most persistent.
Except that gods have not always existed that people at some moment invented gotten at other moments have forgotten God. So, yeah.
All they know agents are immortal and I D agents, I think they're very strongly culture dependent. So they come and they go.
But yes, they are agents.
But are you not making a distinction between like individual people in general, because because people show we persisted for 10,000 years.
But individual human beings don't persist.
Yeah, yeah.
It's that important that it's like, is there a difference between like an individual and for.
Yes, in my paper, I have an agent and an agency where the agency is the more general but also distributed agents.
I would imply that you have to enter some property to say that they are agents that are localized by humans.
There are agencies that are distributed such as legends.
On the other hand, the agency is still localized in the sense that it's on this planet.
I'm not yet out of this of how to make a distinction in a short way.
And why do you choose like a specialist and like goes back and over and it's like autonomy where it's something that can create itself during the time.
It's like an overview. So why do you.
No, no, the so the so the self producing things are agents agents of a more of a more sophisticated.
Yeah, but why do you store agencies for something like that?
It's like no you're not.
No, precisely because I want to get rid of the dualism which says that you have the passive object like things and then you have the active agent like things that have a mind.
What I claim is that the difference between the two is much as big.
Well, there's a difference, but there's a different between all the poetic.
I make a different between all the poetic agents and what I might call stable or rigid agents.
I think that in many cases, you may look at an agent as stable or rigid at one level of of granularity.
But if then you look at it at the deeper level, you will see that actually it is a process.
It's, I think even this cup, if you would look at the level of quantum fields in between the atoms of this cup, you might find that actually it's some kind of an auto poetic agent.
There are models of quantum fields that say that a bolt between atoms is actually a continuous exchange of virtual photons.
So maybe what these things that we consider a static agents, maybe they are really auto poetic but at the level where we would never consider them.
Yes.
I'm very new to this, so this might be a very strange question, but I tried to understand what is new and what I'm seeing.
When you were setting it up, I was like, desiring and anticipating on a model which process seems to be central and the idea of entity would have disappeared.
And when I see this described, I try to wrap my head around like I see actually entities that do processes with each other.
So what is new and chemistry?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, you have a good question.
That is why it's, I mean, intuitively we see these things as entities, but that is why I started by calling them conditions.
A condition is something that you can distinguish.
And condition is something you can distinguish and distinction by the finishes for any process.
So the distinction is in a sense the most basic elements, and you can distinguish something and in our nervous system basically our brain can only distinguish things that change in some way.
Things that do not change, you can't really distinguish.
The implicit in the notion of distinguishable is already that it appears at a certain moment, but it's not always there.
The typical examples of conditions are CO2, so we tend to think of CO2 as an entity, but CO2 an entity.
It's a particular state of atoms of carbon and oxygen that is sometimes formed and then again dissolved and the CO2 that's now in the atmosphere will not be the same CO2 that is tomorrow in the atmosphere.
So it's a short-term and we tend to use this short-term and to re-refine and to turn them into entities, but actually there are distinctions.
And then the question is which distinctions are stable and the whole process, the whole idea is if you make a network of reactions you can start to see which things are more stable, which things are less stable.
Nothing is absolutely stable. All of them are changes. The basis is changed.
It's a concept that it's young.
I have two questions.
One question.
The second one, I don't know if you will elaborate later on.
I was thinking about luck. How can luck be defined in this relational agency?
What is a lucky agent? If I was an agent in this worldview that we're defining, how does a lot of randomness and spontaneity and all this can be defined with this model?
Yeah, that is also a good question. The way I discovered the reactions at the moment, they look deterministic, but you don't need to make the assumption that there is deterministic.
You could, for example, have two reactions.
Two reactions, A turns into B and B turns into C.
There are different ways to interpret that. You could say part of A turns into B, part of A turns into C, or you could say A needs to make a choice in the final turning to B or it turns into C.
If you think statistically as A being a concentration of particles of type A, then maybe you can say 75% of the A is turning to B, 25% of the A is turning to C.
But if A is a single particle, it cannot both turn into B and to C, sometimes it turns into B, sometimes it turns into C.
If you're getting one in field theory, you have possible reactions, but it's intrinsically indeterministic. You can calculate probabilities generally, but there's typically more than one reaction possible.
And statistically, then you can say 75% of A is turning to B, but an individual reaction is one.
Is there a way to talk about this using like sticking more closely to the kind of like the language process and relationships rather than talking about particles?
Because even though I know you're trying to talk about process, when we keep using these language of particles, it keeps sounding like the old language.
No, I know, but if I wouldn't use that language, most people probably would see the other stuff that I'm talking about.
But I would be very curious to know what that language sounds like. And I think it's also partly like that our language isn't set up for...
Yeah, no, no.
I think the best term up to now that I found is conditions.
So A is a distinguishable condition, but the distinguishable condition is another distinguishable condition.
So, I need to describe that very good term.
I'm angry, and then somebody tells me a joke and suddenly I get very happy.
So A was angry, and B was happy.
So A turned into B.
Not a particle, it's not a thing.
My anger turned into happiness, but anger is not a thing, it's a state, it's a condition.
Which you can make sure that that's the point.
I think that's the same thing that is necessarily...
More fundamental in my ontology, which I haven't discussed at this moment because I wanted to put the end of this on a higher level agency,
is the difference that makes a difference.
Something is distinguishable if it's a difference that makes a difference.
And making a difference means that if I have an A that doesn't react in anything that A doesn't exist,
or A could make any sense, there should be at least some reaction where it turned into B
and some reaction that produces an A.
If the difference doesn't make a difference, then it doesn't make this.
So everything is only defined by its reactions.
And that is, at the most fundamental level, I call it a good stuff in axiom.
The things get the meaning by their relations with others.
Nothing exists on its own. A on its own doesn't have any meaning.
It only gets a meaning by participating in these reactions.
How is the difference from the empirical maximum of science, like if we cannot observe it, then it doesn't exist?
It's a metaphysical view of this.
Another version is the life and its principle of the identity of the distinguishable.
There isn't any way in which I can say that A leads to B and A5 leads to B, but I don't know.
If I say that all A5 leads to B, and there isn't any reaction in which A and A5 have different reactions.
When I say A5, they're the same.
There is no difference. It makes a difference.
Therefore, A and A5 are one and the same thing.
If they participate in exactly the same reaction, they are the same thing.
And that is a problem that many people in philosophy do not understand.
They kind of tend to assume that the example I always give is the health problem of consciousness.
You probably have all heard about the famous zombie problem.
So you imagine that there is a zombie and the zombie behaves exactly like a normal person, but the zombie does not have consciousness.
For me, a zombie must be a real person, because if there is no way in which you can distinguish a zombie from a person, there is no difference.
And then all people have consciousness, or all people are zombies, but there is no sense in postulating something that is indistinguishable.
So things exist because they have relationships with other things, which in turn have relationships with other things.
That is why it's good, something that is no bottom level.
I will not start from elementary particles.
These particles exist, and everything else is reduced.
And I know I say there is this network of reactions, and whenever something appears in the network of reactions, it's there only because of the network of reactions.
If there is a network of reactions, then it doesn't exist.
Sorry.
Being able to distinguish a zombie, we can pass through different things yet to the market.
So how do you know that you didn't skip one kind of every end?
Yeah, that can happen, and that's how we learn.
You can't conclude that some of them are the same then.
No, no, the thought experiment of Thomas about the zombies is that he says explicitly that is not where you can explain it.
If you state that as an assumption, then you create a meaningless thought experiment.
But I wonder if I have some kind of intuition.
Even by replacing things by relationships, it's like going back to this, trying to start from this idea of elementary relationships.
Yeah, I'm not sure if it's really like a solution to kind of productionism or not.
Maybe it's just productionism by another name.
It's like, it's still this idea that you can come back to something elementary, some basic building block that you can then put together to explain the world.
There's another aspect about this form of this.
It can be anything as big or small as small, it can be being angry, it can be being happy, it can be the world having a COVID epidemic versus the COVID epidemic being finished.
Nothing says how big or how small this case is. The only thing is this is the distinguishable condition that leads to a different distinguishable condition.
So it's elementary in notation, it's not elementary in the sense of what it represents, it does not claim that what it represents is something elementary.
I can use this formula to speak about COVID and COVID is something extremely complicated.
But, and couldn't it be that a way to express the relational agency model is to express that objects and subjects can switch position?
Because if you can show that sometimes an animal is eaten, sometimes he gets eaten, so sometimes he's a subject, sometimes the object.
This kind of illustrates the relational agency idea more than just summing up reactions, you know what I mean?
You certainly have the two types of reactions, you have the reaction, human was called as human, the human eats the cow, was wasted.
The cow is being eaten, and then you have the cow was lost, the cow was wasted, and the cow is the agent.
So they are interested in the cow becoming a subject and human object in the same reaction.
There's an example of when you try to transfer potatoes in the garden, you think you're the subject and the potato is the object because you choose the potato, but actually you can say that the potato breed chose you because he seduced you to choose him.
So he actually is also the subject and you're the object listening to the potato. You see what I mean?
There's no problem, no problem.
There's two types after that.
There are two humans.
There are both, both of them are agents.
I always suggest that we move with the discussion to later part maybe the anthology gets more clear.
I don't have that many more slides but there are a few slides that I would like to show which to some degree speak about these things.
I think that important concept here is that you can have transitions in levels of complexity.
Whenever you have agents, they interact, they tend to adapt to each other until they become mutually adapted.
That means they form a network of synergistic relationships, mutually dependent, and that network when it becomes self-maintaining, it can develop sufficient autonomy so that we will look at it as an agent.
An agent itself means that it will transform certain things into other things without being affected by the transformation, not affected in the sense that it loses its autonomy.
A super agent in this form is easy to express as a sub-network of agents.
I'm going to make drawings here to make it quickly get complicated.
That's an old idea of system theory.
System theory says you can zoom in and supply your system into a network of subsystems or you can zoom out and look at your system as just one part of a super system.
You can do this perfectly with this formalism.
At a certain moment you see a certain organization of needs, a self-maintaining network of relationships.
You draw a boundary around it and you say that's a system.
That system might interpret as a super agent and now I can look at the relation between that super agent and other super agents and then I can put them together in an even bigger level and like that I can build.
Some of the examples, these are what we used to call metasystem transitions in the Wikipedia cybernetica project.
The origin of life starting from the reaction between molecules is what we are now working on in our double-comp projects trying to simulate that.
Symbiogenesis is also a classic example where you have organisms of different types that start living together and form one bigger organism.
You can see in multicellularity cells that live together and start differentiating, performing different roles.
So each cell is an agent but all the cells together, the multicellular organ also form an agent and of course the emergence of social systems organizations from individuals.
A little more example, the cell can be also understood as an orthopedic agent.
A cell is something actually that looks very much like this ecosphere, this glass ball that I showed that has an input of light.
What are the agents inside the cell?
Well actually the genes, the genes are the ones that produce the enzymes and the enzymes are the catalysts of the reactions.
So in a sense you could say the genes are the agents inside the cell but it's not like in the old idea that the genes control the cell.
No, the genes are individual agents that form a society and the different genes need to mutually agree and coordinate their actions and that's together with the input and output of the cell.
The cell is constantly adapting to its environment.
So genes, inputs and outputs all together form this one super agent that is this very complex symbiotic network.
And what would be the process description of that?
Instead of the genes as entities?
Well the genes are catalysts which specifically for genes are very stable because the cell wants to store its information in genes so the genes are highly protected between DNA which is difficult to change.
Yeah, when you multiply a cell you need to multiply DNA, when you have a sexual recombination you do need to change your DNA so every agent however stable it is within a certain context there will be context in which an agent is formed or distorted.
I was thinking more, I hope you will say that the processes start about because in the process ontology, I mean radical process ontology, we will expect that the originary process is not for agents.
It's an originary pathway for processes involved.
So agents are processes involved and they are embodied and observed through the distinctions we make and this we call the agents but what it works for really is the process.
The agents are a kind of local concentrations of processes.
So you might say an agent is kind of like a concentrated bunch of processes.
That's why I define an agent as a bunch of processes. An agent is really a collection of reactions of processes. An agent is an embodiment of reactions.
So from what you said, an agent is simply that which persists through the process. It's this idea of the catalyst.
It's the pattern which remains in a sense. All these processes are happening and there's one pattern, there's one thing that's stable the catalyst which kind of goes through.
It's the thing which in the end undergoes no difference through the process. Everything else undergoes change and difference and this agent remains the same.
Locally during certain processes, not during other processes.
So why, I think my question is also like why in trying to construct a kind of in some sense like a process ontology or a relational ontology.
The relation is another way of a difference, right?
Which I think, I think all of us have basically agreed that it's super important idea, right?
But why in constructing a process ontology would you then again put in the central piece the thing which doesn't undergo change?
If the whole point of the ontology is the difference is the most important thing, why could, as the central point, exactly the thing which undergoes no difference?
For two reasons.
The first is to connect with our standard traditional intuitive ontology which sees objects and agents.
The second, because evolution has this principle of natural selection, which means that those that are stable survived.
Evolution has a tendency to produce things that are more stable.
If that wasn't the case, then all this would be one big chaos, like let's say immediately after the big bang.
Immediately after the big bang, there wasn't agents, there wasn't stability.
There was just one sea of particles reacting with other particles turning into other particles.
Happily we're no longer in that state.
We are in a state where things have coalesced and stabilized, but the stability is always a stability.
But without that stability, we wouldn't be here.
We wouldn't be able to sit on this bench.
We wouldn't be able to talk.
We need to explain why the stability there is...
I mean, ontologically there are two big problems.
If you start from an ontology of objects, the problem is to explain change.
And in my view, you can't.
If you start from invariant things or the fundamental building blocks of the world, you cannot explain change.
Because if these building blocks are always there, why should they start changing?
What causes them to change?
If you start from versus ontology, then your problem is to explain stability.
We all agree that in the world there is both stability and change.
So if you start from the one, you need to explain the other.
And it's much easier to explain stability from change than the vice versa.
You can't explain change from stability.
You can explain stability from change.
But stability remains relative. It's not absolute.
The concept of time and the special place in your ontology is probably the idea of what is the essence of the process.
It rests on the concept of time.
So it seems like the whole ontology builds on this concept.
I think time, people tend to give time more from the month over the year because I have been working on mathematical models
for the emergence of space-time out of processes.
So for me, a process is something more fundamental than time.
Time assumes that there is someone somewhere, someone with a block,
and that all these blocks are synchronized and then where the process happens.
So A is turned into, there is someone,
what happens at time D2?
And that happens at time D1.
This is already a very complex construction.
At the level of this underneath, it turns into,
where is the problem?
Where is the time?
Time emerges if you have loads of these things.
And then you can see that there are something like the space-time concept is in there.
And then you can start to look at time, maybe as some way of describing this thing.
But we know from the relativity theory that time also is relative.
Time for this part is the same as the time for that process.
So the idea of time as an absolute thing,
time and space,
time and space, that's a Newtonian framework.
All processes happen in space and time.
No, processes happen.
And then we look at the arrangement to say,
well, we can organize and bundle by putting the space-time code in its own one.
But space and time are the same.
Quantum mechanics is another example where you see that space doesn't actually play any role,
because things can be entangled.
It's millions of light years apart.
And then how do you define change?
The change is primitive.
So you don't define change.
Change is your primitive.
That's an autology.
Each autology needs to have a rudimentary, primitive element that is not defined.
So the process is the fundamental element.
Everything else is built out of the process.
Even space and time.
And I must admit that the parts that still first stage we mostly,
the first thing I did in my PhDs in physics,
is make a process of space-time out of processes.
It worked, except that I needed to make one assumption,
which I'm not happy with.
And I still haven't found an alternative for that one assumption.
Maybe the assumption is that processes don't go back in time,
because if they go back in time,
then you lose the whole idea of time order.
Why don't you like it?
Open possibility.
No?
Like, these reactions have certain properties, no?
Because like, just put, if you have like,
opening we have like one reaction happening in the process,
and the other reaction will be less difficult.
Because we're not moving in time.
We only need to suppose and save kind of the same which one going in the process.
No, if you go to the lowest level we found.
The kind of formalism that we use at the kinetic and the dynamic level,
they kind of assume that there is a speed of reaction.
At the ontological level, I don't want to assume that.
Let's say there is a difference between the ontology and the formalism.
In the formalism, you may want to add some parameters
and make it easier to model that are not necessarily fundamental in the ontology.
I don't yet know whether these processes should have some quantitative speed parameter in there.
That's one way to do it. It's an easy way to do it.
But I don't like it because it makes an additional assumption
which I don't think I will justify.
I think that there is something adding to what you were asking.
Even though we might not have a measurable or scalar version of time,
I think it will be reasonable to assume that if we have a meta-system transition,
so we get one level, then we get the emergent level.
And then out of this, in this emergent level, there is a new emergent level,
like from cells to tissues to tissues to organisms.
We have three levels there, for example.
We might expect that the processes that make up the voyette in the organism
take more time than the processes that make up the voyette in the cell.
So still, even if we might not have a time scale, we still have an ordering of time,
like an organ. This takes more time than that.
I think we at least can kind of make it orderly and critical.
And the second thing that maybe has to be following the same point
is that every time you make a model representation with a reaction network,
you have to make, implicitly, a choice on the level of this time order time scale
you're making for the distinctions you want to work with.
So now when you say, okay, this A is the COVID model,
this is the COVID pandemic in a certain city,
and this other B is no pandemic in the city,
then you are implicitly assuming a time scale where this reaction,
I mean, in the regular physical authority, you're implicitly assuming a time scale
and a way of making distinctions in time space.
But perfectly, you could change this model into a fine-grainer model
where A now is an auto-biotic system of multiple things that embody
like our maybe more mesoscale human daily life view of a pandemic.
And then the transition, instead of being seen as A goes to B,
it might be like a very long process in this other view
and even seen as a meta-system transition,
that in this other level, you look at it as a fundamental reaction to say,
so maybe this choice of basic level of representation
and timescales induced by that, which is actually the scientific connection,
because you make distinctions somehow,
and you have to measure them for the sake of doing a represent scientific
driven at this representation of reality.
So this part maybe wasn't that explicit in the talk,
because it's very kind of not easy to imagine that A is actually a complex,
that is auto-biotic somehow, it's defining its own time scale.
So, yeah.
But it's exactly that confusion that's why I...
And then you go back then.
I would love to hear it expressed in another language,
whereas really we stick to this language of process,
because the goal, after all, is to try to make this unification somehow,
to try to bring all these different ideas together in this new ontology
that can be usable.
And it's hard to use because it slips into this other kind of thinking,
it slips into thinking that these processes are things.
But also, I think what gets lost is a little bit this...
Well, I feel as if it's lost is also this coming back to this animism.
I think that was also such an intriguing part of the talk,
of the word of ideas.
And I don't feel like this is how our kind of...
My instinct is that I don't feel like this is how our hunter-gatherer nature,
of worshipping cousins and four parents thought of this.
I think that there's something more about story that's being lost.
I think that the idea of story could be really important,
because a story is, after all, the most persistent thing in this.
I suspect, I would like to experiment it.
I think this, in general, has been experimenting with it,
that you put up with stories as reactions like that.
I mean, I made this human simulation piece,
a long time ago, which was played based on reaction networks.
But it's also the other thing to think about.
If it's about thinking about what's the most persistent agent in all this,
well, the most persistent agent is also story,
because this is all stories.
This is all different ways of telling a story about ontology,
about how the world works, and so on and so forth.
In a sense, story itself is the most persistent agent,
but it's also a process, right?
It's persistent, but it's also a process.
And I think if you're a hunter-gatherer going through the forest,
that's how you perceive things.
You perceive yourself as a story in relationship to other stories,
and there's also an emotional relationship.
The condition of both of our stories is that the story is sequential,
because the language is sequential,
we can only speak about what's happening at the time,
or what this just explains,
and this is something that happened in parallel.
And if you want something like an altruistic procedure,
you see that lots of things are happening in parallel,
and that's what the story cannot catch.
No, but I think with the mythology, it's different.
With the mythology, you have multiple stories in parallel,
and you understand intuitively where you're at,
and you give the mythology a story.
Yeah, but that's not enough to explain something
like how the metabolism of a soul works.
I don't think any mythological story will capture all that complexity.
I don't think even our brain can capture it.
I think you will really need a computer model to capture that.
But these are stories, though, anyway.
I would like to come back to this complaint,
which I see the same way.
We are looking at a bunch of objects,
and how this effect is produced,
because you say you would like to hear this language,
and I wonder if language is ever able to give you the sound you want to hear,
because whatever we will be doing,
we are using language which has nouns,
which are the basic protocol that we are using,
and then it's translated into this.
Okay, let's drop nouns, let's pick verbs, and adjectives.
Let's do that. You will hear processes.
But as long as he can put A is chaos,
B is changeability of feelings,
and C is wind,
and you will say, but why are you speaking about those objects?
Because they are named and put there,
and they are interacting and so on.
So I think this is one contributing factor,
which is the major one,
that we will not get out of objects if we don't change the language
by which we are referring to,
which is an underlying method for modeling,
the natural language.
And another contributing factor,
which has to do with this particular formula,
is that when you say process ontology,
or relational agency,
to me, not necessarily some thing changing into something,
is the basic relationship.
Forget the things, changing into, yes?
So of course, I know it's a kernel of your model, yes?
But I think relationship,
relation, process, doesn't have to be this changing into,
and a lot of agencies of relationships
are not this changing thing,
but exactly persisting of a relationship,
which is the agency.
A consistent relationship for me is a repeated process,
a self-maintaining process.
I am done with you,
that assumes that from time to time we talk to each other,
we exchange information, we help each other,
there is a self-maintaining dual person between you and me.
Fine, but you could think, yes,
that the process or the agency of a relationship,
you could approach in modeling,
not by arrows, but let's say lines or whatever,
that the existence of this friendship is the agent in your life,
in my life, in community, and so on.
And it's more like an almost like a gravitational field
that acts, yes?
And then it would be a different model, I know.
It's the same model.
It's the same model.
It's to change the reactions to be suspicious,
and suspicious to be reactions.
It's actually in the block, it's the same,
but you change the, who is who,
but it's actually the same model.
You mean you can, what I say, you can model with this,
this I know, yes?
I think one of the problems.
Understanding of the relationship as a basic unit.
I think one of the problems with the formalism,
it's so simple, and the examples are so intuitive,
that people immediately assume that,
yeah, but it's too simple.
They don't see how flexible it is.
It is flexible, like A, B, C, and like it's maximum flexibility,
because anything can be, like it's a maximum.
Except, yeah, I'm now speaking about this,
like the ontology of the turning into, yes,
that there could be like an ontology of,
yeah, just different types of relationships,
depending on the situation.
It's like, when you define agents,
why not defining, like getting rid of agents,
and defining it as shared agent disease?
Because at the beginning you said,
everything is about relationships,
and this ontology is based on relationships.
So if we have, for example,
someone who has that formula, human plus cow,
human takes something else on that person's mind.
So, yeah, that's what I'm talking about.
So, probably, I'm thinking of how much of a human is a cow,
and how much of a cow is inside a human already,
as a potentiality.
So, could it be, I suggest,
defining as some form of every person,
and every entity or thing is a shared agency already?
It's kind of like a precondition, defining as everything.
What do you define as a shared agency?
Meaning that you are, by nature,
you are of a relationship nature,
rather than that agent.
Because when you say an agent,
an agent has a boundary,
and has its own internal dynamics,
based on complex adaptive systems.
Yeah, but it also has the relationship.
The whole thing is a network.
The whole thing is a network.
There are no independent things in there.
There are no things that are not that work.
I mean, if I were to do it...
If now I would do one here,
that's not possible.
Everything needs to be part of the one network.
There are no pages that do not interact with other entities.
Because if they don't interact, they won't interact.
They don't exist.
You could call it like that, a field of agencies, yes?
Actually, the field metaphor is quite nice,
because fields are typically seen as these kind of arrows,
but they are like the point in all kind of directions.
And what the field does is it creates a flow,
it makes things move.
That's another way.
I mean, there are different metaphors to try to explain this.
What I have been emphasizing here is agency and relationality.
The basis is process.
Why do I define agency?
Because of these new approaches.
I spoke about multi-agent systems
and actual network theory,
where people are more and more starting to think in terms of agencies.
And why relational?
Because the agents do not exist on the whole point of the agency.
Everything is one big network of interactions,
in which locally you can distinguish agencies,
but they are only locally autonomous and stable.
They are still part of this larger whole,
and this larger whole will change them.
But you need local stability,
because otherwise you have a world that is like,
as I said just after the big bang,
a world that is pure, chaos, pure change.
You need to explain why this table is stable,
and why this thing is stable,
and why I'm less stable than the table,
but still I will still be there when you talk to me tomorrow.
You need to explain that.
So you need to explain why in this chaos,
this field of actions and interactions,
there are islands of stability, which are relative.
I mean, they are like floating islands.
They don't stay in the same place,
but there are kind of islands where you know
if you go on the island, you won't sink to the floor.
There's stability there.
What if you didn't need to explain it?
I'm being a little provocative,
but what if you just...
But you don't need to explain why the table is stable.
It's a version of the plan.
It seems to be getting in the way.
I don't really care about it.
You don't really care about it.
We're talking to some other people
who still believe in internal mechanics,
and somehow we want to convince them of our way of thinking.
But what if we just left them to their own devices for a while
and just go on with thinking about the process
without trying to convince them
that the table exists?
No, as a mystic or as an artist,
you might take that attitude,
but as somebody who wants to change the world,
who wants to be pragmatic, who wants to develop technologies,
who wants to do science,
you need to look at stable things.
You need to make sure that the vaccine you have developed
against COVID will still work
in five hours from now.
If it's just the process and the vaccine changes every minute,
then you cancel COVID.
I think stability is not about not changing,
but about not having an effect on something.
And when you look at the table, it's not stable always,
because if you fall over a table, it has had an effect on you,
so it's not always a stable thing.
So it depends how you define stability.
If something has even an object as an effect on you,
it has agency because it changes your life.
So some of these agents are static.
There are theories that say,
like Vibrant matter that all objects have agency as well,
because they can have an effect on other objects or agents.
You see what I mean?
I'm wondering about the more pragmatic goal, let's say,
with regard to what science does,
how science does things.
And I'm thinking about what is the
epistemic value of this ontology
opposed to the Italian classical ontology.
Because at the end of the day, the collection data
and the ontology we have, the metadata we have there,
basically, you could call it like stable processes
or a stable condition,
but at the end of the day,
it goes back to the same way of viewing the world,
which is just some entities we call it process.
I mean, it's just like things like the change of terminology,
but at the end of the day, we're doing the same thing.
We're going to go back to doing the same thing.
No, can I compliment you a little bit?
Because it's very much related to your question,
and you can answer both at the same time.
Which is how, where would you position this?
Because it's philosophical standpoint,
but also it's kind of linking to science.
So where would you put it in the philosophy of science,
let's say, traditional groups?
I'm not sure I want to put it in the philosophy of science,
but what I want to say is, as I said it here,
it's an extension of the Newtonian world,
which means it does not say Newton was wrong,
objects don't exist.
It says, in some cases, it is useful to think
in terms of objects following the laws of motion of Newton,
but if you want to go deeper and especially if you want to look at processes
like I say here, life, mind, society, culture,
then the thinking in terms of objects is not useful.
It's like in classical scientific revolutions
like relativity theory of quantum mechanics,
relativity theory did not negate Newtonian mechanics.
It says Newtonian mechanics is a limit case for low speeds of life,
or quantum mechanics will not say Newtonian mechanics is incorrect.
Newtonian mechanics is, let's say, Newtonian mechanics
is an approximation for macroscopic objects.
So in that sense, Newtonian mechanics and all the existing theories of science
are not negated by this, but they are seen as a limit case
for more specific situations where the processes are very simple
and you don't have to take into account all these complex
anthropometric self-maintaining interactions.
So what this does is expand the field of things you can describe
to things like life, mind, consciousness, etc.
But without giving up the old stuff which we know works,
it's just that we don't take it as literally anymore.
We're not going to say that atoms are like billion balls, we know that,
but still sometimes it can be useful to think of an atom like a billion ball.
You mentioned the measurement of a model,
to make it really concrete.
I'd be interested in seeing a very simple application.
You mentioned I want to do research on humans around societies
and I'm going to do that using mathematical models.
So in what way will I do it different than I did before
because of this ontology?
Well, we have a number of mathematical models like that.
Two people in the audience are doing that.
In the online models, the last two are starting today.
But I would like to compliment on your answer,
because the title I think is extremely clear on that,
but maybe since it's the title, it's also kind of overseen.
Is the ontology for transdisciplinary?
Do you call it transdisciplinary in science?
Yeah, so the point is that in traditional science,
the act of identifying the objects is kind of immediate.
You want to study in ecology.
What do you have? Species, resources?
It's kind of like the ontology that we can equip with
from natural language is already given us.
The entities we want to observe and it's all kind of,
culturally, you know, constructed.
It's easy to say,
ah, we're going to study these things that already have a language on.
When it comes to transdisciplinary research,
the problem of identifying the objects,
it's already like, what are your guys?
What are the guys that we will be studying with?
That's already a problem.
And that's why the traditional approaches in V6 and so on,
might, for sure.
Because you don't want to study the entities themselves.
You want to study the meta-guys that seem to be more representative
of the phenomenon than the entities that are composing this phenomenon.
Like in COVID, me being sick, neighbor of someone not sick,
it's like, it's not the phenomenon of COVID.
But that's how in agent-based models,
and you saw, like, all the data that you were doing in the pandemic
was focusing on the basic entities doing models
and seeing how this thing works.
But another perspective is to look at the whole of the situation,
of course, composed by parts,
but looking at the potential states of this global situation.
And there is something called the top-down interactions,
that maybe Francis, you can explain better than me,
which is also interesting,
but because when you don't know what this big guy,
this major transition guys are,
and then you identify them, you can see that this meta-system
is also making the influences of the individuals.
And that's, like, in social science, it's very common.
Maybe you mark an example.
So, top-down.
How is it different than just a very complex system?
So using, like, if you look at standard psychological research,
they use also observable objects,
like intelligence and personality.
And then you could just build the top of those
becomes very complex stuff,
which I get in society with multiple people
and directing in very complex ways also with objects.
Yeah, the point is that this provides, I mean, in my view,
Francis, you can say, no, she's wrong,
but in my view, this provides a conceptual framework
to start understanding the levels of representation.
And it's not just from scratch,
and then I look at statistical macro properties
and then I say, this is happening.
Because this is the typical complex systems thinking
that the guys approach any big question from the model.
And there is no conceptual framework to think about
the different levels that start appearing
and the meta-level interactions that can happen.
So if you start from this perspective,
you have like a set of principles that you want to look at
before saying, ah, this is the phenomenon.
You want to build the story of the complex system
level by level, let's say.
And I think this is an important game,
and particularly we have been doing models
or trying to conceptualize better notions
that are typically intermediate like sustainability
or resilience or concepts or notions of that kind,
that kind of when you look from the very bottom part of the system,
you kind of fall short of explaining,
but if you look at these different layers.
I would like to add something.
I made my PhD in physics of the structure of physical models,
and I came to the conclusion that my analysis
in Newton and Feynman, that there are always a number
of ontological elements that are kind of assumed.
You first assume that there are your objects.
In your case, might be people or organizations.
These objects have properties.
These properties can take on different values.
These different values define states.
These different states define a state space.
And then you assume some kind of a dynamics
of how the properties change over time
under the influence of different forces.
And like that, you build layer on top of layer,
and then you get typically a very complicated model.
But actually all your ontological assumptions
are already fixed in the model.
So afterwards, you can maybe fine tune a little bit
by changing this parameter or that.
You can no longer change the model while you're working on it.
Or with this kind of modeling, I just add a few reactions.
And the whole model changes.
But not in a way that you lose what you had.
You can put it in your simulation,
and you see that if I add two or three reactions,
or I move two or three reactions,
well, the dynamics changes.
But you don't have to throw away everything.
You don't have to start from scratch.
Then that's what makes it so easy.
You add a few things.
You take away a few things.
And each time you have a working model,
and some of those will be better,
some of those will be worse,
you don't need to start from scratch.
With this micro-macro level of reactions to the emergence,
we also defined a process
because it seemed to be happening in parallel
between the two.
So, for example,
the relationship between the two
to one is intermingled on the other.
So, is this also a process?
I don't like the subject of super-medium.
I speak by the shape of emotions
to what I love at home,
because properties that don't are not properties of the form.
And how do you get growth?
Because it's here,
if I have more or less growth,
I'll make a lot.
I don't think there's a hope,
but of course, there are still things
that you can't go out,
because nothing is isolated.
And now I can look at this as a whole,
and this as a whole will have properties,
because what comes in here
undergoes all kinds of nonlinear interactions,
whatever comes out here.
It's not what went in here.
It's not one of the things in there.
It's the whole self-maintaining thing
that has produced this output.
And yeah, so I say this thing as a whole
reacts in a different way than any of it from God.
It has emergent properties.
But in this case,
I can say how I'll see things like this.
I don't need to know all these details inside
to simplify my model
or just to get what comes in and what goes out.
In other cases,
I might want to look inside
and look at all these things
and then notice that actually
there are still small ones in there.
And then I can make my model as detailed
or as close as I want.
That's what you want of models.
There are always simplifications,
but the question is to leave out the things
that you find less important
and to get in the things that are most important.
And then by experimenting with this language,
I think it's much easier to make good models.
Yeah.
I was wondering if you could elaborate a little bit more
how the mind fits into the smaller part
of this model,
particularly with respect to the mind.
Actually, the mind is,
you might say, the most obvious application
of which I started by saying
that the character is a matter
that follows these deterministic rules,
these deterministic rules,
and that is the mind
that can think of its own free,
that has free will and accessionality.
What I say is agency is something
that's in between the passive object
and the free will in mind.
And depending on how much agency there is,
it will have more of these properties
that we associate with mind, intelligence, emotions,
memories, values, goals,
and agency as I have developed it
in a couple of other papers.
And what we are doing now in our project is,
as this network,
this anthropogenic network becomes
what we call more resilient,
which means more adaptive,
more able to deal with more difference outside situations,
it becomes smarter,
it becomes more autonomous,
it becomes less dependent on the external conditions.
And at a certain moment,
people say it has a mind,
and for me, there is no such thing as mind or no mind.
It's a continuum.
I call it agency,
and there is low levels of agency.
The particle has a very low level of agency,
and my brain has a very high level of agency,
and in between you have bacteria,
and trees, and rocks,
and they all have agency,
which means they all have some degree of mind.
That's also implied in some of your consciousness,
or what is consciousness?
Consciousness, I interpret as sensation.
This thing is sensitive,
because if there is an impulse, it changes.
So, the example I gave with the a and the b,
a produces b,
b produces a,
not suppose that there is also a reaction,
a plus c is d,
the moment I bring d into the system,
d plus c into the system,
c plus a will produce b,
which means there will be less a available.
The system feels,
it senses that something is not the way it should be.
What is the way it should be?
Self-maintenance.
Natural selection leads to systems that are self-maintaining.
The moment something happens
that affects the self-maintenance,
they sense it, they feel it,
and they will react to it.
That's the other point,
you become sensitive to the perturbations,
and then you act to compensate the perturbations.
The self is consciousness.
It's a consciousness,
but at a very, very limited level.
At a very primitive level,
just the bacterium is conscious of the fact
that it is moving in an environment where there is toxins,
because it has certain rules that says that
if toxins concentration increase,
then it should move,
change direction,
and move in a different direction.
The bacterium is sensitive to toxins.
It feels that there are toxins,
and it performs the action
to move away from these toxins.
So it's a kind of a consciousness
if you want to pull it like that.
Some people call this panpsychism,
that even environmental biologists
have this sensation.
If you want to pull it like that,
I don't object,
but I just wouldn't use the term
to call it unmindedly.
It's a question of more of a taste
in terminology than in a conceptual difference.
For me, mind is a continuum
from a lot of particles to the human brain,
and...
I don't know if you have seen
the magic work of David
from this notion of intelligence,
and it's very similar to what you...
Have you seen that?
Because you kind of have gotten...
I have had a couple of papers of Levin,
and he has a very similar...
I was with you for an article on that.
Michael Levin has a very similar...
It's Levin,
he speaks of this...
well, like,
similar kind of relativity,
we rely on it,
the whole of intelligence.
It's like this planet we can reach
with no consciousness
in the process, like sense,
and then he says,
okay, where is David now, humans,
and then a group of humans
has a higher goal,
so a higher intelligence,
and then he controls
things and planets and stuff.
So he goes all the way up to...
Yeah, I think his model
is simple and mind,
a little bit too simplistic,
he kind of imagined that
if this is me,
and this is space,
and this is time,
then I'm aware of a certain region
in space-time.
That's my memory of what has happened.
This is my idea
of what's going on in other places
in the universe,
and this is my anticipation of what might happen.
And then he says, for a human,
it will be big,
but for a dog, it will be small,
and for a bacteria,
it will be tiny.
So he says it's the wider the range,
it's the higher your consciousness
or your agency.
It's one way
to do it.
Time is up.
Thank you very much.
Close here.
Are there any questions from the group?
Yeah, we didn't even ask
because there were so many questions
in the room, and now it's time
it's up, so we want to extend it
for a bit.
For me, can we extend it a bit?
Yeah, so
if there are any questions
from the audience online,
because soon we will be moving
to a more informal part
of the meeting
and leaving this room, so
I think we can take
one or two questions from
from the online audience
if there's any
questions there.
Guys?
Look.
Here it is.
Here it is.
Anyone?
Anyone?
I have perhaps
a small comment
only.
Is it clear?
Can everybody hear me?
No, just to comment a little bit
first of all, very interesting
talk. Francis, I enjoyed a lot
and
I would like to comment a little bit
on the observation that Orion
and Marta were making also.
Why starting
from
this kind of ontology?
It could
be that we will have
some more surprises, of course
if science develops more
and there could be some hints
already
and the comment I want to make
is a little story
that Feynman once
said
in the beginning of the quantum
computer idea
there was then a whole theory
in computer science
the Turing machine
a kind of a fundamental theory
the Turing machine would be the
fundamental entity of
computation
and still many many computer
scientists work with this as a
fundamental entity of
computation and then the quantum
computer came
and Feynman once said
the problem with Turing is that
he didn't know what paper was
what a strip of paper was you see
and so
the Turing machine
you need a strip of paper
for the material world
and so quantum computer
doesn't
work with strips of paper
things are not on paper anymore
and I think we will stumble
at a certain moment and that might
when I hear
Orion say why not
start with stories
of course you can see as a scientist
very difficult to have a grasp on a story
but we might
stumble on the foundations
I think where even
writing on a blackboard
or what we can do mathematically
will be too limited
to really go deep into
reality because if you write
on a blackboard a, b, c
it's of course
something specific you do
a gives
b, b gives c
you cannot
do what eventually a quantum computer
could do you know on a blackboard
so
just my comment
would be that
in an amazing way
we might
be repeating parochial things
in some way like the old
reductionist
like the old reductionist
in the time of
and not be completely aware of it
that is a little bit what could
be
the future of
and then of course we will have to change again
we will have to adapt
to new findings and stuff like that
and I think that is a little bit
what sometimes is felt also
yeah processes but
processes okay you can
you can make it say
it's perhaps not in time
but there is something also
that limits our self
being on a blackboard to imagine
with our material mind
what can happen
so even there I think
there are some limitations
if you really go to the depth
of what an ontology is
I don't know
I don't know what the limitations are
there are some hints here and there
I think
so
does it mean that
every
every century
or every generation
every kind of dancing
around the sun in reality
we remake the reductionism
it's got like a new
there will be new reductionism
does it
I think every form of knowledge
is a simplification of reality
a model is a reduction
you should be aware that it is a reduction
as long as you're aware of that
I don't think there is much danger
in the moment you start taking
your model for reality that's when it
becomes dangerous because then you are
reductionist then you think that what your model
says is what the real world is
a model is something that helps
you to predict and to understand certain
things and if it turns out
that something that doesn't predict
doesn't understand that well then you may change
your model but you should not take the model
for reality model is by definition
simplification that means a reduction
reductionism
reductionism is to me
means that you
it's a world view where you
take the relationships into account
so you think that somehow the world can be
explained by things
but not really
their relationships are the interest
there is no reductionism is like that
but I think the reductionism that Derek
and Sima are talking about is the fact
that you reduce things to
some marks of a rightful
and of course
reality is more
comparing than those agencies
and of course it is more complex
of course this is a simplification
it's a simplification which no longer
assumes objects
it assumes process is an interrelationship
but still
when I try to represent it on the rightful
it's a simplification that's unavoidable
if I
the only way
to communicate the whole
of reality is to
experience the whole of reality
I can't transfer the whole of reality
to you, to your mind
I have to put it into language
and to Simba that is also simplification
the reductionism
can also take a different context and reactions
you just start from the most
basic particles
and then you can make it very complex
that is the advantage of this thing
it's what I would call an open underneath model
it's a model where you can
add and change things as much as you want
you don't have to make
certain assumptions that there are these particles
and they have these properties and no other copies
and they obey these flows
and no other goals
let's say reductionism you
make this ontological assumption
and they absolutely can't be changed
well here the only assumption that I make
is that there are conditions
that sometimes transform into other conditions
and if
these transformations
appear in a certain pattern
and I see that there is stability
and there is self-maintenance
and then I can start saying non-trivial things about them
but I don't
say what those ABCs
are and what the arrows
precisely are, I don't say when they happen
or how long they happen
that makes it open
it makes it flexible
time to finish
no it was
was that
so we move it to the bar
okay and thank you
thank you everybody online
I'm closing the results
