Music
Hello and welcome to the umpteenth Skeptics in the Hub. I honestly can't remember how
many I've done now so I've got to call it the umpteenth. Tonight we have a fantastic
subject and an equally fantastic guest. As some of you know, I get involved in quite
a lot of debates, arguments even, with believers of various faiths and it seems to me to be
odd that they accuse us of believing that we originated, that we came from rock. Yet
their belief is that Adam was made from dust. I'm not sure what the difference is there,
but of course saying that we came from rock leaves out a huge progression of what actually
may have happened. Tonight we have the man who is working at the cutting edge on this,
Professor Lee Cronin from Glasgow University. Hello Lee. Good evening John, how's it going?
It's fine here. How's the WAU? Fine. The rain has stopped up here. It's been raining a
day down the last couple of days. Yes, we're lucky. We watch the weather forecast and we
see all the blue up north and we think aren't we lucky to be down in the south coast. It's
a shame though isn't it because the cricket match started today and then the last session
was rained off. Okay, yeah, that's a pity. You're not into cricket. I used to be once
upon a time when I was when I was a lecturer in Birmingham and it wasn't that far from
Boston. Right anyway, is it biogenesis or a biogenesis? I get mixed up because one of them is
what Pasteur did when he found that you have to keep life out to stop food decaying. Wasn't
that biogenesis? Sure, I guess so. And then a biogenesis is this idea that we may have come
from organics, may have come from inorganics. Is that? Yeah, I mean, it must be the case. I mean,
it's a biogenesis happened at some point in the past. The argument is under the conditions
that it did happen and what that means. But I think it's indisputable that we are all inorganic
back at the beginning of the earth. Yes, well, isn't it a false dichotomy between
organic and inorganic? When it started, first of all, chemistry came out of alchemy and then
it was all inorganic until somebody realized that living organisms are made of elements too.
And at that point, they decided to have a branch called organic chemistry for the chemistry of
living compounds, as it were. But there's no real distinction, is there? Because organic,
so-called, is just carbon's chemistry. Yeah, you're absolutely right. There is no distinction between
organic and inorganic chemistry per se. I think that the historians of science would argue that
we have invented the divide in the current time. And actually, there was never really much of a
divide. There was a little bit of a divide where people thought that there were molecules that
only organic living systems could make. And there was something vital about those molecules.
Now, I think one of the things I might tell you tonight is that, indeed, there are some molecules
that only life can make. But that's because of the amount of information and the amount of selective
information that we have for evolution. But actually, the molecule that you can make in the
laboratory and the molecule that occurs on the meteorite and the molecule that might have occurred
when the Earth was formed, there is nothing different about them. But life is capable of
complexity that basically a biogenic inorganic chemistry on its own is not.
Right. And why are they all right-handed?
Just a decision that gets made arbitrarily. But where there's an argument, I guess it's a bit
like some of your attendees, they may remember videotapes and why there was VHS and Betamax.
Well, why did VHS beat Betamax? Well, one simple reason is that Sony issues Betamax and banned
pornography from being distributed on Betamax, which is one of the reasons why VHS took off.
It was an arbitrary reason. Yes. For complexity, you need some particular way of twisting molecules.
And there's two options, the left hand and the right hand. And there was another very
decision made at some point, just in the same way that in the UK, we drive on the left-hand side
and in the US, we drive on the right-hand side. There's lots of causal structures for that, but
none of them is hardwired into the universe. Yes. So somewhere there might be a whole
diversity of life that's left-handed, chirality. Yeah, probably not on Earth, but probably
elsewhere. And the reason why I don't think it's possible on Earth, because life probably
has to emerge on Earth as a planetary phenomena. And there's this kind of decision that was made
because the infrastructure required for the production of proteins and all the machinery in
the cell had to be one hat. That decision had to be made early, basically. Yes. Yes. Yes.
They see. So while we're on the subject of false dichotomies,
is there really a division between chemistry and biology?
No, I would say not. I would say that merely the difference between chemistry and biology is
biology is chemistry with a history and with a memory and itself contained. And other than
that, everything's exactly the same. And of course, biology, the chemistry of biology is more
restricted than the chemistry of chemistry. So in some respects, biology is simpler than chemistry.
Right. We used to have discussions about this. When I was a school teacher a long time ago,
it was the physics department that claimed that they were the best science because everything
boils down to physics. And I used to claim that biology was the best science because it's the
most complicated. It's the top of the tree. Well, I mean, I don't know what you say is best,
but I think you're absolutely right. The biology by virtue of evolution is much more complex and
physics. Physics has a lot of universal laws, but those universal laws come out of simplicity in
the cosmos in terms of the way that the fundamental processes are conducted. So I would say that physics
is the dumbest science because you need the least amount of information to explain universal
phenomena like gravity and the formation of galaxies and and the suns and things like that and stars.
Well, that's what I was trying to say, but I didn't want to call my my fellow teachers dumb.
Well, no, I mean, I remember I talked about the the the subject being the dumbest, not the people
who practice it. It just I could probably derive all the physics on the back of a if I was bright
enough on the back of an envelope, just given a few basic axioms, whereas I don't want to derive
all the biology on the back of an envelope. No, no, not even an A4 envelope. So on this subject,
when we're talking about false dichotomies,
isn't more or less everything some sort of continuous progression? Have we found any real
dichotomies, do you think? Well, in terms of barriers, well, I mean, I can I suppose we can
point to a system that's dead and not alive and say this is dead, you know, to go out in the back
yard and take a rock and say this rock has been, you know, a several billion years old, you can
probably use radio dating, or some kind of isotopic mapping. And then you could take out,
no, a living thing, a hedgehog, a mouse, whatever, and say, well, that clearly is is able to move
around and shows an agency has intent, it does stuff, it eats stuff. So I would say that there
is, if you take those two extremes, there's clearly a difference between them. Now, the stuff in them,
there's salt in the hedgehog and the mouse and the human, and there's salt on the, you know, on the
earth. What is the difference between that salt on the mouse and the living thing and the salt on
the earth? Well, there's absolutely no difference. It's the same stuff. But it's how the stuff is
organized. And so I think that there is no real discrete barrier between the things that are
highly organized and disorganized. I think one of the big, for me, the big, starting way of
answering, I think is a very big question, which is how did life start on earth, and is life present
elsewhere in the universe, which I think is even more interesting, is to do with how matter is able
to be organized over time, and how that matters, literally able to start an arms race with itself
to just persist. So rock can persist by doing nothing. That's really boring. But a collection of
very fragile molecules can persist by copying themselves continually, and seeing how the
environment treats it, and then coming up with strategies randomly, if you like, but with a
forward selection, and we can talk about what that means later, to then be propagated into the future.
Yeah. Well, you mentioned life on other planets. And of course, that's topical at the moment,
because we just launched a mission to Mars to examine the prospect of life actually being there.
You also mentioned intentionality. And this is something that the people I argue with find
difficult. They say that even if a brain is made of the same sort of chemicals that it is in fact
made of, chemicals cannot show intentionality. So they say that the consciousness must have been
imposed from above by God, and the mind and the brain are separate.
Yeah. Well, that's, that's, I mean, I think that that's, I have sympathy with the mystery
associated with you, because we all wake up every day, and we, we all kind of experience a phenomena
that we can kind of think that other people have this, this idea of consciousness, but consciousness
probably in, in that definition to read doesn't exist. And, and I think that it's not, it's not,
I'm not kind of saying that you don't have a right to exist or think or have opinions,
but those, there, there is no kind of mind matter barrier, you know, it is just matter.
And the more research we do, the more questions we ask, the more we find, there is no evidence
that there is anything other than matter and the organization of that matter indeed. We can,
we can fool brains into thinking all sorts of things by playing around with a neurological
system or adding chemicals to the neurons and things like that. So, you know, I sympathetic,
but the current data and paradigm has shifted way beyond, you know, I'd love to think that
there is some kind of mysterious, you know, ethereal universe, which I'm tepid to, but no,
just in here, crush my head, I no longer exist, I'm afraid. Yes, yes, that's so true, but it
doesn't stop them arguing that for a supernatural realm, and I tend to prefer the word unnatural
realm just to annoy them. Yeah, I mean, I think those arguments are really interesting to have,
but I think that the issue that we've got when we're talking about science and belief,
I don't think those arguments are actually against one another. I've long said that really, you know,
I'm a scientist, I love to ask questions, I love to be wrong, and in fact, that's why I'm a good
scientist is I'm really good at being wrong. And it's recognizing when you're wrong, and because
you do experiments, you use a scientific method, when that scientific method can no longer be
applied, you are entitled to have a supernatural, yes, belief if you like, but what science does is
this, it's science, if you say that supernatural here and natural is here, all science is doing
is pushing up and this is happening. And at no point in our history of science have we,
has, you know, the supernatural leaped back and said, ah, I've caught you out. I mean,
we have telepathy now, well, we have mobile phones. You have, you know, iPods in my ear,
I can connect it to my phone with Bluetooth, completely natural explanation that someone else
across the world could do the same thing. Are we using, is it telepathy? Well, it looks the same,
but we're using technology, radio waves, satellites, and electronics to communicate.
Yes. Yes, if it's, if it's advanced enough, it's going to look like magic,
isn't it? Like somebody famous said that. Independent Magisteria then, should we put
science in one box and supernatural, the belief systems in another? Who was it? Is that Stephen
J. Gould? Yeah, I mean, I, I kind of have a, some sympathy for that, but I think they,
they relate it to one another. I don't think it's right for me as a scientist who happens to be a
fairly determined atheist. I mean, I'm very determined individual, but I don't see the need
to invoke a supernatural. But what I don't think is by just saying, you know, taking the Stephen
J. Gould or maybe more recently, the Richard Dawkins approach, where we just say, well, actually,
you know, religious people are somehow not smart enough to understand science. I think that what
we have to be very, very, very clear on is that everyone, well, for me, everyone's in
talk to a religious belief. But when I argue with someone who comes from a religious point,
you're going to say, well, look, what is falsifiable? And what do you believe? And just keep, they're
touching like this, right? And so that's the idea is that science and religion do this. And actually,
them talking together is useful. I don't think it's necessarily good to have a superior notion.
Because even Richard Dawkins or Lawrence Kraus, who was a former guest on your show,
have beliefs. We all have beliefs. And it's not that I'm suddenly saying, admitting I'm religious,
it's just there are certain things I can't necessarily falsify, but have a strong feeling
that they exist. And that's what the belief system is, isn't it? Well, I like to use
the analogy that you're at the horse race. And before it starts, you can believe one of the
horses will win. You can believe that right up until the end of the race, when you it becomes known
which horse did win. And at that point, believing is redundant. There's no point exercising active
belief in the winner, because the evidence is too solid to require you to wish to accept it.
Sure. I mean, that could be one way of doing it. I think there's many ways to have these
discussions and have them productively. And I think what I kind of want to like to do is
when I take part in these debates, and some of my colleagues advise me against it, and I'm like,
well, as long as I don't get what I don't like to do is give fuel to people who want to use the
debates in a in a in a non, I suppose, in a in a in a in a non sociable way, or an unproductive way
to basically say, oh, Cronin said this thing, I said this thing, this is wrong, or science is all
wrong. I'm not interested in any debate. That doesn't mean that there is a there is a there is
God. That doesn't mean if I'm correct in the debate, that there definitely isn't a God. All I can tell
you is that through the scientific research I've been doing, I can I can tell you these things I
know about the universe and these things I don't know. I don't know how the universe started. I
don't think it's really possible to know how it started right now. There's interesting questions.
We don't know how it ends. We don't know if there's life elsewhere. So there's lots of interesting
questions that we don't know the answer to. Yes. So another expression. I love your expression.
What was it? Belief, where falsifiability ends, belief begins. That's that rings, that that's a
reverberating phrase to me. And my version of it is a belief is an opinion about the unknown.
Whoa, a belief is an opinion. I suppose in the in the non if you don't if you're able to just
basically say that we're all able to normalize our baggage, if you like, because our belief in
the unknowns are going to be shaped by our psychological profile, our experience in the
world and how we think the world looks right. Some chemists believe that the origin of life was
started with a molecule called RNA. And RNA is actually the information vector inside the COVID-19.
And that this RNA, which is needed in your cells to build the machinery, the proteins,
is allows your cells to work. So then chemists out there trying to make RNA in their laboratory
because they believe that the RNA world was the start of the origin of life, where I would argue
that it's the RNA is a bit like saying there was there's a all of Shakespeare's plays
just suddenly assembled, and then constructed the author. So I think although they've got the
right idea, it's kind of it's a kind of dogma that's in the wrong going in the wrong direction.
So there's lots of, you know, lots of even scientists have beliefs, right, that they do try
and falsify. And then once they've managed to falsify them, then well, hey, they're no longer
beliefs, they're in the realm of, okay, we know a little bit more. Yes, we would call them
hypotheses rather than beliefs, maybe. Or perhaps that's a little bit further down the road, because
we have to have based it on what is known and come up with some way in which it could be
investigated to be a hypothesis. But somebody in our audience has come up with this very idea,
look, is a virus alive? That's a really good question. I can give you I can give you the answer
that the virus is as alive as you are, right, in that none of us are really alive. Actually,
life is a process where you must be able to replicate. So if you have replicated in the past,
and you have kissed, then you were alive once because you have propagated yourself.
And this is a difference between living and alive. And this may seem weird, right? It's like,
what is Lee saying? It's like, folks, folks, I told you he was a radical thinker.
So viruses are not alive or dead and say, well, you're not alive or dead, but viruses
are a product of life. And in fact, they are evidence of evolution. So I would prefer to say
that a virus inside a cell is alive because it's reproducing. A virus outside a cell
is not alive, but it has the potential to be alive in a cell. So I think that the question is a
really good one because it's a classic trap that we fall into about the definition of life.
So a friend of mine is an expert friend of mine who was arguing about life and said, well, look,
when you're in space, this guy was the last guy to touch the Hubble Space Telescope, right?
You fixed it and then you did some missions. And so I said, well, look, if we left you in space,
you would not be alive for very long. You would be dead because obviously you'd run out of oxygen
food and all of this. And also your capability or potential to have more children would be gone.
And so we started to have this debate about what it's like. Is anything alive? Is anything
off earth alive? Because we're all bound to earth and without earth, we can't live.
So that's a really interesting thing. So probably you as alive as a virus is,
was the virus produced by evolution? Yes. Were you produced by evolution? Yes. Were my
glasses the product of evolution? Yes. My glasses, I suppose, on their own can't replicate,
but they may actually help me see potential, you know, if I was a youngster looking for a mate,
make more children, I suppose. So I think that the crucial question is not if something is alive
or not, has it been produced by the process of evolution? And I would like to replace this
question. But anyway, the answer to the question is the virus is alive in a cell, the virus outside
of the cell has a potential to be alive, it's going to be dead. Yeah, it's effective. Yeah, yeah.
So a virus is really like this. There's memory chip. It doesn't do anything until you plug it in.
Yeah. Yeah, so the thinking you've got there is a bit sort of selfish gene like, isn't it?
And this is another problem that the people I discuss with who don't know anything about
biology much, they don't realize that evolution happens on populations, not individuals.
And so the actual moment of living, as you put it, is during reproduction or replication.
Yeah, the notion of selfish gene is a brilliant book. I've got it up there somewhere.
I think it's like everything very simplified. I think what biology is able to do is create layers,
layers of complexity that allow adaptation and selection. And almost like now, you know,
we've got this really interesting thing saying in social media, I mean, I'm certainly told to
have used a dating app, right? But I'm sure most young people now from what I gather use dating
apps to communicate and find partners. So there's kind of like this extra layer of technology
required with biology to kind of advance the species. And I think that what we have to understand
is that genes themselves can't be selfish. It's almost like the gene inside the cell
gives the cell to capability that it wouldn't otherwise have if that gene has been selected
in a population over time. And I think that, you know, it takes real egotists, if you like,
but I don't mean this as a punch. I'm not delirious against Richard Dawkins, because he's a
fantastic individual, great writer, and has some great insights. But I think that the selfish gene
was a great way to sell a book, but it was a really cool way to understand how biology works.
Yes, you may not know that when the book was reissued, Dawkins wrote a forward to his own book
in which he explained that he was against the title, but it was his publisher's idea
to make a marketing prospect. I think it's a really good title from that point of view,
because what you want a title of a book to do is to provoke you into thinking,
but it shouldn't replace the body of knowledge that people then take the title
as the explanation. The title should be raised curiosity to say, okay, critically thinking,
what is a gene? What is selfishness? What is life? And why does life even exist? You know,
why am I so confident there is alien life in the universe, right? And probably intelligent life as
well. And that's really exciting once we understand how not how easy life is, but the emergence of
life in the universe is probably as likely as the emergence of fusion, nuclear fusion in a star.
It's a process. When you get a fusion together under gravity, at some point there's an ignition
and you have a shiny light. Yeah. So selfish gene was a sort of paperback version of clickbait
before the term had been invented. I agree. I agree. So you've got some videos for us, haven't you?
Yeah. Shall I screen the first one of those? Sure. We can probably get the second one,
actually not the title one, because the cube is in the background.
Oh, so you want me to do the second one? Yeah, yeah. Yeah, coming up.
Yeah. So one of the things I'm a chemist in my lab, so we've got basically four things we're trying
to do. We're trying to make an artificial life form is to make something completely different to
the life you find on Earth today. And when we were doing that, we realized we could make robots to
make drugs to digitize chemistry. And when we realized we could make robots to make drugs,
we realized we could use the idea of making drugs to think and make a kind of chemical
consciousness. And that all brought us back to the final question, which is, does chemistry
allow the universe to invent information through evolution and by making biology?
So how does random chemistry become a genetic system? And that is the question that drives
everything on this slide. And that's what my lab is trying to do in Glasgow, which is
make artificial life forms in the lab, make robots to do chemistry, make computers out of
chemistry to understand consciousness, but really understand this thing that what is information
in the universe? And how did it actually emerge in the first place? And there's a very nice little
that video in there with all those squares kind of changing color is actually a chemical computer
calculating a solution to a problem in real time using chemistry in a little box. So all
those lights changing are actually chemical reactions in a grid, and they're all talking to
each other. So that's your random number generator, which is better than the pseudo random number
generators that the computer boffins have come up with? So that's one application of it. Yeah,
that's one manifestation. And what it is is literally that box, there is a chemical clocks,
which are all each tip talking, and you can synchronize them together. When you synchronize
them, or they get synchronized by you programming them, they can then process information. And
because they're all tip talking together in the chemistry, you can do calculations and
instantiate logical problems in a slightly different way to you would in a digital computer.
And that's what you've actually got happening behind you there?
So now in there, this is an LED cube, which I actually bought my son for Christmas, but he
didn't like it. And in there, it's just basically 512 LEDs. And then the bottom of that cube,
there's a little computer. And this is playing a digital version of the game I showed you in
chemistry. And this is called Conway's Game of Life. And so it's a very simple game where a single
cell is either alive or dead, and the cells that propagate around are living. And actually this
model here, you can see all those lights on, is exactly the same as the propagation of a virus.
So if you wanted to model how COVID-19 would move from cell to cell, from neighborhood to
neighborhood, you look at how that's fizzling out and going around and stopping, that type of
model would explain how the virus is propagating around the world right now. We're kind of in
the middle of that before it vanishes. It will vanish, well not vanish forever, but you know it
will get down to the point where it's no longer kind of exciting. So will we one day have chemical
computers for the lottery? We have them right now, in here. So when I asked you to think of your
numbers for the lottery, you'll think of anything. I mean when people say oh you're crazy, you can't
make a chemical computer, I'm saying okay, solve a quadratic equation. Or if you don't do that,
just tell me what 12 times 12 is, or you know some numerical and you think about it, right? You know,
well your brain is made of chemicals, there's nothing else that you can solve in a bit of gel,
and it's in here. So when people say oh you know it's crazy, you can't make a chemical computer
I just say well okay, you know, I don't have any original ideas, I just steal them from nature,
right? So, but will I make a chemical computer that could solve the lottery, that could maybe
play the lottery short? It'd probably be not less interesting than a human being doing it though.
Yes, except that human beings are very bad at picking lottery numbers because they look at the
gaps and they think we need to have them spaced out as if that's going to make a difference to
a random generation. Well, at the end of the day there is no strategy to playing
lottery because it is random. However, if you're playing poker, or if maybe even you're doing,
maybe playing roulette, if you're paying attention and you're not being too biased by the way that
the brain thinks, you might be able to get a strategy that'll allow you to win. But I think
there is no strategy to win the lottery. I don't play the lottery. I'm sure if I, I mean,
once upon a time when my father turned 70 a few years ago, we were going to place a bet on the
Grand National and I was there on my two sons and I just said I don't bet it's ridiculous and said
no you don't understand, I'm giving you money to put on the Grand National. I said well how much?
He said 50 pounds. So okay, 50 pounds and do I keep the winnings? You keep the winnings. So I
then got my two sons to go and say look, we're going to look at the winners, we're going to look,
sorry, we're going to look at the horses, we're going to look up their form. I'm going to use,
we're going to, I'm going to use a bit of probability, Bayesian probability and I'm going
to take the long, there's too many horses, right? So I took, I don't care, I don't care about winning
100 pounds. It was like I want to win big or nothing anyway. So we just took the horses,
get a bit of Bayesian math, we looked at the long form, picked the best of the long form,
put the 50 pounds on that and then during the, during the, my youngest son, Adam, was like watching
the horse race with me and my father's horse was second, putting up first and mine was,
I think it was Wings of Eagle and what happened was it was last but in the last 100 meters,
a gap opened up and Wings of Eagle went boom and I won 450 pounds. So it wasn't that long odds but
it was long enough to make money. Well I thought it was an illustration of using a little bit of
Bayesian probability, getting a bit of information on the form and taking a guess.
Yeah. You can't do that with a lottery, but you can do it with a horse racing probably not either.
I would probably just got lucky. You were lucky. Right? If you believed in luck, you were lucky. Yes.
I did it rationally, but it was in a ration wax. Yeah, I like to think of the lottery as
voluntary taxation for the statistically ignorant. Yeah. Or there are some people in there that
realize they're going to lose money and they just do it because they like hope. And they think it's
fun. Yeah. So I'm taking a punt here or there and it's exciting to have a look and you know one
day you might win. There's a chance. So shall I play your next video? Sure. I like this one.
So this video basically shows how you can erase information and therefore forget what
something looked like. So on the side that you've got an artist clearly made road in and you've
got some DNA. So my question is how much of the features do you have to erase over time before
you can not recognize it was the product of biology? And so this was kind of a play on
when I go out and I look for aliens, if I can't find a living alien, but I can find say a virus,
which isn't you know, or maybe something very complicated, at which point can I determine
within on a scale of probability that object was produced by the process of selection
in a biological system rather than a random physical processes in the environment. And that
was kind of a video I made to demonstrate to a rich benefactor who wanted to invest in a space
mission to go looking for life. And I need to explain to them that we've been looking for
complex molecules like DNA, and they should compare it like artwork. And it's like, you know,
if I find a load of, you know, I don't know, Jackson Pollock's, you find one Jackson Pollock
somewhere, you'll be like, that's just a random painting. It looks a bit crazy. Maybe it's interesting.
We find a whole load of them. You're like, well, there's structure here. And they look like they've
been created by the same individual or at least someone in that same style. So how many jacks
Pollock's do you need to find before you conclude that wasn't a random paint mess made by a five-year
old, but it was actually a competent artist doing something. And that's really, really
interesting question. And we've made an alien detector based on that. Wow. So what's it looking
for? Little molecules and. You play the next slide, I can explain in the next slide how that works.
So our objects that chemists make, but they basically take atoms, they connect them together
with bonds, which are basically strong linkages between the atoms. And what you have to do is
ask yourself, how complex does the molecule, how many atoms do the molecule have to have
before when you find that molecule, that you can be sure that molecule was made by
a biological processor. This molecule here is the molecule taxol. It's made by a tree bark.
And it's very complex. It has about 70 heavy atoms in it, 62 actually, sorry. And that molecule
happens to be a very good drug for cancer in human beings because it stops the growth of
blood vessels to the tumor. It's a random accident, but it's produced by a biological system.
Now, there are 70 atoms connecting in a very special way in that molecule.
There are more where there are more atoms in the universe.
But there are sorry, there are more possible configurations of that molecule
than there are atoms in the universe. So what am I saying that that molecule is if you were to
find that molecule, say on Mars, in any abundance like two or three copies or 10,000 copies,
what would you conclude? Was that molecule made by a random process or by a selected process?
And probabilistically, I would argue that that molecule is just so unique. It's like a Jackson
Pollock. Because you found 10,000 of them, you would be sure that that molecule was made in a cell
or by some kind of biological entity. And what we can do is probably is convince NASA
and a few other space agencies to go around our service system and not look for little green
men and women, but look for complex molecules that we can find in abundance
that don't look like a messy tar. And that's the that's the hypothesis that we're working on in
the lab at the moment. One of the things that you're one of the targets that your lab has set
itself is to identify all of the molecules within 20 years. I didn't realize there was a finite number.
So no, so it's not to identify all the molecules, it was to basically start by coming up with a
series of technologies that can allow us to screen the molecules made by a certain type of biological
process in a finite amount of time, and then use a computational technique to find and say, well,
this universe of molecules is possible, but not accessible by biology. And what you should do
should you view it a bit like his like a frozen accident. So what I mean is on on earth right
now, we have particular types of technology that build on one another, and you've got a
line of technologies all the way back to the first. Although we could probably make different
types of aeroplanes, right, you know, 20 wings rather than two, we went down the two wing thin,
you know, tail. And so the space of possibilities is actually lowered, but the more sophisticated
we get. So what I'm saying is, once you specialize maybe in a particular language, so like in English,
although there's a you do remove all the other languages, if you don't learn them,
you can write more and more sophisticated essays in English over time. It's a very poor way of
explaining it. So what we're trying to say is that by narrowing down that space, we can identify
most of say 95% of all the complex molecules in a certain size range. So certainly not all of
because it's just super infinite. In fact, it doesn't mean anything. It's just infinite. But
within certain boundary conditions, it becomes tractable, countable, knowable.
Hmm. Yes. It's the concepts that that are just so mind blowing.
Yeah, molecular space is big, right? It's bigger than space.
Yes. If you look up at the stars, you go, whoa, that's big. A chemistry laboratory has a bigger
space to play with than, you know, astronomer or the cosmologist starts. And that's really
kind of a hard thing to imagine. Well, the cosmology is hard enough without going into the
super bigger. Wow. Yeah. Yeah. So, so Perry Mason, evo two dot org
has come up with this prize, hasn't he? And you're pitching for it. Would you like to tell us about
that? Yes, so Perry, what Marshall wants to, I think it's Marshall has come up with this prize,
Evolution 2.0, which is basically, you know, someone who can make an evolving system that does
something with genetic material, there's a $10 million prize. Although I, although I like Perry,
and I admire his enthusiasm, the prize does have some captures. Let's put it this way.
So that if I was to pitch for the prize, I would have to give all the IP, the intellectual property
I generate to the people who give me the prize. So it doesn't really sound like a prize to me.
It sounds like an investment. Yes. I currently, I've made a drug discovery engine that uses
evolutionary principles to search chemical space. And I want to search for drugs that are going to
attack very important problems, such as Alzheimer's and dementia, because big pharmaceutical
industry is not investing in them properly. And so I think if I, if I managed to do that,
I don't really want to enter that for a prize. In that way, I want to make it more accessible
to humanity. So on the one hand, I'm torn because I think that I want to win a prize.
Who doesn't want to win a prize? But the devil is in the details. So Perry's prize is,
is, is complicated. If I could find a way to win it and the IP is not really worth anything,
then sure, I'm going to win a prize. Brilliant. And I, and I think that he's, you know, taking
him at his word, he really wants to stimulate argument and a new way of finding out how evolution
works in the universe. And I'm not sure whether he is confident that it won't be discovered,
because Perry, I mean, Perry's religious, he does believe in God, but he's not a creationist or not
anymore. He does think there are naturalistic explanations, but I'm not sure how far he is
on the spectrum of where his false survivability believes. And I don't want, I didn't want to,
you know, push too hard when I was discussing it with him. But yeah, it's interesting.
I think if it forwards the science, and it also helps people culturally
reconcile the differences between faith-based observations and science-based, well,
faith-based beliefs and science-based observations and hypotheses and why not? It's brilliant for
the world. It has to be ethical though. Oh, sure. Well, ethics is obviously, I don't know, I'll let
you finish and say what you're meaning in terms of ethical, but I definitely would say that ethics
is a very interesting concept because it's produced by evolution as well, right? Human beings and living
things display ethics, well, humans certainly display ethical behavior and that is selective,
right? But ethical behavior helps us, helps our society behave better, depend on one another's
future, make sure that we are not calling the farmers, we have food and our banks don't fall
over, and you only need one or two parasites, Donald Trump, a few others, absolutely that don't
have an ethical behavior and they challenge the system somewhat. For their own benefit.
You might be interested in a couple of shows I did about a month ago
with play Whitby, the ethical philosophy, ethics is his specialism, but the Perry Mason,
Perry Marshall's prize sounds as though it's likely, the idea behind it is not altruism but commerce.
Yeah, I think there is, I think he wanted to be altruistic, let's give him the benefit of the
doubt, but he couldn't raise the money without having some backers who thought they were going to get
something out of it. So I think, taking from his point of view, I'm guessing it's a very American
capital based, but I think I would give him the benefit of the doubt because he's gone out there,
he's put in his own reputation on the line, he's got some funders who have the money and he's got
some scientists who are willing to kind of help judge it, and I think, why not? If it allows
some young group scientists to get together and develop a new technology that wouldn't be produced
any other way and then win the prize, the universe wins, humanity wins. And it's a good initiative,
we can't deny that. So I'm going to play your next slide, I think, I say slide, it's movie,
so that would be this one.
So this here is my first kind of go at making an evolution machine, right, without biology, like
generating salad dressing if you like droplets and putting them into an arena,
bit like Westworld, but not as kind of hot and sexy, where we would just basically have droplets
working together and selecting on one another, maybe causing each other to live or die, and we
would make an arbitrary decision about what droplets would be determined to be the fittest
in that way. And I'm not sure if the other movies are playing in sequence here, but the idea would be
that the information that we get from the good droplets would be used in future generations.
So if you can see in the top right corner here, the robot mixes up the salad dressing,
and in the bottom here, you in this dish, you can see the droplets moving around the interacting,
and over some time, we would decide whether those droplets have achieved a fitness or not.
And you can see these events very simple looking, well, they look very complex,
but there's only four oils in it, it's like a salad dressing. And what we were able to show
is that very simple oil mixtures with no DNA, no proteins, no metabolism,
formally could display incredibly complex behavior, and they could cooperate with each other.
They could interact with each other and help each other survive in a complex environment.
And this is probably how life got started, but life got started at the cellular level
with no, it was just bobs basically interacting in networks. And over time, they invented the
molecular machinery to be more autonomous. Now, what do I mean by that? It's a bit like
how our society develops right now, that as we specialize more, we're able to do more.
So now, in the early times, a village would have to have its vinter,
cheesemaker, policemen would emerge, farm. Now, we depend on global logistics.
I'm very sophisticated people in some part of the world making a silicon chip,
maybe other people in other parts of the world making a special type of light bulb.
All those things come together, and that's rather analogous to how the cell is now.
The cell is so specialized that the molecules in that cell cannot do anything else.
Whereas, you and I, 300 years ago, we'd have to be a writer, farmer, physician,
whatnot. It's a really poor way of explaining it, but as evolution occurs in selection,
we allow specialization. Specialization allows us to do amazing things,
like it can land back on a large pad or cure a disease and things like that.
Or internet-connected computers. I love the way that you're doing this as a bottom-up exercise,
rather than the theist view of top-down, which means they come to a gap, which they can't bridge,
and that's where they slot in their God.
Yeah, I think that's the, you know, for me, I'm looking for the exciting moment of discovery,
right? When I can take a dead system and literally go from sand to cells in my robot,
and then go at that point, like, well, what happened there, and how long did it take for
that to happen? And I'm guessing the exciting moment won't happen at one point in the lab.
It will be maybe over tens of years of experiments. I'll look back and go, oh,
that was the process by which we made the first artificial life form. And I think that that's a
very important thing to understand, that they recognize there is a gap. I think one of the
problems that a lot of science have, origin of life science has, is they have not really
challenged the theists in the gap. And quite if I was coming from a theological point of view,
I'd say, okay, well, where, where, please explain the complexity of my brain, you know,
where did it come from? And, and I think a lot of people have ducked and dived that because
although physics can understand simple systems, biology accepts complex systems, chemistry,
I'm sure we've all failed chemistry, right? You know, chemistry is one of those things at school
that you kind of all, everyone kind of, I embraced it because I just found it so confusing. But
messy middle bit. And, and that is why it's so exciting. Because I think if we do the right
experiments, and we just wait for long enough, and we, and we just ask the question, what happens
to make a chemical system develop a memory, that will answer three important things. Like,
I'll say the question again, how does chemistry get a memory? We do that, we, we solve origin of life,
we solve aliens, we work out why we build a consciousness. That's a pretty, pretty,
pretty interesting payoff for just one hypothesis. Yeah, so one size fits all solution, amazing.
Well, again, it's all different manifestations of this bottom up. The same, the same thing, yeah.
Origin of life is the easiest of the hard problems. The next one is basically, from that is kind of,
you know, complex life. Okay. Intelligence, consciousness, if you see what I mean. So
it's got life, complex life, intelligence and consciousness. Now, I'm pretty sure all of life
displays those things. You know, even the trees in your garden are conscious, not on the level of
watching reality TV or take or listening to this or watching this, but they have some degree of
interaction in the environment. And maybe they have some way of imagining the future and remembering
the past, not as explicitly as we have in our brains, but something like that. But human beings
are an extreme example of abstracting machines. Human beings are wonderful because we have,
you know, that ability to imagine the future that hasn't been created yet and then go and do it.
And I think we're the only animal that can do that. And that's why human beings have a special
status, not because we're supernatural, but we are able to have this imagined future. That's why
it's ethical to probably kill a cow to eat it, as long as you don't make it suffer in the moment,
where it's probably not very ethical to kill a human being because of all that potential that
you've lost. And that's a very interesting philosophical argument, lots of people use.
And it's a way above my pay grade as a chemist, but I'm beginning to grasp some of the concepts
there. Yes, yes, we're covering some ground, aren't we? You're sounding a bit like Prince
Charles now, talking to the trees. No, I didn't say I talked to the trees. No, no, no.
So me and Prince Charles, we won't talk. What I'm saying is that I think that on some degree,
all of matter has some consciousness, but we have to be very, very precise what we mean by that.
So you won't deny that trees sense the world. They go and look for water, food, sunlight, right?
And they have, they have seasons too. Exactly. And they distribute information, the leaves come
out and go away and things track. So I think that's what we've got to try to really remember. I'm not
saying conscious as in, you know, we can have conversation with them. We never care. Not thought,
but awareness. Yeah. Yeah, conscious. I mean, you can have consciousness without thought. I mean,
I, I'm one of these people that I don't think in words. I think in, in, in, in, in movies,
actually, mathematical movies, which takes a lot of people by surprise. I find it very difficult to
talk or think in my head ahead of time. It's all, I have to translate from movie to, to words.
How interesting. Have you seen a psychologist?
Therapist, whenever a psychologist, maybe, maybe I'll get you together with one on here sometime.
I'm sure you'd be an interesting subject for study.
Yeah. So here's another question. Oh, not that one. Sorry, this one.
No, I'm pressing all the wrong buttons here.
Do you have a good definition for life? Yes. Yes. So I don't, so I don't have a good definition
for life, but I have a good way of distinguishing the products of living processes. So I think that
life as a thing does not exist on isolation. And I would like to say, so I think there's a very
nice question you just put up there. So I would say that I'm connected to all life on earth,
back to the universal common ancestor, the last universal common ancestor,
Luca, that cell that kind of gave all the other cells. So there's a causal chain.
So my DNA in my, every cell in my body can be traced back to that cell.
And so what I would say is that everything that's a product of that machine going forward
is a product of that living system. So, so let me give you a way of distinguishing life from
non-life, which I think is as close as we're going to get, because we're undergoing a revolution
in the field, or I'm trying to start revolution. I'm a paradigm shift to what life actually is
along with a few other people. And so living systems uniquely hypothesis. My hypothesis is
living systems are uniquely able to produce objects that are highly complex, that cannot
form randomly. I'll give an extreme version, an iPhone. So an iPhone, you know, this is my
phone here, a bunch of messages on it just now. And that iPhone could not randomly form in some sand.
It took a human being to make it. And that human being was made by evolution. And there's that
chain. Let's take that molecule tax soul. So that model tax soul is evidence of a living process.
Let's take a virus. So when the virus is as alive, well, this phone and the virus as a
complex artifact are evidence of life processes. Viruses are a bit more than the phone because
they can reproduce themselves. And so the living so there's so I think that all I've got to at the
moment in my paradigm is I think I can tell you things associated with living processes from things
that are not. And then we're going to have to have graduations in terms of the amount of boundary
condition or autonomy. So and I know that that sound may sound like a hand waving question.
But I would say that right now, it is not possible to define life. Yes, because we only have one
example. It's a bit like defining flight before the invention of a hot air balloon or aeroplane.
Before those you looked at birds, insects, maybe flying squirrels or gliding squirrels,
and you say, oh, this is called flight. It seems to be flat your wings and you can go up in the
air. But I don't know what it means. And then okay, like make an object that goes lighter than this
that can rise in the air changing the density as a balloon. And also to make an airplane,
we have forward motion or a helicopter, you can displace and create lift and therefore fly.
So now, now we have all those objects, we can say what's common to all those objects? Well,
they are able to create lift and move from the surface of the earth in the air to another place
under their own propulsion. And so that I would say is kind of where we're getting
out with the definition of flight. Now take the definition of life and you're like, well,
it has to have DNA, does it? Does everything in the universe have DNA? Definitely no. And there
is other life in the universe. Does all life in the universe use something like DNA?
Doubt it. But let's say that we don't know, we only have one example. So I think at the moment,
all I can be really sure about is if I find a complex object, and I can find enough of it,
so it didn't randomly appear like an artist, you know, like just the kind of like a face on Mars,
which is just me seeing a face on Mars, then that's going to be my working operational way of
recognizing evidence of a living process. And I apologize for being really legalistic,
but I like to be precise about it, because what I'm saying is not terribly highfaluting,
it's really concrete. And I want to keep it that concrete as I try to almost on my own,
but with a few people around the world, try and shift that paradigm.
Well, more power to your elbow. Let's see what else we've got.
When you brought up Taxol, it reminded me that I think it was 23 years ago,
my first wife who had ovarian cancer, and Taxol was just about coming out as a treatment.
And they didn't offer it to her because they didn't have enough
for her to have a course of it, which was very sad. I hope it's more relatable now.
So one of the big things that has happened since Taxol has been isolated is that people have
been making Taxol in the laboratory, and it was a massive effort, you know, their 200
individual steps would have to be made by chemists and lab to do that.
But now these skeletons are actually much easier to produce. So yeah, there are lots of
drugs out there based upon Taxol. We're not lots some. And I mean, it's doing okay, I think.
Good, good. So what you're talking about is a progression. It's emergence theory.
I've got an echo. Can you hear an echo on my voice?
Yeah, I can hear you just fine. No echo here.
Good, good, good. And this is what the people I argue with, the believers, have difficulty with.
They don't want to see things in terms of a gradual progression from very simple,
slightly more complex, more and more complex, and eventually quite sophisticated.
They want their dividers. It's like there's two sorts of taxonomists.
There are those who look at the differences between species and split them and put them in
different genera. And then there are those who look at the similarities between different species
and clump them together. There's the spitters and the clumpers. And this is what we're uppercase.
Surely there's got to be some way of making people understand emergence theory.
Well, I mean, I don't know. So emergence theory for me as well, for a lot of people,
is fairly airy, airy, what we mean by it. And I think the problem is, I don't think the same
thing about complexity. And complexity is really too vague. And so I'm starting to develop a new
theory that doesn't talk about emergence or complexity. It just talks about the emergence
of information in assembly. And it's really the opposite to a thing that a lot of physicists and
chemists and some information theorists use, which is entropy. And entropy is merely a measure of
disorder. So everyone uses entropy to look at transitions in physical systems. And the problem
is what you're measuring is a transition in disorder. So you're basically measuring what you
didn't know and what you've lost. What I've done is turn it on its head and try and develop a theory
of assembly. When I see the evidence of the created information over time being used to
basically take to produce objects, which are now more complex, but let's replace the word complex
to more assembled. Okay. So when I say, Oh, is that more assembled than that? And you can say,
well, how many individual features are there? You know, we often say people who is more complex,
you know, person A or person B, and, you know, and the complexity is a function of their psychologist
they've talked to. But if you take a, say, a computer program, or a state in a game,
a chess game or game ago, you can calculate how assembled that is by the number of moves
you have left and the number of moves you've made. And that is a more productive way because I can
see that emergence theory is good, but it's vague, right? It's kind of like, it's difficult to capture.
And that's the problem with complexity is difficult to capture. So the theory that I'm playing with
is that like, like entropy, quantifiable, but we will aim to one day replace entropy with degree
of assembly. This is very heretical, unpublished, unmerified. It could be crony and just talking
nonsense again. But it's a hypothesis I think is worth exploring. Yes, yes. I was going to call you
heretical. Is there a word? Yeah, that's the word heretic. Thank you. I was grouping for that.
So what is information then? Was it produced by this assembly that could replicate?
Was there a time when there was no information? And is it growing as, you know, we make more
molecules that can repeat themselves? I think so. And this is something that really perversely
is going to get me into cosmology, into physics at some point, because the physicists say, look,
the origin of the universe requires a very ordered state. That is a state where lots of information,
uncertainty, and when the universe got going, it becoming disorder, and that disorder can be
used to power the creation of some order. But I think that's kind of wrong. Because I think
to be a, to be a, this is kind of really, you know, I would like to challenge Lawrence Krauss
on this and other people, or maybe Sean Carroll. I can, I can fix that. I can get you and Lawrence
together. I'm not sure. I mean, I know Lawrence runs really well. I'm not sure I want to talk to
Lawrence for various reasons. But anyway, I would say, I would say that the physicists require
there to be a God at the origin of the universe to create all this order.
Because no one knows where it came from. You can't, there's no competent physicists
alive today. And that troubles me now. And I was like, Oh, oh my gosh, I'm a naturalist. I'm not
a dualist. I believe in nothing, right? So it's almost a belief, right? I believe that there is
nothing I can determine it all. But then when I realized that assembly theory creates information,
I realized that the origin of the universe didn't need, they didn't need low entropy of the origin
of the universe. And what it needs is a readjustment to the way we look at time. But I'm not ready to
go there yet. But the answer lies with time and assembly. But let's answer your question. Is information
created? Yes. While I mean, let's, and that's before the information theorists go crazy. It's
there's information everywhere. No. Information only exists in universes, which are alive.
In the universe, there is no information because there's no encoding and no decoding process.
I told you, I told you folks, he's an original thinker.
And that argument about information requires the physicists to be the God looking down on the
universe counting particles. Whereas what happens is information gets created randomly.
What information get is a time traveling thing. What I mean, whoa, you have random mess, random
mess, random mess in your rocks. Then there is one chance configuration that is randomly generated
that has no value to the universe. But then just by chance that that organized structure
has a better chance of surviving the wind and the rain than another one. And then it finds a way
to copy itself. And that motif gets put back in them to template other ones. It's a bit like a,
now you have a cycle of where the rock is like not as boring as before. And then the rocks start
competing. And then suddenly it's a then mutation and random selection on the rocks go on. And then
the assemblyness goes up. And before you know it, you've invented the cell complex life mammals,
the political system and Donald Trump. And you have rich complexity and contradictions in just
one foul sweep. So what I mean is that we appear to be creating information with selection. And I
still don't understand exactly what that means. And it's one of the big mysteries that I'm kind
of trying to trace down with a few physicists around the world in the US and in Japan and in the
UK. You realize that you could commercialize this and make a fortune in the same way that
Sean Carroll has. All he does is stand up there and speculate about what we don't know.
What do you mean by his books? I mean, yeah, I think Sean is a brilliant writer and he's a very
precise thinker. And also, I think that he kind of dismisses things. So Sean and I used to argue
quite a lot about time and stuff and complexity and he said, no, it's all the core models, all this.
But now Sean, I've watched him in the last couple of years, he's like more open to complexity and
thermodynamics. So emergence. But I think Sean needs to be as precise with those terms as he's
precise with quantum mechanics. And then I think you will then come round to my way of thinking.
Wow, my brain is hurting. Well, I hope it's been entertaining. It's been fantastic. It's been
fan bloody testing, in fact. So I'm going to just thank you in a minute, but I'm going to prepare
people for next week, because currently, I've challenged a self proclaimed real deal Christian
apologist, by the name of David Salako, who I run into quite a lot on the internet, to debate me
on the motion, this house believes there is a God. He hasn't accepted yet. But I would like
my audience to tell me, what should I do? Should I empty chair him and go ahead without him there?
Or should I find somebody else to come and guess for us next week? Tell me in the comments. And
of course, the once this broadcast is ended, it becomes a podcast immediately. And if you have
the time, you will be able to see the comments and maybe engage with them.
And of course, when it's a podcast, it's available to you to distribute wherever you like, maybe
use for teaching material, who knows what. But thank you very much. It's, you know, it's truly
fantastic to have had you as a guest on this show. Well, very nice to talk to you. And I
hopefully the people that have been listening and watching have, you know, has made them think a
bit. I don't know the answers. I only know the questions. Well, there'll be more see it as the
days go by. Meanwhile, meanwhile, go get yourself a beer. Okay. Thanks very much. Have a nice evening.
Bye bye. See you later.
