In a previous video, I explained how to think about probabilistic reasoning visually by
using the Bayesian bar. If you haven't already seen that video, I'd recommend that you
watch it before continuing with this one, as I'm now going to explain how the Bayesian
bar relates to Bayes' theorem. As a result of this, the content in this video is going
to get a bit more technical, but by using the bar, you'll see that it is simpler than
it initially looks.
In order to show you how the Bayesian bar relates to Bayes' theorem, we're going to
need an example. For this video, we're going to use the example of fine-tuning arguments
for theism, and just as with the previous video, I'm not really going to say anything
about this type of argument, or justify the probability assignments that I give. All you
need to know for our purposes here, is that our universe has very finely tuned values
that allow for life, and that if these values had been different, then it's very likely
that life wouldn't exist.
So let's draw a bar of a perfect agnostic who is 50-50 that God exists. So half of the
bar is for theism, and the other half for atheism.
Now although you could do all of what I'm about to do on one bar, it's easier to show
you how it relates to Bayes' theorem if I draw additional bars with extra content on
them.
So let's now draw another bar, just the same as the previous one, but this time we're
going to add in how likely we think fine-tuning is on theism and on atheism. Firstly, then
fine-tuning on theism. We might think fine-tuning is not that surprising on theism, since we
think it's likely that God would want a world with living beings in it, perhaps so that
he could have a relationship with them, and the goods that come from that.
As a result, we give 3 eighths of the whole bar to theism and fine-tuning, and 1 eighth
to theism and no fine-tuning. We then think about the atheist portion of the bar. This
time we're going to think that fine-tuning is really unlikely on atheism, as there's
no being that wants life, and it seems extraordinarily unlikely that the universe happens to have
the life permitting finely-tuned values by chance. So we give 1 eighth of the whole bar
to atheism and fine-tuning, and 3 eighths of the whole bar to atheism and no fine-tuning.
We now get some evidence, namely that there's fine-tuning in the world, and so we delete
the portions of the bar where it says that there is no fine-tuning. Again, to show this,
I'm just going to draw another bar with these sections deleted. Notice also that I've
renormalised the probabilistic values of the portions of the bar, so that they add up to
1. As I said in the previous video, this is just the process of changing the values of
the remaining probability segments, whilst preserving their ratios. So because the theism
and fine-tuning portion was 3 times the size of the atheism and fine-tuning section, it
must be 3 times the size after this process. So the final probability of theism and fine-tuning
is 3 quarters, and the probability of atheism and fine-tuning is a quarter. The overall
result then is that fine-tuning is evidence for theism, as it raised the probability of
theism and lowered the probability of atheism. Now before I explain to you how the bar relates
to Bayes Theorem, it'll be helpful to introduce you to some jargon. So take a look at the
first bar and the half probability assignments we've given to theism and atheism. These are
called our prior probabilities, and they're the probabilities we give to set out the degree
of certainty we have or ought to have in certain hypotheses before we've taken this bit of
evidence into account. How we determine what these values should be is subject to debate,
but exploring that will have to wait for another time. Now look at the second bar,
and the probability assignments we see there of 1 eighth, 3 eighths, 1 eighth, and 3 eighths.
These are what's called conditional probabilities, since they're in the conditional form. This means
that they say, given some x, y has probability of dot dot dot. So in our example, given theism,
fine-tuning has the probability of dot dot dot, or given atheism, fine-tuning has the
probability of dot dot dot. Okay, now let's look at the final bar and the two probability
assignments there. So three quarters for theism and fine-tuning, and a quarter for atheism
and fine-tuning. These are known as the posterior probabilities. That is the probability after
we've taken into account the relevant evidence. With this jargon now explained, let's think about
how the bar relates to Bayes' theorem. Bayes' theorem says the probability of the hypothesis
given the evidence is equal to the probability of the hypothesis multiplied by the probability of
the evidence given the hypothesis divided by the evidence. So here you can see the formula
written out in full, with PR standing for probability, H for hypothesis, and E for evidence. The jargon
we have just learned is also useful when thinking about the formula, with the probability of the
hypothesis given the evidence relating to the posterior probability, the probability of the
hypothesis being connected to the prior probability, and the probability of the evidence given the
hypothesis linking with the conditional probability. In order to think about how the formula works,
let's ask the question, what is the probability of theism given the evidence of fine-tuning? So
in this case, H, a hypothesis, is going to stand for theism, and E, our evidence, will be fine-tuning.
In order to find out the answer to this, we're going to need to fill in the other half of Bayes'
theorem. First of all, is the probability of the hypothesis, which in our case is theism. This is
going to be a half, and we can see this in our first bar. Next is the probability of the evidence
given the hypothesis, which in our case is the probability of fine-tuning given theism. This
has the value of three quarters, which we can work out from looking at our second bar. In order to do
this, look at the second bar, and imagine removing the atheist half of the bar, so that all we have
left is the theistic half of it. Now ask yourself, how much of the theist part of the bar does fine
tuning take up? The answer is three quarters, and this is the value we put here for the probability
of the evidence, fine-tuning, given the hypothesis, theism. So far we filled in the top part of the
Bayesian formula, and now we have to work out what it is that we divide it by, which is the
probability of the evidence. To get this value, we have to work out how likely the evidence is,
in our case fine-tuning, on any hypothesis, and to do this we need another formula. This one says
that we first find out the value of the probability of the evidence, given the hypothesis, multiplied
by the probability of the hypothesis, and then also the value of the probability of the evidence,
if the hypothesis is false, multiplied by the probability of the hypothesis being false.
And then we add these two values together. So in our case, we get the probability of fine-tuning
given theism, three quarters, which we can work out from looking at our second bar, and multiply
it by the probability of theism, which is a half, which we can see in our first bar. We then work
out the value of fine-tuning, given the falsity of theism. So in our case, the probability of fine-tuning
on atheism, as this is the only other hypothesis we're considering. And this is the value of a
quarter, which we can work out from looking at our second bar. And then we multiply this by the
probability of the falsity of our hypothesis. And so in our case, the probability of atheism.
And here we can see that the value is a half, which we can see in our first bar.
After getting these values, we add them together. The result of this is a half. And we can check
this by looking at our second bar. For if you look at it and add up the two sections of the bar
where there is fine-tuning, we can see that it takes up half the space of the whole bar.
With that done, we have the three values we need to fill in Bayes' theorem. So a half for the
probability of the hypothesis, three quarters for the probability of the evidence given the
hypothesis, and a half for the probability of the evidence. So let's answer the question,
what's the probability of theism given fine-tuning? First, we input the numbers we have. So it's a
half multiplied by three quarters divided by a half. Since many people find it easier to perform
calculations on decimals rather than fractions, that's the same as 0.5 multiplied by 0.75 divided
by 0.5. And the answer we get is 0.75 or three quarters. And we can also check that this is
right by looking at our third and final bar, where we can see that three quarters of the bar
is for theism and fine-tuning just as we got here. So that's how the Bayesian bar relates to Bayes'
theorem. Whilst this has been a bit more technical, I hope you can see that the formula is easier to
fill out when we're using the bar, and the bar is also a helpful way to show you what Bayes'
theorem is doing. But remember, as I said to you in the previous video, you can always think about
probabilistic arguments in terms of the bar without numbers, if you prefer. But knowing how the formula
connects with the bar is helpful so that you can use the more formal apparatus if you wish
and translate more formal presentations of arguments into the bar. In future videos,
I'll discuss some probabilistic arguments in more detail and the type of probability that we're
using when thinking about Bayesian reasoning. So if you don't want to miss out on that, then
please subscribe, and if you found this video helpful, then please give it a like.
