The view in our cognitive scientists today is that we construct our perceptions of reality
in real time. The question was, could we be misinterpreting the content of our perceptual
experiences? And what is our current understanding in a biology of science? According to evolution,
what we perceive with our brain and our senses does not reflect the true natures of the reality.
Why should you care? The implications of such radical finding rock the foundations of our
belief system that space-time is fundamental. In this series, we are delighted to have Professor
Meredith O'Carnative Science, Donald Hoffman, and Professor of Developmental and Synthetic
Biology, Michael Levin joining us today to discuss the idea, and we are going to look
at what is a contest agency. Welcome, Professor Levin. Welcome, Professor Hoffman.
Thank you. Thank you. Thanks for having us. Absolutely.
How's the new year treating both professors so far? Did you all have a good holiday?
Yeah, sure. Yes, healthy and uneventful, which is good. Yeah, nothing to complain about.
So, any new project for 2023?
Many things. So, in our lab, we have a variety of kind of conceptual and computational projects
and also a bunch of bench work and stuff. So, we have lots of things going on in the areas of,
well, the practicalities come out as cancer, birth defects, regenerative medicine, those kinds of
things. It is our desire to understand collective intelligence, which I think is all intelligence,
and how it is that minds are sort of emerge in the physical world. And so, we are finding new
ways to try to communicate with cellular swarms in the body as a kind of collective intelligence.
And we've got some interesting things on looking at the different competencies of things like
gene regulatory networks, in addition to other models like slime molds and things. So,
yeah, lots of new stuff along those lines.
Busy is going to keep you busy. And Don, you?
That's quite a list. That's an impressive list. Well, we're focused on a number of projects,
but most interesting to me is the physicists tell us that space time is doomed. And they're
not just saying that they're finding new structures beyond space time, right? They're
actually finding these structures like the Amplituhedron and the deepest structure or something
called decorated permutations. But these are just like static structures beyond space time.
We've been looking for a dynamics beyond space time, dynamical system that would actually give
rise to these structures, like the deepest structure is the decorated permutation. So,
we just published a paper last week in which we did that. So, we prove that it's apparently a new
mathematical result that you can canonically map Markov chains, any Markov chain to decorated
permutations. And so, that gives us a window now to start to interpret these structures beyond
space time in terms of Markovian dynamics. And so, that's what we're doing now. So, we have
the project I'm working on now is to show we have a Markovian dynamics of conscious agents.
That's what made us look after these Markov chain ideas and see if we could, you know,
turn them into decorated permutations. That was the motivation because we already have a Markovian
dynamics of consciousness. And so, that's what we're up to now is, okay, now that we have this map
of our conscious agent dynamics, so as a model of conscious agents beyond space time into decorated
permutations, that now should instruct us exactly how to port specific properties of the conscious
agent dynamics to specific physical properties like mass, momentum, spin, and energy and so
forth. So, that's what I'm excited to do because that link has told us where exactly to look
in our conscious agent dynamics. And so, we're looking there and we're finding some beautiful
mathematical structures and getting hints about how they project to properties in space time. So,
we're trying to, so that's my project to map that out and then make explicit proposals for how
could be tested with the data on the inner structure of protons. So, the scattering
experiments that have been done since the 1960s at Stanford Linear Accelerator and then
much more powerful ones later on. We have given us a tremendous amount of detail about the inner
structure, the quark gluon and so forth structure, the parton structure of, and their momentum
distributions inside protons. So, that's my goal this year is to try to actually predict those
distributions from a theory of conscious agents that's beyond space time. That would be, that would
be a good year. On the 20th of December, Professor Levin tweeted, when I was five, I asked my dad
where a certain toy was that I couldn't find. He said, you know how today's clicks over into
tomorrow while you sleep at night? Well, the toy didn't make it. I wouldn't say that's responsible
for my all weird thinking actions, but I spent a long time thinking about how frame of time and
days works. How some object passed from yesterday to today and how that apparently can fail. And
how we as mine say in yesterday, or successfully make it forward. Try to stay up all night to
catch the transactions very disturbing at the time. Professor Levin, could you speak on the toy
that missing? Yeah, I remember it quite clearly. It was a, it was a, it was some sort of plastic
gun or something like this. And, and I remember my, my, I couldn't find it anywhere. And I'm sure,
I'm sure probably somebody threw it away. And my dad, without skipping a beat, he said, he said,
oh yeah, you know, like at night, when things, you know, go over from today to tomorrow, yeah,
it didn't make it. So, you know, that's it. You can give up. It just didn't make it. And I walked
away thinking, oh my God, that's bad. There's a thought like, like, what, well, what determines
whether things make it? And, and, and what if I don't make it? And, and, and what happens? And
then I tried to stay up, of course, all night wanting to catch that, you know, wanting to catch
that moment. When I wasn't, I wasn't able to, I would just fall asleep somewhere around midnight
and like, dang, I missed it again. But you know, so I don't know how much, how much that was responsible
for some of the strange things I think about. But I do, I do think that one of the things that
I've been thinking about recently is this, which I think it relates that is this notion of a lot
of what we do relates to this notion of selfhood or being a self, you know, what does it mean to be
a permanent or, or not, not a permanent, but a stable cognitive structure? Because much like with
bodies, which are a kind of ship of thesis sort of thing, right, molecules come and go all the
time cells come and go all the time. But something stays the same. So what is that? And what are the
policies that the other cells and molecules are implementing that allows some sort of stable,
large scale collective to remain while the low level parts are swapped out at will. And it's not
always a policy to maintain status quo, it might be more metamorphosis, it might be all kinds of
changes that, you know, regeneration and development may, but, but in any case, you need to maintain
some sort of large scale coherence, even though the parts are changing out all the time. So I was
thinking about this with respect to the cognition as well, if you're going to be a stable mind of
some sort, you need to allow ID and go and you need to be in different states. But it, it can't
be something that just completely erases you, you know, every time you have a new thought, well,
that's it, now you're, you know, now you're gone. So, so, so that that balance with the opposite
idea, which comes from many places, but among them, Buddhist ideas of an impermanent self,
or perhaps an illusory, even, even maybe an illusory self. So I've been, I've been thinking about
that a lot and trying to play with these ideas of stability, but, but changeability and the
robustness and yet plasticity. And one way I now think about this is that the self is, it's not
so much that it's completely illusory, but it, but it has to be recreated at every moment in time.
And what I mean by that is just that, at any given moment right now, everything you know about,
or you think you know about yourself, your past, everything else, you have to reconstruct
from the memory traces in your brain. You don't actually have access to anything that really
happened before, whether they be molecules or, or physiological structures, we actually don't
know what it is really. But whatever it is that you've got hold of right now, you have this narrow
slice of now, which is, I don't know, a couple of hundred milliseconds, maybe, and that's your
self. And then you sort of have to reconstruct everything you think you know, from whatever
memory molecules or, you know, engrams that you find laying around in your, in your brain. That's
your only, and of course, people have played with this, you know, for these sort of, I think,
I think maybe humor, somebody said, you know, or, or Boltzmann brains, you know, this idea that
all your memories could have been created and the really hadn't been, and I don't mean, I don't mean
this, this, this sort of bizarre sceptical thing that can't be disproven. I just mean literally
that at every moment, as a cognitive agent, you have to be constructing a model of yourself from
the evidence that you have, which and where does it come from? Well, whatever engrams happen to be
in your, in your, in your brain. And so this, you know, you can imagine yourself as these like
slices in this, in this, you know, and I'm sure I'm sure this is, you know, as Don was saying,
this probably an outdated view already, but I sort of imagine it as these slices of this, of this
giant space time loaf, so to speak. And each, and each one you're basically, you have to recreate
yourself from scratch. And, and then, and if, and that way, what happens is that you can think of
everything you've done in the past and all the memories that were formed in the past,
patients from a past self to a future self, and everything you're doing now are messages that
you are in fact leaving for your future self in a way, right? Because so the memories that you're
forming now and the things you're doing now are things that some future version of you is going
to be using those to base their model of what the heck is going on and when, and who am I? And,
and of course, there are medical versions of this. So people with anterior grade amnesia,
who can't form new memories, what do they do? They, they, they leave, right? So, so, so you
wake up in the morning, because there's this notepad. And on the notepad, first thing it says is,
Hey, by the way, you've got anterior grade amnesia. This is who you are. And this is what's going on.
And the last thing is, don't forget to, don't forget to write. And so we all do this all the
time. It's just that typically our pads are internal. So that, right? So that's all that is
really the same problem, because you must reconstruct yourself. It's just on a smaller
scale. And, and it's somehow internal. So anyway, that's, that's my, my ramblings on that. That,
that's how I've been thinking about this. Thank you. Don, what did you think the time is then?
Is it a, is it a, you know, space and time? Is it more like a data structure?
Could you speak on that, please? Great question. I'll just say one thing along the lines of what
Mike was saying. I agree with what you're saying, Mike. And it's, and it's quite interesting,
because every time you access those memories, you destroy them. You have to do memory reconciled.
You have to actually rebuild the memories all the time as well. So, so you're rebuilding yourself
all the time. It's not like the memory is there and it's always there. You know, every time you
access it, you have to rebuild it. So that's distracting. And yeah, the framework in which
you're talking like, you know, the space time loaf is, has been the standard, your physicalist
framework, you know, since, since Einstein for, so for over a century now. And, but it's interesting
how the physicists realized that, that, that space time itself isn't, is not fundamental.
And so, so it doesn't mean that those ideas are wrong. It means that that way of thinking about
them will have to be understood at a deeper level, right? We'll have to have a deeper representation
beyond space time and that, you know, of physics or whatever beyond space time that projects down
to the space time loaf and projects down to the processes we see, like memory, reconciliation,
and so forth, the middle processes. So those, so, so the space and time are not fundamental,
you know, then, and the physicists are, the physicists are the ones who are not me. It's
the physicists that are saying space time is doomed. It, their own theories. So quantum field
theory and general relativity together are very clear that it's a data structure that works down
to 10 to the minus 33 centimeters and then falls apart. So it's actually a really shallow
data structure. It's 10 to the minus 33, not 10 to the minus 33 trillion,
just 10 to the minus 33 centimeters, the thing falls apart. And so, so that means that, by the
way, time also falls apart at 10 to the minus 43 seconds. So, so I take the physicists up their
word that space time is doomed. And that that means that time is doomed. Right. So your question
was about time. So, so we, and that also, by the way, means that ultimately, the strategy in science
of that, if you go to smaller and smaller scales of space time, you find more and more fundamental
objects and more and more fundamental laws. That's the reductionism. That's precisely the
reductionism I mean. That reductionism is false. It just doesn't work beyond 10 to the minus 33
centimeters. And in fact, it falls apart well before them. You get these UVIR correspondences
that will things up well before that. So, so I think that time is and space are merely interface
concepts that they're, they're what we use to get by in, but they're not the reality and the,
and the reality is something entirely outside space and time. And I'll just mention that our
work in evolution of a natural selection agrees with, with the physicists. Evolution also entails
that space and time and objects in space and time are not fundamental. So, so that means that
neurons don't exist when they're not perceived, but, but, but that is not to put down neurobiology.
In fact, what I say is we need more money for neurobiology because we realize it's a lot harder
than we ever thought. We thought, you know, there's 86 billion neurons in the brain and,
you know, that's a hard problem, but, but that's just the interface representation. That's, that's
the dumb down version. The real complex version is being hidden from us. And we have to really reverse
engineer neurobiology and space time to something deeper. It's going to be far more complicated
and we'll have to see how it projects down to space time. So, so I think that, that time is,
is not fundamental. And in our Markovian dynamics of conscious agents,
there is no entropic arrow of time necessary in the dynamics. So, we can have a dynamics in which
there is a sequence parameter, but there is the entropy does not increase. But it turns out it's
a theorem that if you take a projection of the dynamics on by say conditional probability,
that any projected view of the dynamics, you'll get a new dynamics that's a, you know, projection
of the bigger dynamics of the fundamental dynamic, that new dynamics will have an arrow of time.
Just because of the loss of information that happened in the projection process.
So, so that makes sense. Space time is just our virtual reality headset. It's a projection. It loses
information. We have an arrow of time because of that loss of information. In other words, time
is not an insight into the nature of reality. It's just an artifact of the projection process,
purely an artifact and not an, not an insight. There's more to say, but I'll stop there because
I don't want to do it. Mike, do you agree? Or you have anything to add to that, Mike?
Yeah. Well, I think, I think it's a, it's a, it's a very profound idea. And, and I think that
I, I wonder if we can generalize that to say that it's almost, it's almost guaranteed that
agents will, will build models of their world that may or may not agree with other agents
models of their world, because as Don has very nicely shown rigorously, evolution isn't looking
for that. It's just looking for expedient representations. And so it's entirely possible
that there are, I mean, so, so Chris Fields and I work on this kind of stuff a lot from the perspective
of observers and this idea that everything is some observer's vantage point description.
And so I think it makes complete sense to me that from certain vantage points,
things look like there's, there's space and time, but you know, it's like, it's like,
we have mathematical tools, you know, neural nets and things like that, that will
take, take their experience and project it into some crazy space where you can't make heads of
tails of what the principal components are. And, and, and because, and this is what happens to,
to us all, we make, we make some kind of representation that seems to be good enough
for survival and various other things. But, but none of that should be taken as, as, as,
as fundamental. And the other, the other thing that this is maybe stepping away a little bit,
but, but I think it bears on this, on this topic as far as, you know, space, space and time have
served well, they've in physics, right, they've done a nice job and everything. But I think,
I think we have to ask somebody, somebody once said, I remember who it was that them,
if you show me the fishing net that you're using, I'll show you the fish you're going to catch,
which is that we have to think about what are these tools good for and what are they not good for.
And one of the things that I've been increasingly sort of focusing on this, this idea that
the world looks like a mechanical, mechanistic place when you use tools that are low agency
tools. So when you use voltmeters and rulers and things like this, all you're ever going to see
is low agency stuff, you're going to see things that look like mechanism. Of course,
it's going to look like mechanism because that's the, that's the lens you're using.
And so we can't then assume that, well, that must be right. And just assume that, okay,
it's all got to be bottom up because those are the tools that we use. And what if, what if
the things you're going to find have to be in some impedance match, almost are
the tools that you're using. And so we suppose you're looking for things like agents or you're
looking for virtual governors or top-down controllers, you're not going to find that
with low agency tools. What can you find that with? Well, you find it with brains and you find it
with minds that are primed to look for agency. These things that are, we don't have a voltmeter
that measures causal information, new theory and whatnot. These things that Eric Hall and other
folks study these high level, integrated information and all that. You don't have a voltmeter
that, of course you don't. But, and so you don't find any of that when you use those tools all you
ever see as mechanism. But when you look at the world using a tool, for example, our own mind
and our observational system, then we're very good at detecting agency. Of course, we make mistakes
in both directions, right? We have false positive and false negatives. But minds are really good
tools to find other minds, voltmeters or not. And so, right? So maybe there's something there.
Maybe it's this idea that, yes, of course, these things have been with us and they do a nice job
on the kinds of things that they're good at, which is describing mechanical,
mechanistic interactions. And I think what Don has highlighted very, very effectively is that
we cannot assume that, well, that's our fishing net and that's all there is to find. That's clearly,
right? They're letting us find certain kinds of things and they're also obscuring lots of other
important things. Thank you. So let me summarize it, Don. So you're saying no physical objects,
including my body, it's conscious, strictly speaking, right? So my brain isn't conscious
because my brain, in fact, doesn't even exist. And then space time is not fundamental. So this
standard view that we all took for granted, objective reality we see with our eyes is not
surviving bonkers. So having this view with the evolution theory, has it affected your
perceptions and your behavior when you come to interacting with the world?
Yes. And I think the way you put it is well put. And what Mike has been saying is,
I completely agree. And it's brilliant. And the fishing net example is a really good example
that, you know, we don't see the world as it is. We see it through the lens of our own concepts and
the way we, you know, what we do. And there's no escaping that. And so in effect, as well,
as we talked about, you have to recreate yourself all the time, right? That was Mike saying,
you're always recreating yourself all the time. Well, you're also recreating the world all the
time. So I have a body when I look, and I have neurons when I look. And when I don't look,
they're not there. So every time I look. So this is really quite,
if you're in a virtual reality game, your avatar is there only when you see it.
And the avatar that someone else sees of you is there when they see it. And as soon as they
turn their heads somewhere else, that avatar is gone. And they're looking at something else.
And so, yeah, we're recreating all the objects inside of space and time on the fly as needed.
And that includes all of my neurons and my body. So these things, you know, it's,
and we have the illusion that they're there all the time, because every time I look, I see it.
But you can get the same illusion in virtual reality, right? You know, if you're playing a
good game, you can get immersed in the game. Every time I look over to the right, I see the mountain.
So it must mean the mountains there all the time. No, no, you're only rendering the mountain when
you look. The fact is, you always render the mountain every time you look that direction,
but that doesn't mean the mountain was there. You still have to create it all the time.
There is something, there is a reality. But so we get confused, because when we go, well,
there must be some reality. Yeah, absolutely, there is a reality. It's just not inside space
and time, because it's not inside the virtual reality, because there you have to render everything
for it to exist in the only exists in the rendering process. So yes, this has a personal impact,
right? I mean, first, when I first realized, I had to just sit down and to absorb it. And that was
35 years ago. And I'm still absorbing it. And it's a shock to me. And I think it's a shock to
almost everybody, except maybe, you know, advanced meditators and so forth. You know, maybe for them
is not as much of a shock, but it's still a shock to the system. And I think Piaget gave us the very
famous child psychologist Piaget gave us some insight as to why it's so shocking. And he pointed
out that we're programmed to believe in what he called object permanence. He thought we got object
permanence by 18 months. Later studies showed that it was probably more like a three or four months.
So this is before we're rational, right? We're not reasoning and logically thinking about things.
We're just programmed to believe that that doll exists, and will continue to exist,
even if it's behind a pillow when I can't see it. Piaget was looking at, you know, babies with
dolls. When are they going to go looking for the doll that they can't see? You know, when do they
believe the doll still exists? And so we're programmed to, so our belief that the sun exists
even when we don't look is not, we didn't come to that belief based on rational, logical, cold
logic. We came to it at three months of age because we're programmed to believe that. And so
that's why my merely intellectual understanding that it's false has not yet
penetrated my emotional work. It's still quite a shock emotionally, absolutely.
Mike, has it changed your perceptions of the world?
Yeah. Well, I guess what I want to say, two things. One about things that don't change and one
about things that do. I once had lunch with a philosopher who was a very strong skeptic on
Free Will. And when the waitress came over and said, so, Professor X, what kind of soup will you
have? And she said, well, let me think. I said, hey, what are you doing? Why don't you sit back
and see what soup gets ordered? What are you doing choosing a soup here? And so that's just
to say that. I mean, I understand, of course, the argument and everything. But the point is
that's one of those things that you can be a skeptic about Free Will. But I don't think you
can live your life. I think it's one of those views that is just impossible to connect with on
a practical level for a strong reason that we can talk about. I think actually that and object
permanence goes back to the bacterial, microbial level. And so we can talk about that. But I think
it is impossible for a coherent mind that evolved under realistic constraints to not believe in
being an agent that does things. I think, right, I just don't think you can, no matter what you
write about Free Will, I don't think you can live. The thing that I think does change some of these
things is this. And this is just a question I'll pose to all of you. And whoever's listening,
I think it's an interesting question. I've done a poll of all my friends with this. Imagine, and
I think people split into two types of people along this question. Imagine some pleasant
experience that you would be willing to pay $100. It's a nice massage or something, whatever it
is. It's a nice, it's a nice discreet experience that you could have. And so I'm going to give you
two choices. You can have that experience right now, but you're going to have no memory of it
later. None, it's wiped, it wipes your memory. So let's say, you know, you've always wanted to go
skydiving and it's free. But afterwards, you will have no memory of having done it. Okay, so that's
option one. Option two is the exact opposite. We're not going to do it, but you're going to
have a memory of having done it. But you're not actually going to get to do it now. So which do
you prefer? Right? And what I find is that people have very strong feelings about this.
But about half of the people I talk to, and it's really about half and half, I think,
people that I talk to, half of them say, well, the now moment is going to be gone anyway. All
I really have are memories of anything, you know, I don't care what happens now. Give me the memory
of this beautiful, you know, skydive or whatever. And somebody else will say, well, who wants to
go around collecting memories? I like experiences. I want to have the experience. Everything else is
fake. I live in the now. Let's do it. And so I don't care if I don't remember it afterwards.
And so this is a really interesting, I think, division point of how you see yourself. Do you
see yourself as this like evanescent agent? And then, and then, you know, three hours from now,
that's not really going to be me anyway. So who cares what that I'm how I want the experience
now, that's all that exists. And then you've got the people who are like, no, no, all I am is,
is this, you know, collection of memory. So let's add to that. And there is no now, it'll be gone
shortly. So, so I think pondering that one and thinking about which type you are, I think, I
think that's kind of instructive and and how and how different people can can really differ on that.
So yeah, it's a it's a really interesting thing. So I my memories, my memory is not that good.
I really it just like when when I first read when I when I was young, I first read about this,
this idea that your memories could be false. I had, I was like, yeah, of course, I could barely
I mean, my memory, I don't know, you know, I don't really trust it that much anyway, it seemed to
make perfect sense. And so I'm one of these guys who takes lots of pictures and, you know, records
everything because that's I find it hard to kind of replay it later. So so from from from that
perspective, I can I can sort of see both views. I think that my memories aren't worth the raw
memories aren't worth all that much. So I would I would take the immediate experience. But but in
real life, I sort of augment that with with all kinds of stuff, right? So I think tons of photographs
and videos and whatnot. So yeah, I don't know, I think it's a it's a profound set of questions.
Yeah, I agree. Yeah, I have I have a silly questions. So dinosaurs not real?
Both of you. So are you saying that dinosaurs is not real? Then it's just a perceptions of us then
the vi has said.
Well, so I'll go after that. So it's quite good. I mean, so, you know, dinosaurs disappeared 65
million years ago or something like that, right? And and and that's that's our space time story. And
it's I think it's a good story. But but I would say, yes, there there is some reality. But it's
not in space and time. And if you get you get the right answer, if you think about virtual
reality most of the time. So you just always think about virtual reality. And so is is that car
that you're seeing in virtual reality? Is it really there? Well, no, it's not. It's there when you
look. Is there some reality that is causing you to see that car? Yeah, but it's not a car. It's
maybe some supercomputer or something outside of your virtual reality. So so so yeah, we we will
find dinosaur bones and we will date them a 65 million years. And that's our virtual reality
perception of it. There is there is some deeper reality that you know, that's real. But but this
is as Mike is saying, we have to recreate this stuff all the time on the fly. And and and so so
yeah, that dinosaur experience that you're having when you dig up that bone right now.
That experience only exists in the moment. And that bone didn't exist as a bone until you
perceived it. There is some other reality that does anybody else who wants to go and dig in
that area to see the bone, right? So you'll all agree. But you also agree in virtual reality,
say that, you know, if you're playing Grand Theft Auto, that everybody would agree. Oh, yeah,
you're racing a green Porsche. Everybody agrees that you're racing a green Porsche. That doesn't
mean that there really is a green Porsche. It just means everybody agrees. And so we all agree
that we see dinosaurs and we all agree that in our heads up, they look like they're 65 million
years old or older. But agreement doesn't mean that it has a preexisting reality.
So are you saying Max Delbert? He was
No, no, who's who's talking right now?
All right, it's one of the audience. Can we move on quickly done? Sorry about that.
Briefly talk about your model and catch on on the conscious agency so that you and Mike could
compare the two models. So you talk on your conscious agency and the mathematical sites of
it and then Mike could unpack it from his perspective on the biology side of it. Shall
we go on that? Sure, sure. Back to the Max Delbert thing later on in the Q&A. Absolutely. So I
didn't want to rudely stop anybody. I just didn't know who was talking. So so the conscious agent
model is a precise model of consciousness. I'm not saying it's the right model,
but it's at least mathematically precise in which we have agents that have experiences
and based on those experiences, they take actions that affect the experiences of other conscious
agents of interacting conscious agents. And the mathematics is basically Markovian. It's a
Markov chain that you get on this collection, this network of conscious agents. And
one of the things that we're doing right now in the model, which is for our next paper, which is
really fun, is looking at the role of observation. So the only thing to observe is other consciousnesses,
right? The consciousnesses are observing consciousnesses. And it's a theorem of this theory
that any collection of consciousness agents is itself a bigger agent. So ultimately, the math
says there's one agent. But it also tells us that we can never write down the one agent because
it would be infinitely long. So you can't write it down. So it's interesting that the theory says
there is one conscious agent, but it will transcend any precise mathematical description.
But we can build as big an agent as we want. And so that's what we have to do. So we have to be
modest and build big agents, but we can't build the one agent. And the only thing there is to
observe is consciousness. And it's only conscious agents that are there to observe it. So what we
can do is we can take a huge agent, which has a huge number of experiences, a huge number of states
that it perceives. So maybe, you know, a billion by it's a billion states, a billion experiences
that it can have. And we can then take any subset of states from it, maybe just 100,000 over or
2 million. And that will also correspond to a sub agent. So this will be a sub agent of this
bigger agent. And then we can take the Markovian dynamics of the big agent and do what's called
a trace chain. We can look at the Markovian dynamics that's induced on the little agent
as a consequence of the big dynamics. So it's called a trace chain. So every time,
most of the time, the state of the big agent is not in the state of one of the states of
the little agent. But when it does, then we will, you know, that little agent will get activated
and we can then build its Markov kernel. You know, we can actually describe over time what
is Markovian kernel is. So there's some big Markovian kernel, but we can induce
little Markovian kernels on all the sub agents. So if you have a big agent with N
states and experiences that it can perceive, then there are two to the N sub agents,
including the original agent, two to the N sub agents. So, and so you have two to the N
different Markovian kernels or trace chains that you can look at. And so you're now going
to get a very interesting group structure. So how do the different agents see the deeper reality?
So you will, I bet we'll see in some cases, we can get a Lorentz transformation relating them
or Euclidean transformation. So we will start to see how the different agents
perceptions differ systematically as you change the agent. But the other thing that is interesting
is that not only the, we might call the spatial window, which particular subset of states you're
using, but how many steps of the chain do you want to look at? Do you want to look at only 50
steps or 100 or a billion or a trillion? I mean, ultimately Markov chains are supposed to go off
to infinity. But imagining finite temporal windows, and it turns out when you do that,
what each sub agent will see depends almost entirely on this temporal window as well as the
spatial window. So when you have a very small temporal window, you will, and I can go into the
mathematics of this, but what you will see with small temporal windows is what we believe will
turn out to be bosons in physics. These are massless particles. So Don, and you'll see
tons of bosons. So Don, the matter matter sites of it, right? The W represents the world, and then
you got the perceived, the P, and then you got the A, the R, and then you got the measurable,
you got the measurable space between the experience, the acts, and then the action, the G.
So what is that measurable experience that you're measuring though?
So what are those measurable spaces? Yeah. So those measurable spaces are probability spaces.
So anytime that you have some kind of probabilistic dynamics, you need to have a probability
space in which the dynamics can take place. And so that's the case with these Markovian
dynamics. And what's interesting is I didn't think about that for the longest time. We, you know,
it's just derigure that if you're going to write down a, you know, probability,
then you have to write down a probability space. And I didn't even think about what the probability
so years later, but I realized that I was only focused on the experiences. But what about the
probability space in which they occur? And it seems to me that a natural interpretation
of the probability space itself is to be interpreted as pure awareness without any
particular content, something that spiritual traditions have talked about for a long time.
So here is the pure awareness, which is the potential. I'm sorry.
Is it the verdict you're talking about, the Indian philosophy about the observer position,
the afman, go backward to the brahman? Is that the one that you're talking about?
That would be, I think that's one example of it. I think all the different spiritual traditions
point with their own words to the same kind of thing. And what was interesting to me was,
I mean, I wasn't trying to model that. I just was trying to do the math and I had to write
down a probability space. And I didn't even think about it. And it was only years that
probability space. And the only interpretation that makes sense is something along the lines of this
unbounded potential for experience, namely awareness of pure awareness without any particular
content. And then many spiritual traditions will then say, that is what you are. You are
not the particular content, this particular body or this particular color that you're seeing or
this particular headache that you're feeling. That's not what you are. Those are just experiences
that are arising in this fundamental awareness. And you are that fundamental awareness, not just
the things that arise. So Don, the end represents our selfhood, the observer position. That's where
the end comes in. And that triangle, mathematical graph. Oh, well, in the perception, decision,
action loop, and there's also an integer n that we have there, that was simply just to
a counter for the number of steps of the Markovian Internet. So you need a counter,
in some sense, to say what step of the chain you're in. So that was just a technical thing.
It's not time. It's just the sequence counter of the Markov chain.
Thank you, Mike. Yeah. So I end up basically at the same point as Don. And let me walk it
backwards towards the biology of where I think it comes from. If you didn't already know what it
was to communicate with a human and somebody showed you a three pound, you know, three and a half
pound brain, and they say, so how many, how many cells do you think you think are in there? Well,
we have absolutely no idea because, because I priori, you don't really know what the dense,
you know, the the agential density of this material is, you have no idea. And, and the thing is that,
and then of course, in, you know, you get to split brain patients and dissociative states, we still
actually, it's still not super clear, you know, how to count these things. But, but it's interesting
that in biology, every, every cell is some other cells neighbor. In fact, every cell, every cellular
neighbor is some other cells external environment. And so this question of, you know, what Don was
saying of different, different cells, sort of being within the kind of a larger structure,
this is almost guaranteed because, because there is no obvious and unambiguous way to say where
any one self ends and any other self begins. And biology is always multi scale and at every,
everything is made up, you know, so, so like Descartes was looking, he liked the pineal gland
because there was just one of them. But one of what if you look inside, it's full of cell,
the thing's full of cells, there's not one of anything. And if you look inside the cells,
guess what you find, you find a bunch of molecules. I mean, there really is no one of
anything, everything is made of sort of components. And, and you really start to see this when you
look at basic embryogenesis, which I think is super important here, it's this, this journey
that each of us took from being a an unfertilized, the oocyte, you know, this blob of chemicals
into whatever it is that we are now. Let's just look at the early time points of this, right? So,
so, so what happens is you have, you have this embryonic blastoderm. So it's a flat in, in the
mammals and birds, it's like this flat disc. And okay, 50,000 cells or something. So you look at
this thing, and we say, oh, look, there's, that's an embryo. Now, what did you just count as an
embryo? There's one of what, well, there's 50,000 cells, what is there one of? Well, there's one
of if you put a particular lens on this thing, and you say, I'm going to count the system that
attempts to that is going to use energy and attempt to build a particular structure. Basically,
what I'm going to count is goal directed systems. I'm going to say how many different
goal directed systems are there. And what you will find is that all of these cells will work
together towards a particular anatomical goal. You can the other way to think about it, if you
don't like go talk, is that it's trying to reach a particular region of anatomical morphous space,
where you've got a couple eyes, you've got the right number of toes, all that stuff. So, so a
bunch of these cells get together, and they're all going to work on this one construction project.
Everybody agrees every step, this is what they're, this is what they're working on. Okay, so, so,
so now you've counted one, you say, well, there you go, that's a, that's a separate self, it's a
separate consciousness, it's going to be a human embryo, let's say we know what that looks like.
Except that if you were to come along at that early stage, and I've done this in avian with,
with chicken eggs and things like this, when I was a grad student, you take a little needle,
and you make a couple of scratches in that blastoderm. Eventually, it's going to heal up,
they're going to heal. But before they heal, what happens is that every group of cells that cannot
feel the other cells, because you put a scratch between them, decides that, well, it's just me,
then. And so they form an embryo, and every island forms an embryo, and then when they heal,
you have conjoined twins, and or triplets or whatever. So the question of, so you look at an
embryo, and you say, well, how many are in there? It could be anywhere from zero to some small
number of them, because that question is decided on the fly. It is not pre-programmed, it is decided
on the fly by the physiology of a bunch of cells making a decision of how they're going to coalesce
towards one machine that's going to take this morphogenetic journey, this movement through
anatomical morphospace. So what happens then is that you realize that what you've got is you've
got this almost like this Freudian ocean of possibility, these 50,000 cells, and out of them
might come some number of intelligences. And once you realize that that's the case, and that
within this one thing, there could be three different conjoined twins, and this, of course,
happens in humans as well as other animals, then you realize that fine, the adult human body,
or any animal body, also has within it various collectives, such as organs and various other
things that for the exact same, and so I'll just back up and say that I don't have a theory of
consciousness that I'm sort of propagating, like many other people do, I don't have my own, maybe
I will at some point, I don't now, so I don't have too much to say about consciousness except this.
All, as far as I can tell, all of the theories of consciousness that try to explain why brains
are associated with consciousness in some way, for the exact same reason that all of those theories
pick the brain to be able to do it, pretty much every tissue in your body should be judged as
conscious, because all of these things that these theories talk about, and let's say the neuroscience
theories, they lean on things like, well, there are these integrated electrical networks and we've
got some neurotransmitters and some ion channel, all of this stuff exists all over your body.
I have yet to come across a theory of consciousness that tells you why the brain is different from
anything else. And when you sort of start to poke at it, they say, well, then it's the magnetic
field of it. They say, okay, how about the magnetic field of the liver? Why is that different?
Well, I guess it probably isn't. I mean, that's right, that's where you end up. There's just no
one has drawn that line for a very good reason, because neurons evolved from systems that were
other cell types that were using these electrical communications long before brain showed up.
So for the same reason that you might now, consciousness is not going to be verbal consciousness,
you're not going to talk to it using using language, and you're probably not aware of it
anymore than you are aware of your other nonverbal hemisphere and the opinions that it has that
you don't even know about, because you're not aware of it. But it's entirely plausible,
given the developmental biology, that we are these nested hierarchies of diverse
conscious agents that are all having experiences and solving problems in different spaces,
all kinds of weird spaces. So transcriptional, so gene expression spaces, metabolic spaces,
physiological spaces, anatomical spaces, we love the three-dimensional sort of space of
the where it's easy for us to recognize intelligence, but that's just our own limitation.
If you had a, just imagine that you had a primary sense of your own blood chemistry,
instead of, in addition to your retina that looks outwards for medium-sized objects moving at medium
speeds, you would also have an internal sensor of your blood chemistry and you could feel it.
You would have no problem recognizing your liver as extremely intelligent,
because it would be solving all these problems on a daily basis and you would know, you would feel
it. I mean, the same way that we see, oh, look, that crow in that octopus, look at the amazing
things they're doing. You would see your liver doing that stuff every day if you had the perception
of this other space. And we can build things, right? So at some point, we'll talk about synthetic
beings and we can build things that will have consciousness in those spaces. But so I end up
exactly where Don ends up. I think that we are these nested hierarchies of consciousness. This is
only some of them are verbal. Only some of them do we have any direct connection to, but they're
all over the place and we're bad at recognizing them and that's why we need to, you know, we need
to think about these things more. Don? Brilliant. That's brilliant, Mike. And I agree. I'm definitely
not the biologist that Mike is, but I'll just throw in another simple biology example to support
what he's saying. And that is with split brain patients, right? So some people who have intractable
epilepsy that can't be treated with normal drugs were in extreme cases where they were,
their lives were on the line, submitted to a surgery called colosotomy surgery, where they would
Joe Bogan, who was a friend of mine, would actually take a scalpel and go in there and cut the corpus
colosum, which was a band of about 220 million fibers that connect the right and left hemispheres
of the brain. And it was a success. If the epileptic focus was on the right hemisphere,
you would spare the left hemisphere from getting bothered by an epileptic seizure. And so it was
a clinical success. But then some other friends of mine and other researchers started to study,
what's different about these people that have their brains cut in half? And Mike Zaniga and many
others, but did this. But friend of mine, Ramacandra, V.S. Ramacandran at UC San Diego, friends called
Rama. So what Rama did was he found one patient in which the right hemisphere, I believe,
was an atheist and left hemisphere believed in God. So here, and another case was found in
which the right hemisphere wanted to be a race car driver and the left hemisphere wanted to have a
desk job. So you have, you know, those are as different a personality as you could possibly want
stuck inside one cranium. And so that raises the question, here I am with my corpus colosum intact.
And why is it that on Friday night, a battle going on about what I want? Maybe one part of me
says, let's go out and have fun. The other part says, no, I got a book I want to read.
Well, maybe there are two people in there. And they really want to do two different things on
Friday night. And I do have to negotiate among them. And so who is the I now that is doing
the negotiation among those two people? So the whole notion of a self then becomes really interesting
and very problematic. So I agree completely with Mike on that. And again, a big issue here is
we're only seeing things through a space time interface. Right. And so it's not like, for
example, the distinction we make between living and non living, or conscious and unconscious
is a principle distinction. Right. So just to get what I'm talking about here, I'm looking at
all of you on a zoom screen. So I'm looking at Mike right now on the zoom screen. And some of the
pixels are pixels for Mike's face. And when I look at those pixels, I'm getting a portal into
Mike's consciousness. I can tell if he's interested, I can tell if he's bored, I can tell
I get some insight into his consciousness. But there are other pixels of a floor, for example,
in the back of this chair. And those pixels are not giving me any insight about consciousness.
Now, should I say that some pixels are conscious? And other pixels on my zoom screen are not
conscious. That's stupid. Pixels are pixels. They're not conscious or unconscious. Some of
them are giving me a portal into Mike's consciousness and others are not. So it's not so the same thing
is true of space and time and what we call physical objects. There is the distinction we make between
Oh, that's alive. And that's dead or that's conscious. And that's not conscious is the same
mistake as saying, Oh, those are those are conscious pixels. And those are unconscious pixels on my
zoom screen. It's exactly the same mistake. An interface is just an interface. It's not the
truth. So, so it's not a principal distinction between living and non living. It's an artifact
of the limitations of our interface that we're mistaking for insight into the nature of reality.
It's a rookie mistake. So we have to get past the rookie mistake of saying that the distinctions
that we see in our interface are therefore necessarily true in reality.
Sorry, I just want to add one one funny. Well, I don't know if it's funny, but a story of a kind
of a troubling story that that goes with Don's point about having two different opinions in
your in your brain. And so I read this. This was a description of a therapist as a psychiatrist
to have this experience. So, so this guy this patient comes in and he says, I've got some sort
of dissociative disorder where I've got there's a personality in there that he's a real partier
and and I like to work and and he just started, you know, I can't I can't work anymore because
sometimes he comes out and screws up, you know, he acts, you know, acts like a fool at work and
whatever we need to take care of this. And so, you know, they start doing some sort of I don't
even know how they do it, but some sort of integrative therapy and so so one day one day
the patient walks in and it's the other guy. And he says, Hey, what's this I hear about
integrating integrate? What are you guys doing? And the doctor says, Well, you know, we're going
to integrate you. And he says, Excuse me, you're going to integrate me and who's going to be left?
He says, Well, you know, you'll be well, you'll do well at work. Wait a minute,
wait a minute, where am I going to be? And he's and the doctor said, Well, you're kind of going
to be gone. I hope if you know, if we do, are you kidding? What? What happened to the hypocriticals?
What do you mean? I'm going to be gone. I don't want to be gone. You know, he's a boring, you
know, he's boring. I've got the fun life to make him gone. And so and right. So just put yourself
in that in that place, right? I mean, presumably the other, you know, the other personality signs
the checks and everything. But but but but you're faced with a coherent. This isn't some weird tick
or reflex. This is a coherent being that is making an argument that knows what what a
hypocritical it is and is making an argument that whatever that whatever you're doing is going
to erase them from the world by sort of somehow jamming you down into this into this integrated
personality that can spend, you know, 12 hours at work and not have any fun. So that's, I mean,
that's a super, you know, it's a super disturbing sort of kind of, you know, way to think about this
because we there are no as far as I know, there are no indivisible beings. We are all made of
parts that that's just how it has to be. And therefore, there is the possibility of that,
that magical, which I think if anything is magical, this is it, it's this this this process by which
by which merge into a larger scale, collective, you know, self or individual, that that process
is going to have failure modes, some of them temporary, some of them permanent. And and it's
these failure modes that really give us something to think about in terms of what are we and who
are we and how we relate to each other. Fabulous, fabulous. Yeah, we recently have McGiocchus. Ian
McGiocchus came to our club last Monday. Yeah, he has booked the matter with things. Yeah, he talked
about the the laugh and right hemisphere hypothesis a lot in his book on his volume one. Yeah, we're
going to quickly move on before because Mike got to go pretty soon, probably about 30 minutes
time. But but don't you can stay with us for another hours, right? So that I'm going to go
straight to the the last question. So these conscious agents, the common factor done. So all
these multi multiplicity and diversity of conscious agents. So how many of them so they're all going
towards one field of consciousness. Is that what it is? And you speak on that, right? So
so there's it's quite interesting. Suppose I start off with a countable infinity of conscious
agents. So there's agent one, two, three, four, all the way to the countable infinity, then any
combination of any subset of them. So agent one and two, agent one, two and three, whatever, that
also is a conscious agent. That's a theorem of the math that any collection of conscious agents is
also a conscious agent. So that means that I started off with a countable infinity of
conscious agents. I can take the power set with what the mathematicians call the power set.
That's the number of new conscious agents that come from combination. Well, that's a higher
level of infinity. That's, you know, a left one. And now with that new set of agents, I can take
their power set. Now I'm at a left to consciously. So now I'm marching my way up Cantor's hierarchy
of infinities, and there's no end to that hierarchy of infinities. So so it's a it's a theorem that
there is just one. And it's also a fact that I'll never be able to get there, which is again,
again, also in line with the spiritual traditions, right, that they they say that anything that we
can say about it, like the Buddhists will say, a finger pointing to the moon is not the moon,
is just a finger pointing. And so that will be true of our scientific descriptions as well. We
have to recognize that the scientific distractions are scientific theories are merely
pointers, and they're not the reality. And in this case, what's what's nice about the scientific
pointers is that they tell you that they're not the reality, they tell you that they are limited.
And that's what's beautiful about the scientific pointers, like Einstein series space time. And
with quantum field theory tells us that that pointer that space time idea fails at 10 to the
minus 33 centimeters, that's where the pointer stops, and the moon begins, right, whatever's
beyond begins. And so, so the conscious agent theory has the same nice property. It says,
basically, there is one conscious agent. And I can't describe it, I can, I can go to a left
zero, I can go maybe to go to a left one. Of course, even then I'll fail because I don't have a
super computer that can do it. So and I don't have enough paper to do it. So already you can see
that that is telling you this is a pointer and the reality is going to transcend the pointer
completely. Absolutely. Mike, did you agree in that night? They're all pointed to one or you're
still keen on your panpsychism? I think, I think both. I think they're not mutually exclusive.
I think that there are, I mean, to me, recognizing agency and consciousness in the world around
you is a lens that you bring to the process like any other. And so if you if you have a way of
recognizing intelligence in components of something that's great, and then you may have, you may also
observe that the whole thing is so so so just to give an example, we recently, there's this there's
this mathematical notion of a gene regulatory network, it's very simple. It's a collection of
nodes, let's say a dozen of these nodes. And you're just going to write down how each one up or down
regulates some others. So it's this like little network. And you can, you know, people have been
like Stu Kaufman has been studying this for a long time. And you can you can view them as as
dynamical systems and see what they do and so on. So you look at this thing, and you say, well,
okay, it's very simple, I can see all the parts, there's nowhere to hide here. This is like the
rock bottom of deterministic, you know, zero agency mechanical system, there's just nothing there.
So we took the hypothesis. So my view always is that you can't just make these pronouncements
from a from an armchair, you have to do experiments. So we said, okay, what if we just
what if what if we test the hypothesis that this thing has some degree of, of, of cognitive
of cognitive ability. So what we what we ended up doing was testing their learning capacity
in the following in the following way, we assign some one of the nodes as a condition stimulus,
another node as an unconditioned stimulus, and pick some other node as the read as the response.
And then we do things like Pavlovian conditioning, we, you know, we twiddle two of them simultaneously
and we look at what happens. Anyway, you get the idea. So so we now have a couple of papers on this
that biological networks, and not so much random networks. So I think evolution likes this because
a biological networks do this more than random ones do biological networks show six different
kinds of learning, including associative conditioning in this in this dirt simple system.
And that's with no, with no changing of the network structure. So we're not changing the
synaptic weights, we're not rearranging the networking, none of that. This is purely,
purely dynamical system stuff. But but but there is a lens. So there are two different two competing
lenses on the same phenomenon. One is the standard molecular biology lens. This thing is dumb as a
rock. And what you if you're going to change the way it works, let's say for biomedical purposes,
your only hope is bottom up rewiring, you need to add nodes, subtract nodes, you know, genomic
editing to change the way that these nodes interact with each other. That's your only hope. There's
another lens, which makes a completely different prediction. And if you which is that which is
that actually, if you treat if you don't rewire anything, but you treat this thing as a minimally
cognitive agent that that can be manipulated by experiences, by stimuli, by training, then you
can do some more stuff. And then you can look at these two lessons say, gee, this one tells us a
lot that we can use in biomedicine that we're actually not getting out of here. Right. So so
you can have multiple perspectives, they have different powers in terms of what they let you
do in the real world. Maybe someday somebody else will come along and say, ah, you're both wrong,
here's a much better lens, you know, fine, that's how it goes. So so then so then that that allows
you to have it all, you can you look at a human body and you say, I'm looking really deep and I
see some components that clearly have their own thing going on. But of course, so does the organ
that they sit in and because because that has certain certain interesting capabilities in
physiological space. And then the whole thing that we're going to call a human, well, that's a
bigger intelligence that can do other things in behavioral space, maybe linguistic space.
So I I see it both ways. I think I think the merging is is is correct. I think Don's totally
right about all of that. But I also think that there are useful lenses that allow you to exploit
a panpsychist view. And just to be clear, you know, the there's a couple of different versions
of panpsychism. The one where the one where you take a perfectly good physics and then paint some
hopes and dreams on all the electrons, that's not that's not the one, right? So people correctly
make fun of that one, because that's just not going to give you anything. There's a different,
however, research program, which which which Don and people like Chris Fields and Karl first and
other people are doing, which is to reformulate physics from the the cognitive perspective.
So it's not that we have a perfectly good physics. And now we're going to paint some extra junk on
it. No, it's that actually, what we have been taking as physics is a, I don't know what the
right word for it, but but it's a it's a it's an oversimplification and a not a really not not
the best lens. I mean, it's done well in many areas, but it's not the best lens. And you can
formulate a different lens, where things like active inference and some of these other extremely
general things, and I don't pretend to be any kind of expert on active inference. But but but I
understand the research program, it helps you understand inanimate things and interactions
between living things and non living things from the same with the same lens. And I think that's
super powerful. And so I think you can have a useful version of panpsychism, where you scale
down your cognitive expectations. It's not that the rocks have hopes and dreams like humans,
that's not the point. The point is that you can use the same tools, including, you know,
active inference and some and trainability and some other things to understand both physical
processes and then eventually, you know, advanced cognitive properties, maybe social phenomena,
who knows? Yeah, anyway, so that's a long answer to your question.
Thank you. So how many conversations then to make a photon down? That's a question from the audience.
Ah, so
that's what we're going to be working on on our very next paper. We're calling it
tentatively titled traces of consciousness paper. And the idea is that I was talking about these
trace chains, right? You've got a big, dynamical system of consciousness agent, a big agent,
but I can look at the two to the n sub agents and do a trace chain on each one of those.
And I can change the temporal window. And so I should say just a little bit of background about
what motivates what I'm about to tell you. So in the paper that we just published last week,
we proved that the Markov chains map on two decorated permutations. I mentioned that earlier.
Decorated permutations and the decorated permutations the physicists have shown
are the deepest structure they found behind space time. And with decorated permutations, you can
then create things like the amplitohedron and compute scattering amplitudes like two gluons
smashing into each other and four gluons go spraying out. So you actually, you can compute
all of the scattering amplitudes. Truly, if you just have these decorated permutations and maybe
momentum and spin data as well. And so when we made this mapping from our Markov dynamics onto
decorated permutations and decorated permutations into space time, that gave us the clue there's a
particular aspect of our dynamics of conscious agents that's critical for the physics and the
mapping of the physics. And it's called the communicating classes. So that's the key thing.
They're so called. So if you look at Markov chains online, you can see what the communicating
classes are. It's a standard part of Markov chains. So our hypothesis, the one that I'm working on
right now is that the so-called entropy rate, this is the technical term in Markov chains. So if
you look it up online as well, entropy rate of a communicating class is what corresponds to mass
in space time. Okay. So particles in space time are projections of communicating classes, but
most communicating classes project to things far more interesting than particles. But particles are
projections of communicating classes. And for those communicating classes that project to particles,
it's the entropy rate that is their mass. So when you look at what I technically what I just said,
it means that if the Markovian dynamics, if the Markov kernel has only zeros and ones
in the matrix, then it will project to a massless particle like a photon. So now I'm getting to
your question about photons. You can see why I had to spend some time, right? The zero entropy rate
communicating classes project to massless particles, or I should say mass lift particle, the better
way to say this, massless particles are the projection of zero communicating, zero entry rate
communicating classes, because communicating classes don't necessarily project to particles,
they can project to more interesting things than particles. Particles are the simplest. So
that means, so now we want to find out exactly what specific, there are lots of different
kinds of Markovian kernels that are that have zero entropy rate. Some of them are, for example,
are derangements. They're permutations called derangements, and there are other kinds that
will have combinations of derangements, as well as absorbing states. So we want to look at those
and then figure out, okay, which correspond to like photons, but photons are not the only kind
of bosons. There is also gluons, there are W particles and Z particles, and then there's a
Higgs. So there's a number of massless particles, and so we'll want to get this dictionary between
the particular kinds of permutation matrices and which ones mapped to which with massless
particles. So that you can see that there's a lot of fun work ahead, but it's a deep technical
question. Looking forward to it, Lauren. So we're going to open up the floor for Q&A. We
are on the stage waiting to ask both of you some questions. So we're going to open it up now.
We have Prakash. Yes, greetings. Fantastic talk, good conversation. I was just curious.
You know, looking at living systems, I always wonder where would you put plants in this picture?
Plants are living agents. They don't seem to have neurons, but they have the same cellular space.
I was just wondering what you would have to share about what do you think about plants?
Who's the question to us? Prakash, is it to both?
Mike makes sense. Yeah, to break out the model.
Thank you. Thank you. Yes, Mike, would you want to go first, Mike? Sure, sure. Well, I can do two
things. One is, so there certainly are people who study this question of plant intelligence.
There have been some nice papers on that. People like Frantisek Balushka and some other folks
really talk about plant cognition and plant intelligence. From my perspective,
plants are not nearly weird enough as a challenging example for all of this kind of stuff. I mean,
and other people, of course, spend time thinking about really minimal models compared to which plants
are a no-brainer to pardon the pun for having cognitive capacities, including anticipation
and memory and learning and creative problem solving and various things. Plants do all of that.
So, yeah, I have zero. The fact that they don't have neurons means almost nothing to me. I think
as we think about the wide universe, I find it impossible to believe that the only things that
have cognition are things with actual neurons like we have. I mean, that seems like just an
incredibly implausible view to me. And we came from, a lot of electrophysiology was done in
bacteria anyway. I mean, neurons, they do some interesting things, but this is way wider than
that. So, yeah, no problem with plants. I agree with Mike, and I think you said it well. So, yeah,
absolutely. Thank you. Are we going to move on to Andy? Hey, thank you both for being here.
This is fascinating. Thank you, Ivy and John, for making this happen.
It's hard to decide what to drill into. I would like to drill into this idea of the
simulations, the simulations that you claim prove that perception of truth leads to extinction.
So, I want to drill in this idea of truth a little bit. What do you mean by truth versus
fitness? It seems like fitness is a sort of truth for a biological system. And can you give an
example of the perception, like a true perception of a thing leading to less fitness than a false
perception and or a false perception of a thing leading to more fitness than a true perception
of a thing? And, you know, and finally, isn't the results say more about the simulation and how
it's built and the built-in approximations and assumptions and biases that are built into it,
then it says about reality. Thank you. That's a great question. So, I'll first just give you
as for an intuitive example that we might help understand why not knowing the truth could help
you out. I'll just give an intuitive example. In virtual reality, say, again, Grand Theft Auto,
you're trying to race against a bunch of friends, you know, you got your car and you're racing a
Porsche and the Maserati and so forth. And what are you really doing in reality in this metaphor?
What you're really doing to win the game is you're toggling millions of voltages per second
in a precise order. That's what you're doing to try to win the game. And that's in this metaphor,
that's the reality. What you're doing, what you know about what you're doing is you're turning
a steering wheel and you're pushing on a gas pedal. A lot, lot simpler than toggling a million
voltages per second in a precise order. So, now, if you said, well, yeah, I want to know the truth
and I'm going to try to play the game knowing the truth. I'm going to actually toggle the million
voltages per second to try to win. So, I can guarantee you the person who's trying to toggle
those voltages as fast as they can would lose against someone who is just turning a steering
wheel and pushing on the gas. And that's the top-level intuition why evolution hit the truth
from our eyes is because if you had to actually toggle all of reality, you would die in the
process. Better to give you just a user interface that hides most of that from you. So, that's the
intuition. But now for the math, we did simulations to begin with just to check to see what would
happen. And once we found that organisms that saw a reality word were going extinct, we then
let go of the simulations, we went to the math. So, I went to a mathematician. So, we now have
theorems. So, it's not, we're not relying on simulations at all. We have theorems. And the
theorems are using the tools of evolutionary game theory. And in evolutionary game theory, the key
technical notion are fitness payoff functions. The domain of that function includes whatever
objective reality might be. Evolutionary game theory doesn't tell you what objective reality is.
It just says there is some objective reality. It could include organisms, their states, their
actions, and so forth. And then, so there's this fitness payoff that includes whatever objective
reality is in the domain of the function. And the range of the function are the possible payoff
values, say from 0 to 100. 0 means very, very bad. 100 means wonderful, wonderful payoff, say.
And you can ask a clean technical question. What is the probability that a generically
chosen payoff function will be a homomorphism of some structure in the objective reality,
like a total order in objective reality or, you know, a measurable structure or topology
or whatever it might be? In other words, what is the probability that a fitness payoff function
will actually have information about structures in objective reality? Because if it doesn't have
information about the structures, how can it tune you to the structures in objective reality?
So we ask the technical question, do fitness payoff functions generically contain information
about structures in objective reality? And we, if you want to see the math, you can Google our
papers called Fact, Fiction, and Fitness. So that's the paper where we go through the math.
And what, Chaitan is the mathematician, not Don Hoffman. Chaitan is the mathematician,
but of course we collaborate on it. And what we prove is that for several different structures,
but when you see the trend, you realize it's true basically for all structures,
the probability is zero, precisely zero, that a generically chosen payoff function
will have any information about objective reality, about any structure in objective
reality. So there's nothing in the fitness payoff functions to tune you to objective reality.
Now, I'll just mention a couple quick objections that people see. One objection that
made in Sintes recently is, look, you're using evolutionary game theory. So either you believe
that evolution, the math of evolutionary game theory models biological evolution correctly,
or you don't believe it does. And if you do believe it models biological evolution correctly,
well, biological evolution assumes that there are physical objects like organisms in space and
time and resources. And if you don't believe that, so if you're going to use evolutionary
game theory to say that there are no such thing as physical objects in space, time is fundamental
reality, then that would be contradicted. You'd be contradicting yourself because the math,
you're claiming the math faithfully models the physical biology. And if you don't think the math
of evolutionary game theory models the physical biology, then you shouldn't use it anyway because
you didn't think it models. So either way, you're stuck in a logical contradiction. That's
sort of his argument. And what that argument misses is how science works. So take Einstein's
theory of spacetime and quantum field theory. So these theories assume their mathematical
theories are built on the assumption that spacetime is fundamental. So Einstein's special
relativity and quantum field theory, those mathematical, those assume that spacetime is
fundamental. So you could use the same argument. So, but notice what the physicists do is they
say our theories tell us that spacetime is doomed. Spacetime is not fundamental. Okay, well, okay,
so I'll use the same, got you logical argument. Well, so either Einstein's math modeled his
intuitions, in which case it could not possibly show that spacetime is doomed, or it didn't model
his intuitions, in which case you couldn't use it, you shouldn't use it to show that spacetime
was doomed. Well, no physicist would take that seriously. That's a, that's a silly argument.
Here's what really goes on in science. Every scientific theory makes assumptions. And there
is no theory of everything. There is no such thing as a scientific theory of everything.
So a good scientific theory starts with assumptions and basic concepts, but a good scientific
theory will tell you the limits of those concepts. Einstein's theory with quantum field theory tells us
the limits of his basic concepts, namely 10 to the minus 33 centimeters, and 10 to the minus 43
seconds, you fall apart. So what we're doing is exactly the same thing, but with evolutionary
theory, the assumptions about sure Darwin thought about physical objects in space and time. Absolutely.
What are the limits of those concepts? Well, evolutionary game theory is the mathematics,
and that mathematics is precise enough to tell us the limits of the basic concepts, just like
Einstein's theory of relativity is good enough to tell us the limitations of Einstein's notion
of space and time, or spacetime. So this is the way science works. It's not a self refutation.
To think that is actually to misunderstand fundamentally the nature of scientific progress.
Now, what you can't do is to use the old theory to tell you what's next, right? So
Einstein's theory tells us spacetime is doomed, but it can't tell you where's the next step
beyond spacetime. It can't do that. And similarly, the theory of evolution by natural selection
with the mathematics of evolutionary game theory tells you, aha, the notions of organisms in
space and time is not fundamental. But does it tell you, okay, what is more fundamental? No,
it doesn't tell you what's more fundamental. So that's where the scientists have to make a creative
leap. And physicists have done this just in the last 10 years. They went outside spacetime,
they found the amplitude, Hedron, they found decorated permutations. That's a creative leap.
But then what you do is you show how they project back into spacetime, right? You have to go back
and get your previous theories as a special case of the more general framework. And so we have to
do the same thing. Our theory of conscious agents is a leap beyond evolutionary theory.
But we have to show how it projects back into space and time and gives us back evolutionary
theory as a special case. So I'm answering your question, but I also want to answer another question
that has just been published in Sintase, you know, the philosophy journal recently.
And I just want to point out that that argument just falls flat very easily. I'll stop.
Thank you. Can we move on? We have LeMond. LeMond, did you want to ask questions?
Hi, Donald. We've corresponded before. I think I'm probably one of your biggest fans on Clubhouse
here. I was wondering if you had had any correspondence with Neema Arkani-Hamed,
because I know that you're following what they're doing in high-energy physics really closely. And
a lot of people have been, you know, begging Neema to, you know, write a book that's, you know,
more understandable for the general public, because I'm fascinated with the, you know,
decorated permutations and the amplitude hydrant. But it's so far over my head.
Could you provide any resources on how to really get a grasp on what that means?
Right. So I would love to talk with Neema. I haven't yet. And I'm hoping to actually get
to a place where I'll be worth his time. So I'm trying to, you know, the work I'm doing on these
trace chains and so forth. The decorated permutations stuff and the mark of chains onto it, I think
already might be of interest to him. But I want to push this a little bit further. His time is very
valuable. When I talk to him, I'd like, if I get the chance to talk to him, I'd like to really have
something that'll be of interest to him. But if you want to see more details, a little bit more
accessible about the amplitude hydrant and the decorated permutations is, of course, at Harvard
that he gave in the fall of 2019. So if you Google, Neema Arkani Hamid Harvard Lecture One,
you will find on YouTube, they post it all 20 something 25, 20, whatever it is, lectures.
So Neema Arkani Hamid Harvard Lecture One, you'll see that he has an introductory lecture.
And he really lays it out in the introductory lecture. He tries to be fairly non-technical.
It's for a graduate class at Harvard. So, you know, non-technical for them might be technical for
the rest of us. But it's fairly accessible. And that's probably, I would say, his class and all
the lectures are online. That's maybe the most accessible source you're going to find right
now is his Harvard lectures. And I've studied, I've been studying his lectures. I've actually
transcribed 15 of them, all his first 15 lectures. I've transcribed myself personally,
equation by equation, figure by figure. I did that until COVID stopped me. COVID took me out.
But I plan to get back to it now. I'm starting to recover from COVID and go back to it. But yeah,
I'm really trying to study Neema's stuff. And, you know, I'm not a physicist.
I work with physicists. And at some point, we would love to talk with them.
Thank you. And we move on to Willie. Wonderful. Thank you, Ivy. And thank you
to have this great minds in the same room and watching your conversions at some point.
And I have two questions for each of you, one question. And it's definitely fascinating what
you are doing, God. And I say the first thing that great jumps in science are often company
of a big flock of people who don't understand what the new perspective is. So I'm also confused
sometimes by the combination of metaphors and mathematical apparatus and all this.
It's in the making, definitely. And I will take it for granted that you imply kind of
anti-realism with your stance. And I don't want to discuss it. What I want to see, if I get it right,
is that you are letting go reality and space time in a way. And starting with the fundamental of
conscious age. And we had a reading room here with these wonderful people from the
2014 article, The Origin of Time in Conscious Agents. And we found that it's a bit hard to
define or to go with you, what you mean. And it reminded me of the Floggy Stone story,
which is famous from Thomas Eskuhn about the structure of the revolution and Occup's razor
and so on. And we found out that we don't need Floggy Stone to understand that
heat is flowing from a hot point to a cold point. And so we let go Floggy Stone.
And I wonder how it can be in the same way let go reality and space time. Does it really make
sense? What are the practical and theoretical consequences in science and in life? And closing
here for your question, the old Leibniz introduced Monats in the same way as atomism just cannot
deliver the mantle. This was his basic intuition. It cannot deliver a series of emergence or
combination or composition just doesn't suffice to make us understand how this should ever work.
So I understand to go back to the primacy of the mild, definitely. But what are the predictions?
Is it detectable? Are you working on a kind of
operationable and kind of a detector, so to speak, that you can say now we can
here really see that here's a conscious agent. Sorry, it's in space time somehow,
but we can detect it and then we can count it just as an example. And then we can even see
how they emerge together or cooperate together and let time emerge. Something like this would be
very ambitious, of course. And should I go to Michael or should I just wait for you?
We really got to Michael first, because Michael got to live in time and it's time to
sort of succinctly ask your questions. So for me, also you, contrary to what Descartes was doing,
Descartes tortured cats saying that they are not sentient beings, they are just machines,
don't worry. And now we have inflation of consciousness and inflation of conscious
ancients, contrary, for instance, to even Thompson, who is preferring biopsychism,
psychism to panpsychism, only biological stuff like maybe even plants might have consciousness.
And now my question is, because you are also coming from a series of process structure like
autopoiesis in a way, but I guess you're going in a different direction. You're going into this
bioelectricity pattern. Here's my question. Are you looking for a substrate where the
self then is emergent? Because you're using the term emergent and have a different,
you have a different ontology, contrary to Don, because you are starting quite with common sense
that you are observing nature like Aristotle, Newton, Gallier, and so on. And then from this on,
you are constructing theories. And yeah, you say, I start with reality in a way, or do I get you
wrong? And the last thing, and this is again, to both of you, are you actually waiting for a new
physics, which might be even produced by Donald? Yeah, this is very exciting, because maybe this
comes together. So thank you for both of you for your answer. Yeah, thank you so much. I'm not
sure I will be able to hit all of that, but I'll try to get to some of it. The first thing I should
say is that I'm in an enjoyable position here, where on this panel, I'm not the most sort of
avant garde person here. So Don has gone further. My stuff is a little more mundane. I have not
really said anything about consciousness. I don't know anything about any new physics. I haven't
really gone there, although I'm in complete agreement with Don's view of it and where he's
going with it. I have a somewhat less ambitious thing, which is that I'm interested in cognition.
Cognition is not the same as consciousness. Cognition is, and I sort of get into this in
excruciating detail in this last tamed paper, what exactly I mean by cognition. But to address
your first point, I do think that there's way more of it, not less of it than, for example,
Descartes might have thought. I think it's actually extremely prevalent in the universe. I don't
think it is limited to things that we would call alive. I'm actually not sure what we mean by alive
necessarily, and I don't spend any time trying to figure out what this category is. Other people do,
and that's great. I spend all of my time thinking about cognition, not life, because I think there
are many things that are importantly cognitive that we may or may not call life. So that's
and I have this, and B is that I have this functional framework, it's called TAME,
which is technological approach to mind everywhere, that basically it's a very engineering
kind of approach that seeks to show you what exactly are the practical benefits of
odd cognitive lens. So it's very important to me that this is not just philosophy, that this is
all of these views are supposed to drive new discoveries, new research programs, so half of
my lab takes this stuff and turns it into interventions for biomedicine, for cancer,
for whatever, because this is not just supposed to be, well, you can look at it this way, or you
can Occam's razor it and just sort of do the science. That's actually not true. This way of
thinking about this gives rise to new experiments and new capabilities that we didn't have before.
And maybe at some point, consciousness will be folded into that. I haven't done that yet,
and so I make no claims whatsoever about consciousness yet. But I do think that
this view of basically dropping our teleophobia, we've developed through the early stages of
science this really weird fear of talking about goals and the systems that pursue goals.
And I think we need to dump that. I think that leaves so much on the table when we pretend that
doesn't exist. Since the 40s and cybernetics, we've had good theories of how you can have
non-magical goal pursuing systems. So I think it's time to kind of give up our fear of that.
And once you do that, really interesting examples of novel research programs come to light.
And bioelectricity, I think you mentioned bioelectricity. So bioelectricity happens to be
my favorite kind of cognitive glue for cells into larger systems, but it is not the only one.
I don't think it's magic. I don't think it's the only game in town. I'm sure there are other
mechanisms that play the same functional roles and who knows other places in the universe what
substrates play that role. But here on earth, what evolution has done is really exploited
bioelectricity and shown us how you can use certain features of physics and computation
to scale up cognition from very primitive goals of homeostatic little tiny systems all the way
up through human level, massive cognitive light cones. So I love bioelectricity, but it is certainly
not the only game in town for that. Thank you, Michael. Can we give a massive thank you to
Professor Levin because Professor Levin would have to leave now. So a massive thank you to
Professor Levin, everybody. Thank you so much. Thank you for having us. Great to see you, Don.
Awesome to be able to discuss this. And thanks, everybody. Thank you for your questions.
Great to see you, Mike. Thank you. See you soon. Thanks. Right. See you soon. Thank you.
Thank you. So I'll respond to the question as well. So first, the notion of reality, I would
distinguish two kinds of reality. You might say something is real if it exists, even if no one
perceives it. That would be what you might call objective reality. But that wouldn't apply to
my headache. So suppose I have a headache. Well, that headache sure seems real to me, but it would
not exist without someone perceiving it, right? So the notion of objective reality doesn't seem to
catch my headache. And if you told me my headache wasn't real, I'd be very crossed with you. I mean,
it's real to me. So I'll distinguish between objective reality versus subjective reality in
that sense. And then what I'm saying is that we thought that space, time, and physical objects
like the sun and the moon are objective reality. And all I'm saying is, no, they're a different
kind of reality. They're subjective reality. We thought that they were objective reality,
but no, they're subjective reality. And I think quantum theory, the Nobel Prize in physics last
month was awarded to three researchers who have done empirical work showing that local realism
is false. And basically, what I'm saying is local realism is false. These things are all
subjectively real. They're there when you observe, those properties are there when you observe,
and they're not there when you don't observe. They're subjectively real, but not objectively
real. So now in terms of lightness, yeah, lightness, brilliant work in monodology,
and, you know, he had the analogy of the mill where he understood the hard problem of consciousness
and dismissed it in one paragraph. He knew that you couldn't boot up consciousness from
physical systems. And it was so obvious to him he didn't think it was worth more than one paragraph
of his time to spend on it. And I agree. And so he then proposes the monodology and the
monads. And he basically says we need to start with two things, experiences and probabilistic
relationships among experiences. And I agree with lightness again. That's what we've done in our
model of consciousness. We basically model experiences and probabilistic relationships
among experiences. So lightness was there 300 years before me. And his notion of pre-established
harmony, that I think we're going to be able to model that in the way I was talking about earlier,
where I have like a big Markovian kernel for a big conscious agent. And when I take its trace
chain, there's two to the n trace chains, those are two to the n conscious agents that are all
interacting. It'll look like a pre-established harmony because they're all part from this one
big, now I can't do the trace chain on the one big conscious agent, the ultimate one. I can't do
that just because, well, Apple hasn't built a big enough laptop for me yet. But so you need to
you know, go to all of Cantor's hierarchy infinity. So Apple has a little bit of work to do ahead
for that. So we can't do that. But I sort of concede the notion of pre-established harmony
coming out of this. But it's also very useful for me to talk about conscious agents interacting in
non-trivial ways as independent agents looking at their interactions. So I mean, ultimately I think
lightness is right, but I think this other perspective is useful, given that we can't
actually model the one itself. And finally, in terms of what kinds of testable predictions,
that's what I'm working on this year. I want to, I'll be writing a paper in
in terms where we try to show that we can predict precise part-on distributions
for protons from a theory of conscious agents. So the proton, as everybody knows, is one of the
fundamental parts of the nucleus of protons and neutrons, the nucleus of atoms. The proton itself
is one of the most complicated things humankind has ever studied. It's not a trivial little ball,
and it's not just three quarks. You see three quarks, two up quarks and a down quark,
at sort of low spatial resolution, Bjork and X and low temporal resolution, Q squared. But as you
increase your spatial and temporal resolution, you find at the highest resolutions, you see
what they call a gluon C, an ocean of gluons that are appearing and disappearing. And then
as you back off, and you sort of have larger temporal scales, less temporal resolution,
then you start seeing quark, anti-quark appear or disappear. So you get this quark C, and then
finally at the crudest scale, you see the three quarks, and then some other quarks that are
appearing and disappearing. So they have momentum distributions for all Bjork and X and all Q
squareds. And I want to show that we can get all of those as artifacts of the spatial and temporal
windows of our trace chain. In other words, these particles and their properties that we're seeing
at the colliders are not an insight into a fundamental reality. All of the particles and
all of their properties are artifacts of the spatial and temporal resolution of trips by
conscious agents in their observations. So again, I could be wrong, but you're asking for a
prediction. So the thing about predictions is you can be wrong. So this is the prediction
that we're going to try to make, and we'll see where it goes. Thank you, Don. Maron, next. Great,
thank you. Thank you very much. Good to see you, Professor Hoffman. I have a question about the
problem of perception. So under the free energy principle, perception has been defined as
finding the most likely explanation or the most likely value for a hidden variable, given the
current observations that, say, we have five sensory inputs, and at time t, we are receiving
five different sensory inputs through those five channels. And given that, I'd like to
predict the most likely explanation for a hidden variable that has probably caused
those sensory inputs. Especially in artificial intelligence, when we want to create smart AI
models, particularly deep learning models, we are talking about a hierarchical structure of layered
neurons. And one of the reasons that we do that, which is also similar to what they do in predictive
coding networks, is that we are having a hierarchical structure of neurons so that we might be able to
infer the hierarchical sequence of, you know, links of causality behind, what is it, like in the
world out there that might have caused these sensory inputs, sort of model the hierarchical
structure of God knows how many hidden variables and the way they're connected to one another.
Now, if, first of all, I'd like to know whether you agree with this, like, would this be the right
at least approach, in trying to understand the complicated hierarchical structure of
hidden variables. And second of all, because, I mean, this way, it seems intractable to me to try
and sort of, you know, model, you know, potentially many, many, many such hierarchical
relationships to so that we could model the world around us because it's just too complicated.
So these are my two questions. Thank you very much.
Yeah, great, great question. So the idea of perception as Bayesian inference is, you know,
have a long history in the field. I've done some papers on that myself. There's a book called
Perception as Bayesian inference. So if you there is actually a book called Perception as Bayesian
inference by edited by David Nill and Whitman Richards and Whitman Richards was my PhD advisor.
And I have a paper in that book. So I'm very interested. And that's a 1996 book. So it's
quite old now, but it's, I've been interested a long time in Bayesian inference models of
perception. And I think that they're quite powerful. Most of my colleagues who are doing that are
assuming that space and time is fundamental reality and that we're, the Bayesian inference was,
we're actually finding the true physical substrate behind our perceptions. And I think that that
whole thing is that that interpretation of Bayesian inference is mistaken. And if you go to the,
you know, predictive processing, predictive coding kind of thing and the work on Bayes Nets,
for example, and the implications there, what you see is the nodes inside a markup blanket
appear to be doing this kind of, you know, Bayesian estimation.
Whenever I say something that sounds like Siri, Siri on my phone starts,
anyway. So, but, but, but here's the key thing that, that, that we know about Bayes Nets.
The, even though it looks like the nodes on the inside are doing some kind of Bayesian inference
about the world states, we know that the states of the nodes on the inside and the states of the
nodes on the outside of the markup blanket are conditionally independent, given the state of
the markup blanket. That means the only thing that the nodes on the inside can never, can ever
know about the external world is the information on the markup blanket. So that whole framework tells
you that you're only seeing an interface. The markup blanket is your interface and you're not,
when you're doing this predictive processing, you're not predicting, you're not estimating the
true state of the world. You're doing something on an interface and you're using only interface
variables. So you never see the truth and you're not estimating the truth. And it's just right
there in the actual, you know, the fact that a markup blanket is the set of nodes that makes the
internal nodes and external nodes conditionally independent. That means you can't know anything
more about the external nodes, except what you see on your markup blanket. So, so it just really
highlights what I've said from Evolution of a Natural Selection and what the physicists are
telling us. Not fundamental. Evolution tells us it's just an interface and so does the markup
blanket. It tells you it's just an interface. So they all agree. Thank you very much. Thank you,
Don. John, did you have any questions for Don? Thank you, Ivy. Yeah, I, the one thing I guess I,
as a physicist, I confess, I, the one part, I like, I love your Windows interface analogy,
you know, and I, and I think that's really powerful. Oh, I'm sorry. Yeah, sorry, not doing,
but I feel like, I feel like I can't quite make the leap to, you know, my experience in the world.
And so for instance, the things that I have trouble with is kind of extending that to the idea that
I can both see things and feel things and I can travel to those things that I see and touch them
and other people can too. And they have the same experience. And I don't know, maybe I'm,
I just feel like I'm missing something there. And I wonder if you have anything to help me over that.
Sure. Sure. I think, I think the virtual reality metaphor is a big, big help here. So for people
who are playing multiplayer, so multiplayer VR games. So I'm, I'm playing with somebody in China
and, you know, in Germany and in Argentina, we're all playing Grand Theft Auto together.
And we can all agree that, oh yeah, I, you know, Hoffman is racing against a red Porsche and the
red Porsche is, you know, is 20 meters ahead of Hoffman. And we all agree. So we have consensus.
And, and, and they might be giving me advice. You say, you know, Hoffman, you do a hard left there,
there's a shortcut, you can beat him, something like that. So we have consensus and it looks like
there's this objective reality, but we know that there is no red Porsche anywhere. There's just
some supercomputer and we're toggling bits. So, so when the physicists like Nima or Connie Hamid
tell us that space time is doomed, right? That it's not fundamental reality. There, but they're
going beyond, they're saying, okay, there is a reality beyond space and time. And by the way,
beyond quantum theory. And but, but they're saying that quantum theory itself is not fundamental.
So, so the new structures that they're finding, like the amplitude, there are no Hilbert spaces there.
But the apple to Heaton is this high dimensional geometric object with facets and faces and edges
and vertices. And it turns out that the properties of space time and quantum theory, locality and
uniterity are coded in the face structure of these geometric objects beyond space time. So, so, so
this is so the physicists themselves, and this is only in the last 10 years. So most, by the way,
I was at a conference on consciousness, just a couple months ago, where a number of physicists
who are quantum theorists, so they're their PhDs in quantum theory. And they're looking at
consciousness. At the end of their talks, every one of them I asked, now, are you aware of these
structures beyond space time, the amplitude, hedron and the decorated permutations, and to a
person, they had never heard of it. Now, now, now, the reason is, is this is high energy physics,
right? Only people who are in high energy physics, right, know about this stuff. And, you know, so
why does a cognitive scientist know about it? Well, because I knew I needed to look for something
beyond space time. So I've been looking for physics beyond space time. And when I found Nima,
Arkanian, and their work, I realized, okay, okay, the other ones that would be doing it, they're
the ones that are pushing the envelope with the highest energies, right? They're the ones
that are going there. So it's, and it's Nima who's saying quantum theory is doomed, not just
space time, but quantum theory, that both of those are going to arise together. Because if you think
about it, the particles, right, some people are trying to boot up space time from like entanglement
of particles, right? But what are particles? Particles are irreducible representations of the
Poincare group of the symmetries of space time. So you're not getting outside of space time,
you're just staying in. So, so quantum theory does not get you behind space time. In fact,
all the weirdness of quantum theory, the fact you need superpositions and collapse and all this
stuff is a symptom of an interface. It's the fact that you've lost information in projection.
That's why we get the weirdness of quantum theory and the no cloning theorem and all that stuff
is all an artifact of space time not being fundamental. And there's this deeper reality.
So now where physics is right now is, so the amplitude hydrant, so here's something for a
physicist. If you do the scattering amplitude computation, say for two gluons smashing into
each other, four gluons spraying out, you do it in space time using quantum field theory.
There's hundreds of pages of algebra, nasty, nasty math. If you do it with the amplitude hydrant,
three or four terms, you can compute it by hand. The math becomes trivial. Well,
relatively trivial. It's all relative. But trivial compared to what you have to do with
Feynman diagrams. And the other kicker is, you see new symmetries. There's something called the
infinite Yangian symmetry that's true of the scattering, but you cannot see it in space time.
You can only see it when you go beyond space time. So when the physics, when the physicists
find that the math is getting simpler and you're seeing new symmetries, bye-bye space time.
Well, I'll be sorry to see it go.
Well, it's a wonderful headset. It's been a useful headset.
Thank you. Do you want to, do you know it?
Yeah, very quickly, Donald, you didn't talk about the hard problems, consciousness. It seems to me,
in fact, that that problem still remains as a problem because you essentially created a
mathematical model of, you know, the effects of consciousness, not the consciousness, but the
effects of consciousness, where the sentience, the sentience is coming into play in probably all
the way you're kind of portraying the reality. Can you just very quickly tell us something about
this? Because I feel that experience is something that you cannot, you cannot convert it into any
kind of model. That is my view. Right, right. So the hard problem is that it comes up if you,
if you assume the space and time are fundamental and you're trying to figure out how, for example,
something like neural activity could cause conscious experiences. And there, I've got many
friends and colleagues who are working in that direction and they're brilliant, but it's impossible
to solve that problem. And the failure is clear. There's, you know, there's, for example, integrated
information theory. What is the integrated information that must be the taste of chocolate
or the smell of garlic? There's not a single one that they can do. Same thing with the orchestrated
collapse of microtubules. There's not a single specific conscious experience that they can explain.
And I predict I'd bet good money that they'll never be able to do it because it's just impossible.
Lightness was right. It's impossible. So, so for me, I don't have the hard problem of consciousness
because I'm not trying to boot up consciousness from non-conscious ingredients. I'm saying that
that whole approach is wrong. So I've got the reverse hard problem. I have to, I have to show,
if I start with consciousness, so I'm assuming consciousness, I have to show you how I give
you physics in all detail. So I'm doing the reverse hard problem. And that's why I said my goal this
year is to predict the parton distributions for all the quarks and gluons and so forth inside the
proton. In other words, that's my reverse hard problem. So I agree that we need to solve it,
but I have to go in the other direction. That one, I think, is feasible. And by the way,
my current simulations are already very, very, they're, they're encouraging. At small temporal
scales, I get a gluon C, a massless particle C appearing. And as I increase the temporal scales,
I get a C of small, increase the temporal scale even more, I start getting bigger particles with
greater math. So I get the, I've already in my simulations got the big picture now. But my goal
is not just the big picture. I want to get the exact momentum distributions. But already, my,
my current simulations tell me, you know, this is in a very profitable direction.
Thank you, Dan. Can we move on to Ethan Prillock?
Yeah.
Go straight to your question, please.
Yeah, well, we had asked it about Delbrook earlier. And I'm just curious about comments as to how
you have additions or subtractions or how similar it is. Thank you.
Well, just briefly, I mean, Delbrook did a lot of things. So what specific idea about Delbrook's
did you want me to comment on?
Yeah, I mean, he talked about evolution, not really providing for something that we should
expect to understand, you know, the fitness function as modeling, real underlying reality.
So, so I'm not familiar with that. So he actually said that, that the notion of a fitness function,
the fitness payoff function is not a useful tool, you're saying?
He said it wouldn't really, we shouldn't expect it because of the way evolution works,
to represent the underlying reality. But he didn't, you know, he didn't talk about it in terms of,
you know, operating systems, of course, we didn't really have any of the potentials.
Oh, I see. So you're saying that he was sort of agreeing with me that he was saying that
we shouldn't expect evolutionary grounds that we don't see reality as it is. Oh, yeah. Yeah.
Absolutely.
And he was a student also of some of the great modern, he was a doctoral student of
you, one or two of the great modern physicists before he became a biologist.
Right. So, so yeah, and I think he was not a reductionist, and I'm not a reductionist either.
So, so I, so I'll just say, yes, I agree with Delbroque on that. And he is absolutely my superior
in terms of his knowledge of molecular biology. And then my other one quick question too is,
in terms of the stuff that you were talking about these formalisms, is there anything that would,
if we stay on the side of the Planck limits, that would make a demarcation about describing
features of the universe in, you know, a prebiotic situation or a proto-ecology?
And is there anything that would show something like that?
Well, what I think is going to happen from the simulations I'm doing is that as I
increase the windows, the spatial and temporal windows of the trace chains that I,
that I do, I will get more and more complicated behaviors. And so I'm doing particles
because that's the most trivial thing. I mean, I'm doing the physics is,
it's going to be the easiest thing. And it's also where we have the most data, right? The
physicists have been doing these scattering experiments for decades. And so we have tons
of data. And so I'm not going after the physics because I think that that's the final thing or
the most important thing is, it's the thing that you can do first. And you can get,
but I eventually want to show how as we go to larger scales of these trace chains,
we will then be able to see like the emergence of cells and organisms and greater organization.
But that's more complicated. If I went after that first, I wouldn't have anything to report.
I need to do the physics where we actually have a shot at getting a concrete result.
Thank you, Don. Can we move on to Tony, please quickly? Yeah, it's going to be Don's last question.
Okay. Let me try to add something useful. How you relate physics or fundamental physics,
particle physics and consciousness. This part is still not clear to me.
Okay. So, so the, we just published a paper last week that you can take a look at it. It's
called Fusions of Consciousness. So if you just Google my name, Donald Hoffman and fusions of
consciousness, it's available free online and you'll read how we make the connection. But what
I'll say at the top level is what we show in that paper is that communication or communicating classes
of conscious agents correspond or what are being catalogued by decorated permutations.
So the physicists found these decorated permutations beyond space time,
these decorated permutations account for most of the data about scattering in space time.
So we said, okay, if, if decorated permutations are the deepest thing the physicists have found
beyond space time, let's take our theory of consciousness and project it onto decorated
permutations. And we did. So that's, so we introduced new mathematics, the mathematics that
takes Markov chains and maps them to decorated permutations is brand new in our paper. So that's
a new contribution as far as I can tell to mathematics. And that tells us now that particles
in space time correspond to communicating classes of conscious agents. So that's, so that paper
establishes that part in way we're clear in the paper, we're proposing that particles in space
time are projections of communicating classes of conscious agents. So in the next paper that
we're working on, I'm going to we're planning to now make specific mapping. So for example,
what properties of communicating classes correspond to the mass of a particle? And there,
I mentioned earlier, so my proposal, and this is not published, so I'm telling you what we're
working on. And if you can beat me to it, go ahead and publish it. That'd be fine. I don't
care who publishes, I just want to read the papers. I just want to know this stuff. So,
so I'm putting my ideas out there and someone who's a lot of people are smarter than me in
this area. So you can run with it and I'll be happy to read your paper. What we're proposing
is that the entropy rate of a communicating class corresponds to the mass. And the number of states
in the communicating class will will lead almost immediately or momentum and wavelengths. So,
so those are the things that we're looking at right now, but we're going to write up, we're
writing a paper, tentatively called traces of traces of consciousness, where we use these
trace chains and show how particles arise as artifacts of the trace process. And all of their
properties arise like the they'll then be artifacts like the entropy rate of the Markovian kernel
that happened to arise as an artifact of the trace chain process, that will be the mass that you see.
So, so that's how I'm proposing to get physics. All of the particles and all the properties
are not fundamental reality, they are artifacts of the way we observe.
Statistical artifacts and we're going to, and that's not just a hand wave, we're going to say now
exactly what the statistics are and exactly how those properties emerge as the artifacts and why you
get like bosons first and then only later does it condense into fermions and so forth. That
that's all going to fall out of this, so. Thank you, Don. I have a very small question if I may.
I will cry otherwise on stage. I'm sorry, Madej, we have to stop the interview now.
Don, have to go. So, can we all give a massive thank you to Don for today, for his time, please.
Don, thank you so much. It's been amazing. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Don. Thank you so much. We'll see you later.
Bye bye. Bye bye.
you
