The main problem, I think, is that we don't really know exactly what we're looking for.
The only known source of life is on Earth.
It could be that we have other life in the universe that's quite similar, but it could
be completely different in a different environment, so we wanted to come up with a way of looking
for life that was kind of agnostic, where we didn't have to make any assumptions about
life at all.
In order to make any progress here, you have to think about, you know, what is it about
life that seems unique relative to non-living systems?
When you see something that is interesting, that looks like energy went into it, that
you can't explain through abiotic means, the best way, the most generalized way we could
think of life is being that extra push of energy that is needed in that environment
to make that expression.
A footprint is that little bit of energy in a dusty landscape that tells you something
was alive there, but fossils are also a physical expression of energy that accumulated a bunch
of organic material, and we can do the same thing in chemistry by looking at the complexity
of molecules and saying, is it likely that you would have all of that energy that it
took to assemble a molecule in that way, happening without the presence of life?
What we landed on was basically a complexity measure.
Further you go down in chemicals based, the larger molecules you make, the more decisions
you have to make to get to that molecule, and the more possible other things you could
have made.
What we wanted to do was we wanted to take molecules and say, how many steps would it
take to make this molecule, even if you ignore all the rules of chemistry, in competition
with all the other things that could have been made, and then use that to assess how
likely it is to have been made in a kind of just random process without biological direction
behind it.
You know, this particular idea of molecular assembly was really born in math.
Even though it's a chemical method, it was born out of the idea of thinking about building
molecules in an algorithmic sense, and then recognizing that molecules that are derived
from abiotic systems have far less steps necessary to make them than the molecules that we associate
with biology, which take many more steps.
So once we sort of had that stew, spend a bunch of time writing code so that we could
calculate those quantities for any molecule we cared about, the next step was to think
about a way to measure it.
The original idea of using mass spectrometry goes back to this thought experiment and knowing
that NASA had this long legacy of sending mass spectrometers to space.
And so the first thing that we did is we went and we got a bunch of molecules that had different
complexities, different molecular assembly values, and we put these in the mass spectrometer
and we looked to see how they broke apart, and we just counted the number of unique pieces
they broke into.
But once you get that right, you can sort of see that the higher the assembly number
is, the more pieces the molecule tends to break into, which was really exciting.
For the first time any of these chemical complexity measures has been something that's detectable
in an experiment in the lab.
Now we have that framework, first of all we should apply it on Earth, secondly we should
go around our solar system and look for complex molecules everywhere.
The MoMA instrument that will be aboard the ExoMars rover has this capability of fragmentation
and then investigating the sizes and identity of all of those fragments.
And there will be a mass spectrometer that flies with dragonfly, the Titan, that will
also be able to do that same process.
I'm also really excited to go to Venus, well I'm not going to go to Venus, I don't want
to die, but I'm excited that NASA's sending missions there because I don't expect we'll
find life there, but I think we will learn a lot about the scope of possible abiotic
chemistry, so I think it will be really good to visit the closest analog to Earth that
we have, and I definitely think we should be using this technique to learn about the
surface of that environment.
But I think there's an even more important thing for astrobiology, not just the defining
what life is, but also looking in observationally, looking at exoplanets, so suddenly you can
start to look for signatures over the entire universe using spectroscopy remotely, but
of course, first things first, let's get some decent mass spectrometers to Mars, Venus,
Titan and Celadus and find what we can map, and that's really exciting, and I think NASA
is super excited and has been great because without their samples and collaboration, we
wouldn't have been out of validated technique.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
