What's the most stressful part of getting married?
Many of us have asked this very question and there are lots of different answers.
Maybe it's where should you have your wedding?
How much should you spend on your wedding?
What sort of food should you have at your wedding?
Or who should you invite and who do you have to exclude?
But there's another stressor that many people don't talk about when it comes to planning
a wedding and that's registering for your presence.
Now a friend of mine told me about her experience several years ago and what she said was that
when she and her then-fiancee went to a big store, they were given a tool that resembled
a gun.
And what they did was they spent hours making hundreds upon hundreds of decisions.
They had to make decisions such as do we want these forks or these forks?
Do we want these bedsheets that have this color and this thread count or these other
bedroom sheets?
What sort of theme do we want our kitchen to have and what sort of theme do we want
our bathrooms to have?
What she said was that by the end of those hours she would have said yes to anything
because she was completely, mentally wiped out.
She was exhausted.
She had become depleted of her self-control energy.
Six studies have backed this up.
When you ask people to make decisions, what happens is they have to use self-control to
do that.
And by making decisions, it depletes people's self-control energy and it impairs their ability
to control their impulses later on.
So if this is true, if depleting our self-control energy happens when we make decisions, then
how can we offset those deficits?
Well, one way that you may have thought of is simply to make decisions that you enjoy
making that give you positive emotions.
And that's true.
When people enjoy making the decisions that they're making, they aren't as mentally fatiguing,
up to a certain point.
Even if you're making decisions that you enjoy, over time it's going to wear you out.
It's going to make you mentally exhausted.
So one thing that this helps us understand is how people make decisions and how people
actually begin to enjoy the decisions that they make.
Because making decisions takes a lot of mental energy, it helps us understand why people
are more satisfied with the decisions that they make when there are fewer options available
to them.
Now this is counter-intuitive.
When you ask people if they want to have more options, most of the time people will say
yes.
When I go into a coffee shop, I want to have lots of different options.
When I go to a grocery store, I want to have many options for buying all of the different
products that my family and I enjoy.
But the reality is much different.
By narrowing your choices, by narrowing your options, you're going to be more satisfied.
And one reason for that is because you're going to be less exhausted.
So this helps us explain what goes on in the decision-making process.
Self-control is involved.
So next time you're going to make a decision, target decisions that you enjoy making and
limit your options to two or three or four possibilities.
What you'll find is you'll make better decisions, you'll be more satisfied with the decisions
that you make, and you're going to have more mental energy left over.
And what that means is you're not going to suffer many of the pitfalls that we all experience
when we're mentally fatigued.
How does self-control affect your money?
Well, it can affect it in a couple of different ways.
One way that we can understand this question is simply going back to understanding what
self-control is and how it works.
One component of self-control is monitoring, keeping track of your thoughts, your feelings
and behaviors, and this is extremely important when it comes to your money.
People who keep close watch on how much money they have and how much money they spend are
better able to achieve financial success, to meet their financial goals.
Now it seems common sense, but lots of people don't do this.
And fortunately, through technology, it's never been easier to keep track of how much
money you have and how much you spend.
Logging online through your computer, even getting on a cell phone using an app, all
of these things can help us exert self-control over how much money we spend.
Standards also help us understand the link between self-control and money.
Remember that standards are guidelines that are set before us that tell us what's appropriate
and what's inappropriate.
These standards can come to mind when we're making decisions about our money.
If we're making a decision that's going to undermine our personal or societal standards
for what's appropriate, we might change our behavior so that we can do what's in agreement
with that standard.
But another factor of self-control can influence the decisions that we make when it comes to
our money, and that's self-control strength.
When people are depleted of their self-control strength, it influences their monetary decisions
in a couple of different ways.
In one series of studies, what researchers did was they brought participants into a laboratory
and they had half of them complete some tasks that depleted them of their self-control energy
and the other half of the participants were not depleted of their self-control energy.
And they did this in a variety of different ways.
Next what the researchers did was they wanted to see how much participants would spend
of some money.
Imagine going to an auction and you see something that you want.
You have an urge to buy it.
But then what happens is someone else starts bidding on that and the price goes up and up.
These researchers created a situation that mimicked that very scenario at an auction.
And what they showed was that when people were depleted of their self-control energy,
they were willing to pay more and more for the same product compared to people whose
self-control energy had not been depleted.
But that's not the only connection between self-control strength and monetary decisions.
When people are depleted of their self-control energy, they will simply spend more of their
money on just about anything.
It doesn't matter if the goods are high quality or low quality, if they're healthy or unhealthy.
With the limited amount of self-control energy that we have, when that becomes compromised,
people simply make more impulsive decisions.
Now one important factor to consider is it's not only that when people are depleted of their
self-control energy that these things happen, but it also depends on whether people are
naturally inclined to make impulsive financial decisions.
When you combine these two different factors of being mentally fatigued or exhausted and
already being the type of person who makes impulsive financial decisions, those two factors
create a perfect storm that will predispose you to make very unwise financial decisions.
So most of the problems that people have when it comes to self-control and money are often
with not regulating themselves that much, under regulation.
But this isn't the only time that self-control can get you into problems surrounding your
money.
Think of people that over-regulate.
Now one example that I like to think of is the example of Hedy Green.
Now she is a very good example of over-regulation of her finances.
Now it paid off handsomely for her financially.
When she died she was worth what is the equivalent of billions of dollars in modern day currency.
But when you look at the consequences of that on her life, they weren't always that positive.
So she led a very simple life, but maybe it was a little bit too simple.
It had negative consequences on some of her relationships.
For example when her husband was having financial difficulties and she had plenty of money to
help him out, she refused to do that and it seriously compromised her relationship.
So the important thing to remember here is that self-control is often a very good thing
when it comes to the financial decisions that we make, but balance is also something that
we have to keep in mind.
By keeping both of these things in check, exerting self-control, but doing so in a way
that doesn't undermine our relationships, we can get the benefits of making wise financial
decisions and of having positive and lasting relationships.
What are the great mysteries of the universe?
The origin of the world?
When did humans begin to have consciousness?
Well when I tell people that I'm a psychologist, they often don't ask me those questions.
The most common question that they ask is, how can I have a good relationship?
Well let's think about that.
Think about the trait that you prize the most in a close relationship partner, whether it's
a friend or even a romantic partner.
Now there are lots of things that we look for.
Maybe we want someone who has similar interests, someone who's humorous, someone with whom
we feel safe.
But another thing that we can think about is we want someone who can control their impulses,
who can fulfill their promises, someone that we can depend on, who will be there for us,
even when the times get difficult.
So how might this play out in our relationships?
Is self-control really that good of a thing?
And if so, what are some examples about when it can be good?
And are there examples about when it can backfire?
Well one way that we can think of this is to imagine a scenario.
So you come home from a long day at the office, nobody understood what you were trying to
do, you're frustrated, you had some anger on the way home, and you just want some support.
As soon as you get home, your romantic partner meets you at the door, looks at you and says,
did you really wear that to the office today?
You look awful.
Now what are you going to do?
What's going to help to predict whether you're going to forgive your partner or if you're
not going to forgive your partner?
Well in that sort of situation, most people would have an urge to lash out at their partner,
and that's just a natural part of being human.
But what comes between that urge and lashing out at your partner is self-control.
And what scientific studies have shown is that people who have better self-control are
able to override their impulse to lash out at their partners, they're more forgiving.
And when you deplete people of their mental energy, when you stress them out, when you
make them feel mentally exhausted, they become less able to control their impulses, and they
become less forgiving.
Now this line of reasoning is not only true at a psychological level, it's also true
at a biological level.
So people who have deficiencies in breaking down their metabolic energy, they also tend
to be less forgiving.
People who have elevated symptoms of diabetes, who don't break down glucose sufficiently
into amino acids, into energy, they also have problems forgiving close relationship partners.
So that's one way that we can understand a link between self-control and relationship
success.
But another way that we can look at it is simply who tend to be the most satisfied people
out there in terms of their close relationships.
Now there are three different hypotheses that we can entertain when it comes to self-control
and relationship satisfaction.
One of them is that birds of a feather will flock together.
So the more similar two people are in terms of their level of self-control, the better
their relationship will be.
The more satisfied people will be, the more committed they will be.
Another possibility is that dissimilarity will be a good thing, that opposites should
attract, that it's much better for someone with very high self-control to pair up with
someone with very low self-control so that they can balance each other out.
But the third possibility is the total amount of self-control in a relationship paying off
the most.
That when you think of two members of a relationship, the more self-control that those two people
have, the better off they're going to be.
And that's precisely what you find.
Whether it's with your friends, with your dating partners, or even when you look at
people who are married.
People who report the highest level of satisfaction in those relationships tend to have the highest
level of self-control in that relationship.
The more that you and your partner have high levels of self-control, the better off your
relationship is.
And it's not just with satisfaction, it also increases commitment.
And this can help us understand some key findings when we look at the relationship between self-control
and other relationship outcomes.
So we've seen that having good self-control reduces the likelihood of divorce.
But there's also recent evidence that people who have self-control that's operating at
a very high level, they also are less likely to do things that might lead to a divorce,
such as engaging in infidelity.
So what these findings all point to is a general conclusion.
That if you're looking for a close relationship partner, there are lots of different traits
that you can go after.
But among the most important in predicting relationship success is whether or not that
person has high levels of self-control.
Relationships take work.
So we have to ask ourselves, why do we have them in the first place?
Well one main reason is because we're kind of hardwired to have relationships.
We have a fundamental need for positive and lasting relationships.
Now this need to belong is deeply rooted in our evolutionary history and has all sorts
of consequences for modern psychological processes.
But one main benefit that we get from having close relationships with other people is it
frees us up.
We don't have to do everything for ourselves.
We're able to outsource certain things in our lives to our close relationship partners.
Now all of us do this without even thinking about it.
We outsource a lot of our daily lives to our culture.
Very few people cook and grow everything that they eat.
Very few people make all of the clothes that they wear.
And even fewer people construct the homes or the apartments in which they live.
We depend on other people to do this for us.
And by outsourcing those activities to other people, we're able to fulfill other goals
in our lives.
This is true at a one-on-one level.
When we think of our close relationship partners, like our romantic partners, they also help
to fulfill this role.
So to explore this possibility scientifically, researchers have begun to bring people who
are in relationships into the laboratory and to expose them to different situations to
see if you get this outsourcing effect.
So in one study what they did was they brought participants who were all involved in romantic
relationships into the laboratory.
By random assignment, they depleted half of them of their self-control energy.
They had them complete a self-control task that was specifically designed to wear them
out mentally.
The other half of the participants had an easier time of it.
They completed a similar task that did not require self-control.
But the trick came next.
For half of these participants, the experimenters had them list a goal, a fitness-related goal.
And they asked them about whether their partner helped them achieve that goal.
For the other half of the participants, they were not given this opportunity to think of
a goal that their partner helped them with.
Next what the researchers did was they asked participants how much they expected to exert
effort and self-control in that specific domain in which their partner helped them or where
their partner did not help them.
And what they found very consistently is that people outsource their goals to the romantic
partners.
And when they do this, they're less likely to report wanting to expend effort themselves.
Now this effect was most pronounced among people who were already at a deficit of mental
energy.
So when people are already mentally exhausted and they know that their partner is going
to help them complete the goal in the first place, they are less motivated to expend much
energy on their own.
Now what function might outsourcing serve?
Well the next step looked at this question and what they found was that outsourcing not
only makes people more judicious about the energy that they spend, but it increases commitment
to that relationship partner.
Now it makes sense why that might happen.
If I know that I can depend on my relationship partner to help me complete various goals
in my life, I might come to rely on them and to become more committed to my relationship
to them.
Because instead of having to do everything on my own, now I can reap the benefits of
having help.
And by doing that, I'm going to be better able to achieve other goals, maybe even goals
that I haven't even thought of yet.
So this is one reason why people have a fundamental need for relationships.
They make us feel happy, but they also allow us to conserve our mental energy so that we
can achieve many different goals.
Now that we've learned about the relationships between self-control, money, and relationships,
now let's consider some practical activities that we can use to apply this knowledge in
our everyday lives.
The first thing that we can do is become mindful when it comes to making major relationship
decisions.
Now we all have to make these, and sometimes they can be very stressful.
What I would encourage you to do is when you have to make these major relationship decisions,
don't do that when you're mentally exhausted.
Think very carefully about how much mental energy you have, how much stress you're under,
and if it's more important for you to get it done now, or if you can wait and sleep
on it.
By waiting until you have a sufficient amount of mental energy on board, you're a lot more
likely to make a logical decision, something you aren't going to regret later.
The second activity that I like for you to do comes to how we communicate with other
people.
Now email and text messaging are two very easy ways that we can get in touch with people,
and this is often a very good thing.
But sometimes we send messages that we wish that we hadn't sent.
We say things that we wish we hadn't.
So what I'd like for you to do over the next week is to simply do a simple experiment with
yourself by not sending an email or text message after 10pm when you're most mentally exhausted.
By keeping in mind the importance of having sufficient mental energy to communicate with
other people, you may see that you're less likely to send messages that you will regret
later.
But another benefit of this is that you might sleep more soundly because you know that you're
not even in need of reading any emails or text messages that you receive because you
can't respond to them anyway.
So a third activity that we can do related to self-control and relationships and other
decision-making processes is limiting the options that you have.
So we've seen that people are most satisfied with the decisions that they make when they
have just two or three or four different options at their fingertips.
So what I'd like for you to do is think about the activities that you're going to be doing
over the next week and make a strategic plan of attack for activities where you know that
you're going to have to exert a lot of self-control.
If you're going to a restaurant and you're worried about what you're going to order,
if it's going to be healthy or unhealthy, look at the menu ahead of time.
Narrow the options down to your favorite two, three, or four dishes.
And by doing that, you're going to be more likely to make a decision that's going to
be in line with your goals.
So these are three simple activities that we can use to apply our knowledge of self-control
and how it can improve the decisions that we make and our relationships.
In this course, you've learned about your greatest inner strength and the easiest one
to improve, self-control.
What I hope that you've gained is an understanding that it doesn't matter where you're starting.
We all have problems with self-control, but we can all improve our self-control.
We can start small, making incremental steps, and by doing that, we're going to be able
to achieve our goals.
One way that we can do this is simply by changing our environment and changing the way that
we think about our environment.
So oftentimes, people feel as though they're on the defense, that there are constantly
things that are approaching them, that are tempting them to do things that they know
are going to undermine their goals.
What I would encourage you to do is to begin to play offense against your environment.
When you look at the most successful people, when it comes to their ability to control
their impulses, a lot of times what these people look like are just like you and me.
But the key difference is that they've changed their environment to relieve them of things
that might tempt them, that might throw them off track.
So the next time that you find yourself having gone off track, don't sweat it.
You'd be hardly human if you didn't have problems with self-control.
We all do.
It's a difficult, often painful process.
But also keep in mind that you can start small, that you should never give up, that you should
never stop believing, that you can achieve goals that seem even far out there.
Things that you think aren't possible for you are possible because you have the inner
strength that will make all the difference in the world.
You have self-control.
And so this is something that I've also included in my own life.
As someone who loves to write, I use self-control to become a better writer.
I allot time in my daily routine so that I'm sure to get my hours in every single day.
And I've built this up over years of practice.
I also apply it to my life in terms of my fitness goals.
I love to run, I love to exercise, but I have to exert self-control to do that.
I have to set specific plans for myself so that I can achieve my goals, whether it's
running a 5K, a half marathon, a marathon, or even an ultramarathon.
I have to follow a routine, a schedule, that will help me to achieve this goal.
So we all have what it takes to achieve our goals.
Although we might not think that we're just like the people whose self-control we might
idolize, we share more in common with those people than we might think.
We have an inner strength that will help make that possible.
And that inner strength is self-control.
