We were wrong Tony. We were just straight up you especially but I was also a little wrong.
In January we made a podcast about AI and we said it was going to take a while for it to get here
and we were so wrong because between January and now just a few short months it's already changed
so much. AI is here, it's here to stay, it's changing photography. Photographers and models have
already lost their jobs. I think it's here to stay and I don't want you to get left behind so
we're going to tell you how to integrate it into your photography and where we think it's going.
First one of the best ways you can improve your photography career or videography
career is to set up your own portfolio off of social media. Go to squarespace.com
slash Chelsea. Set up a beautiful website that reflects your own sense of style, your own brand
and bring customers into something you own. They can book appointments, they can leave
deposits, they can buy prints from you. It's all possible at squarespace.com slash Chelsea.
Try it out completely free, no credit card and when you love it the coupon code Chelsea will
get you 10% off. Thank you Squarespace. Let's get into our wrongness Tony. We tried AI and it just
we just thought it didn't look very real. It was in the uncanny valley. Yeah this is like three
months ago. It was very glitchy, things were coming out just kind of silly looking and it was cool
but I just thought I think this will take a while before we really integrate this.
Yeah I've been in tech my whole life and I'm always trying to make predictions and
when things will come about and I think I said maybe in five years this is going to be useful.
That was a big mistake. It was three months. Three months that it took to make a new version
of Mid Journey, the only real AI imaging app that I considered to be useful at this point.
Mid Journey has existed for one year. Version one was released in March of 2022,
version five alpha March of 2023 and I generated a bunch of images with both engines using the
exact identical prompts. These are the results and look at that drastic difference. Can you imagine
anything learning in one year? What app, what code, what camera, what electronics device improved
this much over the course of one year? It's incredible. Look at the eagle on the left. It's
pretty disturbing and upsetting and the one on the right I think passes at a glance.
Yeah like the grip isn't quite right. If you really squint you can notice some tiny little flaws
but it is good. It is real good and most people will not notice. This one's especially very good.
So we've seen huge leaps. As you can see this is
applicable now. People can use this and so we want to talk about how people are using it,
how it can benefit you as a photographer and how to integrate it into your workflow if you want
to so that you don't get left behind because we've seen these changes in photography before.
But let's just first start by saying that Mid Journey is not perfect. AI is not perfect. It
still has flaws. Yeah here in April 2023 there's no free trial so you have to pay for it. We both
subscribed and we're using that like crazy because we have like a hundred images. It's fun and it
can't handle text I think is the single biggest flaw. So anytime you render a product that might
have a brand name on it or you made some movie posters the text is not good. This is my movie
poster for a karate hamster that likes to steal cheese that I was going to call ham and cheese.
Oh that's good. Isn't that good? I'd look at the text it says like
and my favorite. So the words it's still not great at generating text which is funny because we have
like chat GPT that could generate text. Yeah but this does not do that. There are other AI engines
that do generate text. I think stable diffusion you can give it text and put this text on a sign
or a menu or something and it can do that. But I think Mid Journey could change this tomorrow.
Yeah that's probably a version six thing. A tool I think will be important to portrait
photographers is the ability to take a source image and accurately reflect that person in
an AI generated image. So you could take a snapshot of somebody and put them on a beach in Morocco.
So I fed it an AI image of me and asked it to make a portrait of me in front of a wall of
vintage cameras and this is what it produced. Some other guy? It kind of like me though right?
No. I was not even wearing glasses in the original picture but the hair is kind of the same the skin
tone is the same but it's like a male model plus me and it's interesting because AI is clearly
using images that are on the web and there's a disproportionate number of images of models posing.
So right now everything kind of gets blended with a model. So it's weird. I wouldn't complain
about that for me. Well here you go because I had to generate wedding images for us. We did
not get pictures of our wedding because we eloped and did it on a beach and as a result
two photographers did not get proper pictures and at some point AI is going to be able to make wedding
pictures for us. But that is not us. But this is not us. But you can see what it was doing.
I look better though. Most people would take a glance at this and think that it was real.
I think it's pretty uncanny. It's just not us. But version 6, version 7 which is going to be
three or six months from now will probably be doing it accurately. I also think AI does not
understand some things about being a human that are subtle. Like that's too many birds.
I'm uncomfortable. What's going on? At some point you're cowering and you don't want to be approved
on. It's like a horror movie and then also there's someone in the background photo bombing you but
you would edit that out of a wedding photo and there's like barriers in the background for the
for a parking lot or something. So it's like AI knows those things exist but it doesn't know
that humans would not want them in their wedding photos. I have to say we've been talking about
mid-journey and I want to make the point that not all AI is equal. I found that mid-journey produced
the best results but was the most difficult to sign up for and you had to pay for version 5,
the better version. But I thought Dahli worked pretty well but you can see the difference.
Mid-journey version 5 I put in the same prompt for a Joshua tree in front of a sunset and you can
see that Dahli is okay but not as stunning as the mid-journey one. But if you put it in a person's
face or something mid-journey leaves it all behind like Dahli looks terrible with that kind of thing.
Though I noticed your mid-journey picture has a watermark on it. Again it's stealing watermarked
pictures and so it keeps adding in water marks and images. It's not good at hiding stealing.
It's been caught red-handed. In January when we made our podcast I thought that it was a long way
off that people would be using it in a practical way even though I knew some photographers who were
using it a bit. I want to talk to you about the ways that photographers are using it right now
because I've seen it become far more prevalent with well-known photographers. So one thing that
photographers are doing is they are rendering details for photos. They're rendering birds and
putting them into the background. They're rendering like a field of flowers or different clouds or a
different sky and then they're comping it in. So we've been doing this type of comping for a very
long time but I have done comping by buying stock photos and comping it in or by going through my
own photos and finding something that I'd like to put into another photo. So this is already
happening a lot. I rendered this dove and it's not that easy. It took like 15 minutes and six
different tries to get this dove which Tony pointed out has two sets of wings. I didn't notice
that. It's funny how you don't notice stuff. And I rendered it into this photo. It's a quick job.
I'm not saying this is gorgeous but you can see how it would be used. Another way that
photographers are using AI in a practical way is to test ideas for a photo shoot. So we've been
taking pictures of our car and they're not quite coming out the way that we want them to. So I went
into mid journey and I rendered an idea for a rainy day shoot and this came out. Now I really
want to take pictures of our car in a rainy day with the headlights on. Right and I did some too
and I found a nice fog in the background is nice so we have to kind of have a fog plan. I just want
to point out if you look at the picture it can't manage to render the Porsche name on the back
of the car or the license plate but everything else is like literally perfect. Yeah but it just
comes to some letters and it's like I have no idea. Another way that photographers are using it is by
rendering props. So let's say you want to do a photo shoot and you want to flower crown you know
that's actually quite expensive. If you went to a florist it could be over a hundred dollars.
So you go into mid journey and you render one there and then you add it and that's what I did
in this picture. Again I did these very quickly to show you an example without using other people's
pictures. Another possibility is to give mid journey your original picture and you can control it
with the parameter IW which is image weight and that tells it take this image and then either use
it as a little bit of inspiration or stick very closely to the original image. So here I pass it
that same picture and I told it to stick closely to the original image but add in some birds and a
lighthouse and this is the image that came back. All the same elements are there and in fact it's
like a little bit more perfect like the dress is a little bit more sheer. The angle is pretty much
the same but it's better. It is better. The lighting is better. The lighthouse looks good. Yeah birds look
weird. It's not good at birds yet. It's it's failing the bird community. There's still some room for
improvement. What I'm hearing a lot in the photo community is that photographers are pushing back
against this. I've heard people say that it's not real photography, that it's cheating, that they
don't like it and I think that's all understandable. I've been through all of those feelings I think
but I've been talking to other photographers and one thing that someone brought up was that it really
is kind of the same as other photography technology that we've seen in the past. So think about when
the camera first came out and it wasn't really respected because it wasn't a painting and people
didn't think it was real art and then when we went from film to digital people did not think
digital photography was valid. They thought film was real photography. Digital wasn't valid. In fact
recently in our DP review video you said that you went to DP review because other photo communities
and forums were saying that digital photographers weren't valid so you went to digital photography
forums specifically. So we've seen it's a tale as old as time. The same with darkroom to Photoshop.
People didn't respect Photoshop. They thought it was cheating. The same with traditional cameras
to smartphone cameras. A lot of people watching this still don't consider smartphone photographers
real photographers. Manual focus versus AF versus IAF versus high frame rates people making fun of
spray and pray. My point to you being this might feel icky and fake because we've been doing
photography for a while but I really think it's just going to become a part of photography forever
and that we can either figure out what's going on and try to learn or get left behind and become
one of those criminally old photographers that's like that's not real and I want to try it out
and see if I like it. What's the harm of trying? We've talked a lot about still photography but
recently AI video has been in the news a lot. Like there was a short movie 10 minutes long
called Last Stand that was presented as an AI movie. I dug into it. I found out the video
itself was not rendered by AI and in fact AI video I think is still I want to say several years away.
Anyway it's nowhere near ready yet because it is exponentially more difficult because video
requires 30 pictures per second instead of just one picture period because it requires
object persistence and permanence between those separate frames. Like continuity too like someone
drinking a glass of water that could turn into coffee with AI or something. Yeah and if somebody
turns their head you need them to have the same face throughout the entire thing and that's actually
these are really big challenges so it is exponentially harder than creating a single still
image. So we should come back in three months and say how we were wrong about this or what?
It's a distinct possibility but this is reassuring for people making their living as a professional
videographer because you are safe for the time being. If a restaurant needs a video of somebody
pouring wine you cannot replicate that with AI at this moment. You need to go actually hire somebody
to capture that video. There is an exception there are many companies at least eight or so
that are doing talking head AI video that seems to render perfectly so what you can do you can
create a text prompt or have AI generate a block of text for you something that you want a person
to read on video and AI will have an avatar that looks exactly human and you can pick from 100
avatars and 100 voices and match them up and it will speak it and it can translate it into
different languages and in this way you could essentially instead of hiring an actor to read
your corporate training monologue you would have AI generate it in just a couple of minutes at a
small fraction of the cost. So that aspect for both actors and videographers and audio people
and video editors that is already going away rapidly. I think you we think about what's going
away but that also means that there are job opportunities because like I said making that
simple ugly dove with two sets of wings took me 15 minutes trying to refine the idea for a photo
can take you hours and if you go into mid-journey it's set up like a chat room kind of a forum
in real time and you're seeing people put in their prompts and then it's generating their photos so
it's kind of like a group effort you're seeing what words they're using that are working for their
pictures but you're also seeing that they're building something brick by brick almost like a
little lego castle or something this word worked this one didn't and people are in there for hours
creating one image my point being that if it's a skill and it takes time to create something beautiful
in the future we may see people who are AI prop creators and it takes so much time it might not
really be your thing as a photographer to make AI props you might hire someone else paid $10 for
the flower crown and AI instead of 100 to a florist so it's just something to think about a possibility
you know what is so easy to make that you don't need to hire anyone I can't imagine I can imagine
it's a square space portfolio we have them for our photos but people use them for other websites
as well whether it be your business if you're a dentist a contractor whatever it's so easy you
can drag and drop into their beautiful templates and make a professional looking website um I have
galleries I have places where my clients can proof their photos and tell me which ones that they like
and it's just fun to do honestly and it's totally free to try it you don't have to believe me get
the 14-day free trial no credit card needed drag in some photos you're gonna be like dang am I a pro
because this looks so good thank you Chelsea hallelujah I hope you get your coupon code we don't
make money from the coupon code but it makes me look good get 10 off with the coupon code Chelsea
when you buy it and that just tells Squarespace we're doing a good job thanks Squarespace they're
gonna love it I put you all to a test on my Instagram I put up three pictures two of them were
generated by AI and one of them was a real photo albeit a photoshop composite it's the cover to our
photoshop book but the model is real and her actual frame itself wasn't much changed we took
out some footsteps in the sand we added a little bit of splash to the water and the most photoshop
part is actually the dress itself yeah I will also say I didn't do a great job comping the dress so
yeah but it's not AI no it is made of real images and I wanted to see what people's responses
to this were how many people would detect the AI would they have feelings like would they be
upset about that yeah um and what I found was surprising first I asked people what their
favorite image was and two out of three people picked one of the AI images um how dare you
right and it does go to show you we put a lot of work into this picture we hired a model we
got down to the beach at sunrise she was extremely cold walking into the water we bought a dress
we had her hair and makeup done it was a lot of work and it took me just a few minutes to generate
an image that two out of three people like better so it was it felt a little deflating to me oh it
felt deflated um I will say about eight percent of people in the comments mentioned something about
them being AI but my audience is not a random sampling of people on the planet it is mostly
photographers who follow us who have probably seen our previous podcasts on AI so they are
particularly attuned and I still think that's a pretty small number so to me that means the vast
majority of people will simply appreciate a picture and not know or think about it being made by AI
of those people who identified some as AI they also thought the second image was AI
which it was definitely not so about two percent of people thought they had a false positive
and about two percent of people just said something mean that's not relevant I just
wanted to say some people are mean it's more than two percent of people but I think you got a pretty
good ratio on that I think this means we need a system to prove authentic images and we'll get
to some widespread AI images that have been published by big national news agencies recently
I was a nerd I am a nerd there is an easy solution for this at least technically easy look at the
shirt you're wearing I was a nerd this is actually was featured on the IT guys show that's why I
ordered this it's a doubly nerdy shirt so cryptography public key cryptography we use that
to generate digital signatures for images when the camera captures them so there'll be a private
key embedded in every camera device smartphones real cameras and when an image is captured it
will be tagged with that digital signature and as long as that image remains intact it can be
validated by using the digital signature which has a hash of the image in it we create a system where
have files or whatever can contain some metadata for that digital signature as well as simple edits
like give it a crop brightness contrast saturation so that the final image can be displayed in a
meaningful way but still authenticated by the device that has received in this displaying that
image which that could be the instagram app itself or it could be an iphone depending on how they
decide to implement that and this this way real images that haven't had substantial edits could
have a check mark on them and you would know that it was a real image that'd be good when
like for um journalistic purposes and documenting it also might be good for knowing what someone
actually looks like because this the ai we're talking about seems super advanced but think about
every beauty filter online where I've seen people take them off during the video to demonstrate
how much they change a person and they're almost unrecognizable which means like you're gonna look
back at pictures of your family and they're gonna be some weird mutated version and people as a
whole hate that and every time filters come out there's another group of people who rebel against
that and they want no makeup pictures yeah and if we had a system for showing that things were
authentic I think most people would want that they would want that check mark on their authentic
pictures on their selfies and social media and suddenly we'd be looking at real humans again
this is possible but we need a committee to actually form like maybe it's the IEEE or somebody
needs to uh actually it could be ISO somebody needs to create this system so that we can view
authentic images once again well people have other concerns about this because a bunch of experts in
AI and Elon Musk and uh Wozniak they came forward and said that they wanted to put a six-month pause
on AI because they felt like everybody needed time to think about what kind of rules or regulations
should be put in place around AI and what we should and shouldn't do with it and like basically a
lot of people think that it's it's not going to happen this pause is impossible we don't really
have time to keep up with legislation and laws anyway it's kind of it's just like happening
but it just goes to show that people are concerned about what could happen and if we can keep up
as people to this technology that we're creating I absolutely think we cannot I would love to
pause it I wish government could move faster because I do believe strongly it needs regulation
but it's not happening right now no um I want to talk about how this has already impacted the
industry I thought it would soon be impacting the industry but in my news feed I'm already seeing
more and more of the thumbnail images are AI generated and right now it's probably one in 10
but I would bet in six months it's going to be 50 percent our AI generated images as opposed to
real images and several companies like fashion stores and fashion brands have announced that
they are using AI to generate their images which means they're not hiring photographers
they're not hiring models one of them had the gall to pat themselves on the back for increasing
their diversity because they were going to be using AI to render people of color people of color
oh and but so like they increase diversity but still managed to not hire people of color
yeah they still aren't getting paid I'm sure they're thrilled yeah no kidding and we've also
seen several AI generated images be accepted as genuine and be viewed by millions of people
I fell for the pope one viral right the pope in the puffy jacket I thought he just got swagged out
I was like dang as I look at it it looks flawless and right now I showed that AI cannot replicate
a portrait of a civilian like me but it renders shockingly accurate images of just about any
celebrity including the pope including here's an image of Donald Trump getting arrested which
was widespread even though to me I immediately saw this as AI has like a waxy characteristic
yeah looks fake but it won't look fake in three months because we've seen the rate of progress
right I just saw this Elon Musk is known for having his father owned an emerald mine and
people criticize him for that and somebody published this image of him setting sitting on
an emerald throne and a lot of people forwarded this as if it was genuine but it's definitely an AI
generated image so we can see that AI is being used to mislead people to tear down characters
and that is very bad and again we desperately need a system to authenticate images it is but
let's go back to the times when photo journalists staged entire photo shoots anyway yeah and we
did a really big podcast about that how Sharbat Gullah the Afghan girl they said that she was an
orphan and she wasn't they pulled her out of school and made up a whole story for her she
didn't even want her picture taken the whole thing was a sham yeah so like same as it ever was well
you're absolutely right that this has been happening in different ways from the beginning of time and
there is even if you capture a real image it doesn't mean the story behind it is real so maybe it's
not that big of a leap maybe we've been maybe it's even that our eyes are open now and we are
being forced to question everything that we see and maybe that is good AI right now does impose
some limits at least mid-journey does you can't do anything violent i wanted to make a thumbnail
for artificial intelligence is killing photography and it wouldn't let me use the word kill
and that threatened to ban me you're too controversial i i tried to say destroying or
smashing none of those things can be done i mid-journey never told me i was too violent for
their platform but it scares me when important limits like that are imposed by corporations
without any sort of regulation because who here trusts corporations i do not trust corporations
corporations do what is in their best interests it is the role of the government to actually look
out for the citizens right maybe but the government does not move fast enough the government is very
slow and this is happening at incredible speed so it is going to go out of control also there's
going to be people at the corporation who hack it who make a copy of it and remove the limitations
there's massive amount of corruptions in corporations so this is definitely going to go
out of control we're going to have some interesting news stories coming up about that
people have talked about what if ai killed photography maybe those people were us in
january i honestly can't remember but one thing we were talking about today that was interesting
is that ai functions let's say hypothetically it does kill photography no one's taking pictures
anymore where do the source photos come from it just keeps recycling old stuff at some point it's
going to get dated so let's say it just keeps cycling pictures of the eiffel tower and something
happens to it it changes maybe it won't be updating it in the correct way yeah like you had some car
pictures in there what about when there's a 2025 model and it's completely different somebody has
to take a physical portrait a physical picture of that new model for ai to learn what that model
looks like because it can't go out in the world and it can't get real images it won't see fashion
trends change it won't see haircuts change it won't see biodiversity change so i was giving the
example we like to take wildlife pictures and i take bird pictures and i saw some sick birds when
we were out taking pictures i took pictures of the sick birds i sent them to the department of
environmental protection locally tagged the location of the sick birds and then they go out and help
them my point being if there's some widespread bird sickness like there has been in the past
photographers were a crucial part of documenting that because real photography is about documentation
often so if we're not having those source photos for documentation ai could kind of warp our
perspective of our world and kind of put in this gap between us and what's really happening
there's also the problem which seems inevitable of an ai feedback loop where if ai becomes even
moderately popular it's going to start seeing ai images and not knowing that they're ai and using
those to feed itself and so you have almost like an inbreeding scenario where little flaws would
become exaggerated and of course it would be learning from the images that people decided to
choose and share so people's preferences would start to become stronger and stronger in this
feedback loop everything could be karate hamster we just don't know but this is all doom and gloom
but let's talk about if it could help photographers because i i do think that it can and one thing
that i was excited about is that i think it breaks down barriers and it breaks down a lot of
gatekeeping so going into a studio having props having professional models all those things cost
a lot of money but also you have to be in the right location um and you have to have access to
certain people certain resources with ai if you are a photographer in a country with not one single
model you might be able to render one or if you want a specific car in the background and you
just don't have the funds for that prop you could render one like i was saying earlier if you couldn't
afford flower crowns or certain dresses you could render one and so now we're giving access to more
glamorous photos to people that can't afford physical props physical studios things like that
i think that's a good thing so we were wrong in january tell us what we're wrong about today
because i'm sure that we are maybe you have your foot in ai more than us what's going on there what
do you think is changing how do you think it will be used and do you see the pros and cons we're
curious to hear your insight i want to add some people are mad at me for publicizing ai they feel
like i am helping to push it along by giving it a voice but i feel like i'm the weatherman saying
a tornado is coming at you and like i can't stop the tornado i'm definitely not speeding up the
tornado we are just reporting what we see happening i think maybe we're we're advertising it a little
bit unintentionally like i'm sure someone watching will try it because we're talking about it but i
also think that the people we're talking to are more informed and that they're going to be trying
it if they're listening to this podcast from an educated point of view so and i hope we help people
recognize ai images because knowing the difference between truth and fiction is going to be increasingly
difficult but important yeah all right give us your thoughts and also just this is what you need
to do you need to go to squarespace.com you need to sign up for the 14 day free trial pull in your
regular photos pull in your ai photos have the first ever portfolio for ai prop creation it's
going to be free for 14 days and then when you decide to buy it you can use the coupon code
chelsea to get 10 off thanks squarespace and thanks to all of you for watching if you want to see
more episodes of the picture this photography podcast go to wherever your podcasts are available
or you can subscribe to our playlist on youtube so you see every single new podcast as we publish it
thanks bye
