That miracle journey was during the night time and Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala sent a
beautiful heavenly baby white horse named Barak to take the profit through the journey.
Isra was known as the journey between the Kaaba and Al Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem, Palestine.
And the Miraj was known as the journey between Al Aqsa Mosque and the heaven.
Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala mentioned that night in Surah Isra verse 1 or another name
of that Surah is Surah Bani Israel.
The details of this story is very big and that's why we found several different versions
of the stories from different Sahabas who were all mentioned in the great Tafsir ibn
Qathir.
After a really long time of studying and researching the story, inshallah we will try
to tell you the most logical version of the story from ibn Qathir but as always Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala knows the best.
During the 10th and the 13th year of Muhammad sallallahu wasallam's prophethood, one night
in Makkah after praying his ishah prayer, the prophet was taking a rest next to the Kaaba.
At that time angel Jibril peace be upon him came with a small white horse and it was called
Al Burak.
First, Jibril peace be upon him opened Muhammad sallallahu wasallam's chest and cleaned his
heart with the Zamzam water, afterwards he put it back into his chest.
The angel requested Muhammad sallallahu wasallam to ride the Burak, instantly the Burak started
to fly.
One step of the magical creature covered a great long distance and because of that within
a very short time they reached a holy place which was Masjid al Aqsa.
Then prophet Muhammad sallallahu wasallam went inside the mosque and prayed to Raka to respect
the mosque.
That prayer that he prayed is called tahiyat al masjid.
Then Jibril peace be upon him offered a glass of milk and a glass of wine to Muhammad sallallahu
wasallam as a guest.
The prophet rejected the glass of wine and instead accepted the milk.
Jibril peace be upon him became very happy and said that that was a very good decision
to accept milk and reject the wine.
Even though the prophet had just went on a journey from Mecca to the Masjid al Aqsa,
there was still another journey that was waiting for Muhammad sallallahu wasallam.
Then after they were well rested, angel Jibril and the prophet started their journey to
the sky.
When they reached the first sky, Jibril peace be upon him requested angels to open the
sky door.
Many different books use the word sky and heaven as the same thing, but many scholars
agree that the sky and the heaven are two different things.
So after they went through the first sky door, Muhammad sallallahu wasallam saw our father
of mankind, prophet Adam peace be upon him.
They were both very happy and gave salam to one another.
Muhammad sallallahu wasallam saw that all of the good people's soul were on the side
of Adam peace be upon him and all the bad people's soul were on his other side.
So Muhammad sallallahu wasallam became very sad and started to cry.
Muhammad sallallahu wasallam and angel Jibril peace be upon them continued on with their
journey to the second sky.
Jibril peace be upon him again requested the door angels to open the gate.
After entering the second sky, Muhammad sallallahu wasallam saw two prophets, Isa or in English
Jesus and Yahya peace be upon them.
They all gave salam to one another as soon as they met.
Then Muhammad sallallahu wasallam and Jibril peace be upon them moved their journey up
to the third sky.
After the third sky gate opened, Muhammad sallallahu wasallam met the most beautiful
and handsome prophet in the world which was use of peace be upon him.
But the fourth sky prophet Muhammad sallallahu wasallam met prophet Idris peace be upon him.
Then in the fifth sky the prophet met Haroon peace be upon him and then after that the
great prophet Musa peace be upon him on the sixth sky.
When he saw prophet Muhammad sallallahu wasallam, Musa peace be upon him started to cry that
he had less followers in the heaven and he also said that Muhammad sallallahu wasallam
would have more followers in the heaven.
When Muhammad sallallahu wasallam reached the seventh sky, he saw prophet Ibrahim peace
be upon him.
He was rest next to the Baitul Mu'mur mosque which was located directly on top of the Kaaba.
But every day only 70,000 angels are allowed to pray in that mosque and that is a chance
that they only get once in their lifetime.
How does the Baitul Mu'mur mosque look like?
According to some scholars, Baitul Mu'mur looks just like the Kaaba.
After meeting prophet Ibrahim peace be upon him, angel Jibrael and Muhammad sallallahu
wasallam both went to the highest point of limit of all creation and then they saw Sidra
which was the biggest tree in paradise.
Its size of its fruits and leaves were extremely big.
It was also covered by golden butterflies.
It was so beautiful that no one could ever explain it.
Over there Muhammad sallallahu wasallam saw angel Jibrael peace be upon him in his real
form and shape.
He was very big and the prophet saw that the angel Jibrael had 600 wings.
At that point Allah s.w.t. talked to Muhammad sallallahu wasallam.
According to some scholars, angel Jibrael peace be upon him stopped there and Muhammad
sallallahu wasallam went beyond the tree to talk to Allah s.w.t.
But Allah s.w.t. knows the best.
Did Muhammad sallallahu wasallam see Allah s.w.t. with his own eyes?
No Muhammad sallallahu wasallam did not see Allah s.w.t.
No human eye can ever see Allah s.w.t.
Allah s.w.t. talked to him like Musa peace be upon him and gave him a special message to
the muslims.
Allah s.w.t. and Muhammad sallallahu wasallam were there talking about the daily prayer.
At first the daily prayer was 50 times a day.
After receiving Allah s.w.t. message, Muhammad and Jibrael peace be upon them started their
journey to come back to the earth.
On their way Musa peace be upon him stopped them and wanted to know what that special
message was.
When Musa peace be upon him knew about 50 times daily prayer, he advised Muhammad s.w.t.
to go back to Allah s.w.t. and request to have a less number of daily prayers.
Muhammad s.w.t. did not know what to do.
Then he turned to Jibrael peace be upon him for his advice.
Jibrael peace be upon him told Muhammad s.w.t. that he could go back and request for less
prayers.
So then he went back to the sidratul muntaha and requested Allah s.w.t. for less number
of prayers.
Allah s.w.t. accepted his request and lowered it to 10 times of daily prayer.
And then the prophet started their journey back to Makkah again.
Again Musa peace be upon him stopped them and advised him to request Allah s.w.t. to have
less number of daily prayers.
Muhammad s.w.t. went back again and requested Allah s.w.t. for less number of prayers.
This time as a gift to Muslims Allah s.w.t. gave only 5 times of a daily prayer.
Again on the way Musa peace be upon him stopped them and advised for less.
Musa peace be upon him told that Allah s.w.t. wanted his people to do less but still his
people did not do their duties.
At that point Muhammad s.w.t. did not feel comfortable to go back again and ask for less
daily prayers.
Suddenly the prophets could hear Allah s.w.t. voice.
And then Allah s.w.t. told them that it was an easy order to follow for Muslims.
Allah s.w.t. also said that if we pray our 5 times daily prayer Allah s.w.t. will give
us the same reward as praying 50 times a day and his order was final.
In the journey of the Mar'aj Jibrail peace be upon him showed hell and heaven to Muhammad
s.w.t.
Scholars have different opinions about that but Allah s.w.t. knows the best.
Jibrail peace be upon him also showed the most beautiful qawthar river and stream which
Allah s.w.t. gave Muhammad s.w.t. as a gift after his youngest son Abdullah had died.
On his journey he also saw the angel named Malik without a smile.
He was the angel who was the guard for hell.
In different hadiths we know Allah s.w.t. showed some examples of the bad people's punishments.
Muhammad s.w.t. once again returned to the Masjid al-Aqsa before the morning prayer Fajr
time.
All of the prophets came and got together for the first mandatory prayer of the day which
was Fajr prayer.
That prayer was the first official prayer that was prayed in Islam after Allah s.w.t. finalized
the daily 5 times prayer.
Angel Jibrail peace be upon him asked Muhammad s.w.t. to lead the prayer and because of that
it was proof that Prophet Muhammad s.w.t. was the leader of all the prophets.
Then after the prayer Jibrail peace be upon him and Muhammad s.w.t. started their journey
back to Makkah.
On their way Muhammad s.w.t. saw a group of people who were coming to Makkah.
Muhammad and Jibrail peace be upon them returned to Makkah before sunrise.
