These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by The Teaching Company.
The Great Courses cover a broad array of university level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in just weeks.
Browse our catalog or website and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just 30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lecturers are university professors carefully selected by The Teaching Company and its customers for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
These lectures are titled The Terror of History, Mystics, Paratics and Witches in the Western Tradition, Part 1.
The lecturer is Professor Theo Philo F. Ruiz.
Professor Ruiz is a professor of history at the University of California at Los Angeles.
A student of Joseph R. Strayer, Dr. Ruiz received his PhD from Princeton University in 1974.
Prior to taking his post at UCLA, he held teaching positions at Brooklyn College, the City University of New York Graduate Center,
the University of Michigan, the School of Advanced Studies and Social Sciences in Paris and at Princeton University as the 250th anniversary visiting professor for distinguished teaching.
Professor Ruiz has been the recipient of fellowships from the National Endowment for the Humanities, the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation,
the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton and the American Council of Learned Societies.
Dr. Ruiz has published six books and over 40 articles in national and international scholarly journals, plus over 100 reviews and smaller articles.
His Crisis and Continuity, Land and Town in Late Medieval Castile, was rewarded the Premio Del Rey Prize by the American Historical Association.
In 1994 to 1995, he was selected as one of four outstanding teachers of the year in the United States by the Carnegie Foundation.
Professor Ruiz prepared the course guide that comes with these tapes.
The course guide includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a glossary, a timeline, biographical notes and a bibliography.
To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to follow along with the outlines or review them before or after each lecture.
Lecture 1 The Terror of History
Welcome to the first lecture of the Terror of History.
This is a series of 24 lectures entitled The Terror of History, in which we will look at the history of mysticism, heresy, apocalyptic movements and the witch craze from a period between 1,000 and 1,700.
This is a course that I have taught for almost 28 years.
My name is Teofilo F. Ruiz. All my friends call me Teo.
My name being a very difficult one, a Greek name called Zeus Philos, Love of God.
All my friends call me Teo, as I said, which means God, and please feel free to address me as such if you write or email me.
I would be delighted to answer any of your questions or to hear any of your comments or suggestions.
If you write to me to the Department of History at UCLA 6265 Bunch Hall, B-U-N-C-H-E, Los Angeles, California, 9 0095 or email at tfruizruizathistory.ucla.edu.
We are going to this course that really is composed of three mini-courses, one dealing with the history of mysticism, another one dealing with the history of heresy and apocalyptic movements in Europe, in Western Europe,
and the third one, an examination of the witch craze, a period between the end of the 15th century and the end of the 17th century in which people in Europe and in the New World were persecuted, brought to trial and executed because they were believed to be witches.
So in a sense we are going to try to link together these three very different courses.
I want to point out to you that this is a course about the history of these movements and not about religion.
I will deal with religious issues and so on, but I will do so from a kind of critical perspective of a historian, not so much what the mystics wrote and what is the nature and character of the mystical experience,
although I will do some of that, but essentially I am concerned with the way in which this mystical experience or these heretical movements or these apocalyptic movements shape the history of a period and indeed add it and reflect the mentality of the age.
I think we should keep that in mind as we go through this material.
I also want to point out that this course also in a sense combines elements of high culture or the history of high culture.
Mysticism is, as we say, a cultural product of those who read and write and who are able to convey their ideas whereas some of the apocalyptic movements, some of the elements of the witch craze are part of popular culture.
And one of my aims in this class is to see how high culture and popular culture are connected, what is the circularity between one and the other, between the kind of esoteric knowledge on the one hand and the kind of popular beliefs on the other.
Having said that, I would like to begin with some stories, some vignettes which are somewhat emblematic of the kind of material that we are going to examine here and some of them are personal in nature.
Let me begin with the beginning of a great collection of anthropological data and folklore written by James Fraser in the early 20th century.
It's a golden book and it begins with an account of rituals that were performed in a grove in a lake north of Rome, the grove and lake of Nemi.
And Fraser tells us the story of this grove, this lake, the mirror of Diana, it was called, that was dedicated to Diana, and there a priest presided over the cults and rituals of the place.
This priest was a king of the woods, and it was very peculiar and unique to antiquity, the manner in which this priest was selected.
This priest was selected by slaying the previous priest, so that in order to become a priest, you could be running away from justice, you arrive at the lake, and if you can overcome and kill the man who is in charge of these procedures and these rituals,
you yourself become the new king, become the new king of the woods, the new priest.
You have to spend your day in vigilance because if you are caught on a wears or asleep, you will be slain by the man who is going to succeed.
The story of the lake of Nemi, which is indeed very ancient, touches peculiarly on some of the themes of this course because it is about the king who must die and the king who is resurrected, about a god who dies and is resurrected.
Let me tell you another story, and this is a personal one.
In 1972, I was doing research in Spain, in the city of Burgos, I was working in the Cathedral Archives in the city, and late April, after I have been for many months working in this cold and dusty archives,
I went to Galicia, which is in the northwestern part of Spain. I went to visit friends there, and I lived in the city of San James of Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, for over a month.
And one weekend, some of my friends said, let us show you the countryside. And we went in a cart, three of us, we went by the coast, which is a very beautiful coast.
Galicia is an old Celtic homeland, a place of legends where Celtic life and traditions are still very much alive.
And we went by this beautiful green coast, the Atlantic Ocean on the one side, mountains on the other, and eventually we came to an old site, an old Celtic sacred site on top of a mountain known as Santa Tecla.
And we went up the mountains, and it was beginning to rain, and my friends refused to get out of the car, and they said, well, go up there and look from the top, from the summit, and see the view that you will see.
And I obeyed them, although I was very reluctant to get wet and to get out of the car, and I went up the hill from the parking lot, which was just beneath, and I was on top of this mountain, which sits right by the ocean.
And you could see in the distance in the Atlantic the sun setting, the rain was just localized on top of this place, but in the far distance you could see the sun setting in the back, and the clouds running behind me, all the green of Galicia.
It was extraordinarily quiet, and for a moment there, for a moment which had never been replicated again, I had this extraordinary sense of peace, this extraordinary sense that I was one with the world around me.
And the desire that I had was a desire to just simply jump out into the void, jump out into this space, not because I wanted, in a sense, to commit suicide or anything like that,
but because I felt that I was one with the world. This is the kind of feelings that Freud describes in the future as an illusion or in the civilization, and it's this content, as the oceanic feeling, the way in which we connect with the larger world,
in which we lose a sense of self and connect with something larger than ourselves. The mystics call this moment an illumination.
I was astonished by this sense that I have never had before and never had had again, and I went down to the car and I did not speak to my friends, I went back to Princeton where I was doing my PhD,
the following year I returned to the same location, I collected all my friends, I asked them to wait for me while I went up the mountain by myself, and of course nothing happened, which depressed me to no end.
I am not a religious person. I am not a believer. Nonetheless, this is the kind of experience that in a sense motivated and gave life to what we are going to examine in the next six or seven lectures, which is indeed the mysticism.
Now in reading, in studying, in understanding how these things work, these type of experiences and so on, we have to be conscious of the way in which humans, from the very beginnings of time, from the leap into consciousness,
understood the world around them and understood themselves. That is to say that our leap into humanity, which is our leap into consciousness, is also marked the beginnings of history, not a written history, but a consciousness of time and of the passing of time and of our own mortality.
That which makes us human is the gift of the gods. There is a story that is told by Frederick Nietzsche in a great and evoking and beautiful book entitled The Birth of Tragedy from the Spirit of Music, and he tells a story which I always tell at the beginning of every one of my classes,
and the story is a very simple one, that there is a satyr called Silenus, who frequents the table of the gods, and frequenting the table of the gods, he knows the secret of the gods, and he chairs the nectar and the ambrosia in Olympus,
and kind miners, the ruler of Crete, continuously pursue him, because he wants to know from the satyr, from this entity, what is the best gift that the gods could give man, and when I tell this story in my classes and I ask the students, what will be the best gift that the gods could give you?
My students always come up with extraordinary answers like immortality, or to get an A in this class, or should I be rich or be powerful, or all kinds of strange questions, all of which I dismiss immediately, and they never, never really come with the right answer.
And the right answer is the King Minus turning, no, Silenus turning to King Minus and saying, you wretched man, the best gift that the gods could give man is never to be born, to which Nietzsche added, and if you are born to die at an early age.
And that is the quantity of existence, the realizations which the Greeks saw first, which the Greeks understood first, that our lives are lives which continuously hang at the edge of doom, that when you look outside the window, you don't see these bricks, you see nothing, that there is no meaning, and that culture is essentially the construction of meaning.
And how we construct this meaning, that history, that is to say, that process in which we live, in the context of which we live, is a terrifying experience, and that humans have spent all of our collective history either escaping from, or in a sense creating a world in which you can escape from history.
Therefore, the Greeks construct a civilization which is based upon measure, nothing in excess.
Why? Because the Greeks were rational? Because the Greeks believe in measure? Because the Greeks believe in order? No, because they knew in the hearts of hearts that the world was all about disorder, was all about emptiness.
And therefore they created a world which we call today classical because of its beauty, and there are ways in which we, in a sense, flee and escape the terror of history.
The terror of history is that, is that awareness, not only of the untold cruelties of our life on earth, of the ephemeral nature of our lives, of our emotions, of the cultural constructions we make.
And therefore we deal with this terror, with the idea that tomorrow, in my old end, with the awareness of death, by constructing culture, or in this particular case, by seeking the transcendental, in mystical experiences, or waiting for the coming of the millennium, and the end of history, and the end of that terror.
Or by shifting the burdens of that terror into other people, by making and constructing otherness, by constructing scapegoats, in this case witches, or Jews, or lepers whom we can, in a sense, blame for the terrible difficulties of our daily existence from the catastrophes of history.
In that sense, it is a reminder of the way to read this history, that is to say, the methodologies in which to read this history is the kind of critical postmodern methodologies first presented by Walter Benjamin, that the constructions of cultures, that the codes of cultures, that the products of cultures are a civilization, are also the products of barbarity,
that what we call civilized, it is also intimately linked with acts of cruelty and barbarity, and that the angel of history which Walter Benjamin describes to us as this angel that stands in a promontory, being propelled into the future and seen in front of him, the piling up of the debris of history, the catastrophes of history, the terror of history,
is that which we, in ways of escaping history, call also progress.
So in a sense, in looking at this, in looking at mysticism, heresy, and wishcraft, what we are doing is essentially to look at the underside of those records of civilization, and to see the mystic in some sense, not only as someone who is deeply connected and embedded in his own culture,
but someone who is also, in a sense, escaping the awful reality of his and her world, and who is, by doing so, empowering himself or herself, and by looking at heresies or apocalyptic movements, what we are also looking at ways in which people, in a sense, stand out of history, escape from it,
and search for ways in which they can contain the progress of time in which they can reach a point, the millennium, Perusia, paradise, where time no longer flows with all the changes that time brings with it.
This is not a way in which we can see the past through kind of rosy, tinted glasses, but rather to look at it in the way in which the people who experience this phenomenon, the people who experience this terror, deal with it.
Now, in dealing with this, in dealing with this, we also have to deal with it by reconstructing this world, the world that I am going to try to reconstruct for you in the next 24 lectures, by reconstructing this world, not by what people have written about,
but by what the people who live these experiences wrote themselves. That is to say, that if we are going to understand this world, this world between 1,000 and 1,700, we have to do so by reading the sources, by reading the primary evidence,
by reading what mystics wrote about their experiences and by taking them seriously. The question is not whether I believe that the mystical experiences are real or not.
What is important in this inquiry here, which you and I are undertaking together, is that the mystics who wrote this did believe so, and that many people, many of the contemporaries, believe it as well.
And that is, I think, what historically is important. We must also be aware that in looking at this evidence, at these primary sources, all this evidence, all this written evidence is, in many respects, prejudice and bias,
because all knowledge and all culture is mediated by writing. Meaning by this, but what we have in here, these records of civilization, as Walter Benjamin describes them, are the records of an elite, of a small elite at the top who knew how to read and write,
and that we do not hear, we do not hear well, or we do not hear correctly the voices of those at the bottom. And when we hear those voices, we hear them only as mediated by the act of writing, by the culture of the elite.
And that part and parcel of this class, of this series of lectures, is a relationship between those on top and those on the bottom, and the movement, the circularity between high and popular culture.
And we are going to see this most evidently when we study the witch craze, and we are going to see that the description of witches is a learner discourse, is a way in which those on top represented for us the lives and beliefs of those at the bottom,
and that we have essentially no way, or at least not fully a way of reaching out and tapping into the real culture of the populace, because we only see it mediated by the elite. We see what they want us to see, and nothing more.
And from time to time we hear echoes, which give us a sense of what that life might have been, what the lives of those at the bottom might have been, what the true sets of beliefs might have been, and through archaeology and all the means we can come somewhat to reconstruct the way in which these lives were bought, but not fully.
So please remember that as we progress through these 24 lectures, that we only see these things through a glass, darkly, and nothing more.
So essentially we must read these primary sources, which I will quote for you abundantly through the next 24 lectures.
We should look at them, we should examine them with a critical eye. We must always think of them as something that has to be read critically, that we have to submit these things to a thick analysis.
Please remember that as we go along. And then of course we must also remember that we are all, as it were, sharers in the kinds of experiences which these people who lived 500 or 1000 years ago experienced,
that we all, as Westerners, and this is a peculiar Western experience, as Westerners share in a series of cultural constructs which are part of our inheritance, which are part of what makes us.
I speak here specifically of the extraordinary conflict in the Western tradition between the Apollonian elements of our beings and the Dionysian ones.
And for that we have to go back not only to ancient Greece, but also to Nietzsche, again to the birth of tragedy.
Nietzsche argued in the birth of tragedy that the Greeks who were the first ones to understand tragedy and to understand vividly the tragedy of humankind were always caught between these two forces.
On the one hand, as part of our cultural and intellectual heritage, there is the Apollonian, the sense and desire and the need for order.
We want the world of order. Poetry and Apollos, the God of poetry, is in fact emblematic of that need for order and of the emphasis on the eye and on reason.
Nothing in excess, it says, on top of the oracle at Delphi, know thyself, thyself not yourselves, that is to say know the self, so the sense of uniqueness of the individual.
That is the presiding and most powerful of all our Western traditions.
That's one. The other one is of course the Dionysian, the need that we need sometimes to get out of ourselves, to obliterate the self and become one with the world, to join in a community, all together in one.
Some of the same sense, some of what Freud calls the oceanic feeling, that which is the very roots of religion, the idea that there is something outside yourself, outside the eye which joins together into a kind of community.
In the Dionysian mysteries this is achieved through intoxication. That's what intoxication does for us.
It takes us out of ourselves. That's what it does. It essentially erases and obliterates the boundaries of the eye and makes you one with the rest of us.
That's when children begin to gyrate of when, what is it called, the dervishes in Turkey begin to gyrate completely.
What you do is essentially lose a sense of the self and you are fragmented into the world.
The West faced this once, that is to say this issue, this quandary, this bifurcation of the road between the Apollonian and the Dionysian.
It faced so when Hindu ideas and philosophies came to the West by way of Parmenides and it rejected them and it embraced the sense of self, the sense of the eye.
So in many respects this is something that goes against the background of our discussion of mysticism and indeed of some of the heretical and magical traditions that are going to come into the West in the 16th century and so on.
How do we in fact deal with the hostility of the world with the terror of existence?
Hoisinga in a great, great work entitled The Autumn of the Middle Ages, which was sold in the United States under the title of the waning of the Middle Ages.
Speaking of the great terror which medieval men and women faced at the end of the Middle Ages, but which is applicable here to the entire period and to the entire history of mankind,
we spoke of the three ways in which we deal with this terror.
We face this terror, we face these anxieties provoked by the catastrophes of history, by the anxieties of daily living, by the ephemerality of our lives, by the fact that we are mortal and there are three ways which we deal with this.
One of them of course is religion.
What is religion?
We know the history of religions in the West and we know that a great deal of the religions of the West are really culturally specific.
They are very different altogether from all the religious traditions or from all the ways of understanding and seeing the world.
But in the West there is that particular moment in which magic becomes religion.
Magic is the way in which you try to control nature and try to keep the terror of history at bay by controlling certain magical formulas, by certain amulets and talismans.
But it doesn't work and we know it doesn't work.
It might work today, it might work tomorrow, but it will not work all the time.
So essentially primitive man faced with the insecurity of the world creates religion.
And religion is that, is the acceptance of the things as they are and the shifting of the responsibility of that to God.
Whatever happens as cruel and as inconceivable and as unacceptable as it may be, it is God's wishes and therefore you accept it.
And religion works and it has worked for many centuries because it is a way in which you have shifted the responsibilities of the historical moment and historical lives
to a supernatural entity who is now responsible.
And this supernatural entity in the Western tradition is a patriarchal figure, is a father who takes care of you as Freud explains and takes care of you and solve all your problems.
And so in many respects the first answer to the problems of mankind and to the agonies of the terror of history is religion and it works.
And when we look at the mystics and when we look at the heresy and when we look at millenarian movements we see how well it works and the kind of empowering that the surrendering to God brings to those who do so.
But clearly not everyone is capable of doing this, not everyone will accept this answer.
And so some people will search for an answer to history, will escape from history by embracing the material world.
I tell my students tongue in cheek that when they are depressed and they don't know how to do, well there is always a solution.
Get your parents credit card and go and shop.
And you shop and you go to the mall and you buy yourself four more addresses because after all you have nothing to wear and four more shoes because you have nothing to wear on your shoes, on your legs and your feet anymore.
And then you bring that home and for a little while you have escaped the agonies of daily existence.
Of course there is also an ephemeral answer because it will not last because tomorrow you will need to go to the mall again and your credit card might run out.
So first religion, second embracing the material world, being intoxicated, escaping through it to pleasure, to the sense of giving yourself to the pleasures of the world and putting and keeping the terror at bay.
And then finally the embracing of the aesthetic answer, that is to say those who neither accept religion or the kind of escaping into hedonism and who seek aesthetic pleasure, who seek beauty and knowledge as a way in a sense to make sense of the world, to construct a world of their own.
Isn't this what it is all about? That is to say that the escaping of history is essentially the making of meaning.
And what we are going to do in the next 23 lectures is to see how Europeans between 1,000 and 1,700 make meaning of the lives and of the world around them. Thank you.
