Lecture 7 Jewish Mysticism
Welcome to Lecture 7 in the series of lectures on the Terror of History.
This in the previous lecture we look at the lives of St. Francis and very briefly at the
life of Dante and try to contextualize the mysticism within a historical, political,
economic, social context and changes in the liturgy.
In this lecture in Lecture 7 we change our, we say direction, we make a rather important
shift because what I want to do in this lecture is to examine some forms of Jewish mysticism
to indicate the differences between Jewish and Christian mysticism and to discuss the
importance of some of these mystical traditions later in the Renaissance.
And I want to begin this or to preface this by saying that this is an exceedingly complex
and difficult topic.
And it is about this time in my courses when students begin to mourn in class and complain
bitterly about mystics and they want to move on to millenarian movements and especially
to the witches.
So please don't give up, the witches are coming.
So they will be here with us.
But this is an important topic in the cultural history of the West and it also provides us
with a very vivid contrast between Christian and Jewish mysticism.
And let me begin with a quote from the Bible which in a sense encapsules what Jewish mysticism
is and the distance between God and man.
This is from Isaiah 55, verses 7 and 9, let the wicked forsake his way and the man of
inequity his thoughts, let him return to Javay to God and he will have compassion upon him
and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon for my thoughts are not your thoughts and
your ways are not my ways, said Javay, for as the heavens are higher than your ways,
so are my ways higher than your ways, are my thoughts higher than your thoughts.
Here what you have is the complete and total separation between the Godhead and mankind.
It is an unbridgeable space between the two and in that sense we already have an idea
of how Jewish mysticism differs from Christian mysticism in that essentially the way of
bridging this space between the Godhead and man does not exist.
I also want to point out that there are varieties of Jewish mysticism and that most Jewish mysticism
is concerned specifically with the first book of Genesis and with the first chapter
of the book of Ezekiel and specifically with the vision of the throne of God as represented
in a chariot, in a flaming chariot which is a kind of emanation and representation of
God, not God itself or himself or herself, but the representation of God in this kind
of emanation.
For the vision of Ezekiel, the Merkava as it is called, the vision of the sacred chariot,
the throne of God is and plays an important role in the construction of a mystical vision.
I am not going to discuss Merkava mysticism here, my interest here is to discuss one specific
text or at least a specific part of one significant text and that text is called, is entitled
the Sohar, it has a very long Hebrew title but the Sohar is the way in which it is known
which means the book of splendor and it's a significant text, it's the most important
Kabbalistic text ever written but it is also one of the most controversial texts because
there is a very important historiographical controversy on the authorship and the dating
of this text.
The greatest scholar on this themes is a German Jewish scholar who left Germany for
Palestine and who wrote copies, numbers of books on Kabbalah, on Jewish mysticism and
on Shabbat-e-Sevii, a topic that we will explore later on when we look at Jewish messianism.
The name of this author, this scholar who has now been dead for a long while is Gershom
Sholom and Sholom argues that the Sohar is a Kabbalistic text that dates back to 1285
or around 1285 and that it was written in Norton Castile in the Iberian Peninsula by
a rabbi named Moses of Leon who in writing this text insisted as he was very common throughout
the Middle Ages that the text dated back to great antiquity and that it had been written
in Palestine and Sholom by a philological analysis but also by a topographical analysis
argues that this is not possible, that whoever wrote this text did not know Palestine, that
the Palestine that is created in this text is a Palestine taken from books but not from
reality and that there are Hebrew words that are used in the text which could not have
been used in the world before the common era that in fact though the book itself encompassed
and has within it a good number of ideas that dated back to great antiquity to a very ancient
past the book has been composed and put together in the late 13th century by Moses of Leon
and is put together in the late 13th century by Moses of Leon because the late 13th century
is a period of great apocalyptic agitation in the kingdom of Castile the Jews have we
are facing in the late 13th century especially in the kingdom of Castile all kinds of reverses
the position has become very vulnerable that economic and social status was being brought
increasingly on their attack by Christians there is a need for as it were redemption
a word that will appear in this text continuously teshubah redemption and moreover that they
have been around this period some important conversions of Jews to Christianity and that
they have entered into great polemics with the Jews these newly converted Christians
have entered into important polemics one of them was a man named Abner of Burgos who writes a
book entitled the war of the Lords which is a betrothalic attack against Judaism and the Jews
I want to point out here because in the outline I mentioned this that Sholim also argues that Jewish
mysticism is different from Christian mysticism and that the so hard which is in fact the great
Kabbalistic mystical texts is in that Jewish mysticism is less feminine than Christian mysticism
that there is no marriage of the soul with God we have and in fact Christians borrow continuously
from the epitalamic tradition of the song of songs of the bride and the groom of the marriage
which is interpreted in Christianity as a sacred marriage of a marriage of the female
soul of the mystic to the male element of the godhead but in Jewish mysticism though in the
literature we might find examples of this there is none of this there is none of this feminization
of the soul of the mystic more over and that is obvious there is no Christocentric mysticism
in Judaism Christ does not play any role in this mysticism and third what I have said before
that there is this clear cut separation between one and the other so what is the so hard what is
the so hard all about what is this text all about may I point out to you that orthodox Jews are not
allowed to read the so hard until they are after over the age of 40 even though in LA where I live
now there are Kabbalistic clubs in which all kinds of Hollywood types go to learn about Kabbalah but
in the orthodox setting women are not allowed to read or study Kabbalah and you have to be over 40
to do so which means that this is a very esoteric doctrine open only to the very few and a study
over a whole lifetime by a very few people who are engaged in this process this process has an end
and I will talk about what is the end of this process because we will find it again later on
what is the so hard telling us the so hard argues that in the Torah in the first five books of what
we call the Old Testament the first five books of the Bible is all the lie that God has given to
Israel and more than that that in Sinai as the Jews follow the road to the holy land to the
promised land out of the bitter exile in Egypt the Hebrews were given the actual presence of God
that in Sinai the Jewish people so the very presence of God that is to say that they wear
they are shown all the glory of God itself it is believed among orthodox Jews that 40 days before
you are born your soul goes to Sinai to really see the presence of God that there is a linkage between
the showing of God in his glory in Sinai and the Hebrew people there God gave to the Jews
the commandments to Moses the first tables of the commandments come from the tree of life
they are all positive they are all positive they are about positive things they are written
directly by God but when Moses brings them down to the people what does he find he find the Hebrews
worshipping the golden calf and so the first table of commandment is broken and a new table
is written now and this table now has to be carved by poor Moses because of the
transgression of his people and this second tables come from the tree of good and evil
and they contain positive and negative commandments they are in many respects a social code
is about the things you ought not to do or the things that you ought to do that you seldom do
honor thy father and thy mother what should be told to do that if it is not because we don't do it
often enough don't covet your neighbor's wife don't commit adultery do not kill all essentially
negative commandments so that essentially what we have here is a series of traditions
that emanate oral and written law the Torah the Mishnah the Talmud and all that are in a sense
originate in the sights and sounds in the lights and sounds of God showing himself or herself or
itself to his its her people in Sinai and therefore we have very different ways in which we can read
this text this text that contain the light and sounds of Sinai there are different ways of reading
the text there are different manners of interpreting this text one is Peshah and I refer you to the
outline for the spelling of many of these things which is the simple interpretation that is to say
you read the text and you read it as it is written you have a simple direct interpretation of the text
the second one is remes allusion which is the many different meanings hidden in the text itself
the allusions of the text the kind of interpretations of the text that you can be interested in the
third one is the rush which is a homilitic use of a sacred text the way in which you use this
text for teaching for example in which you explain it for the matter for didactic purposes
and the last and the most important one is sought S.O.D which is the mystery hidden behind the words
please understand that Hebrew is for the orthodox a sacred language and that for the Cavalys
every word every letter every number has a magical mysterious sacred meaning behind it and as we
shall see afterwards Cavalys will pay a great deal of attention to the combination of certain
Hebrew letters so this is what we have here S.O.D is mystery and Cavala and the Soha is
concerned with S.O.D with the ways in which you can read certain texts and interpret them and the
mysteries behind the text and what the Soha tells us is about the hierarchy of the emanations of God
if God is incomprehensible if God is beyond our understanding what is about God that we see and
know the Soha will say that there are 10 emanations of God which are called the Sephiroth the Sephiroth
is 10 emanations of God they are arranged hierarchically from God to man as a bridge between
the Godhead and humanity this Sephiroth are 10 each of them by itself contains all the essence of
God all of them together are also the entirety of God and they are as follow please you know follow
me on this difficult road the first one the first one is called Keter or the crown it is and I quote
the uncreated and infinite all reality of God it has no aspects it cannot be comprehended
there is nothing outside the first Sephiroth of outside Keter outside the crown it is eternally
mysterious it is divine consciousness is the consciousness of God the second one is called
Hukma wisdom it is the wisdom of God it is the first actual divine emanation Keter stands almost
for God and Hukma is the first divine emanation of God it issues and I quote here from the luminous
nothingness of Keter it is the first active cause it is also very Aristotelian it is in many respects
that which moves the world without itself being moved is that which knows remember this Keter is
divine consciousness Hukma is that which knows is being the third one is Bina intelligence that
which is known we have here a kind of ontological construction of the mind of God which in many
ways resembles some of the kind of things that Espinoza will say in the 17th century Natura Naturans
Natura Naturana Nature creating nature being created all these three Keter Hukma and Bina
form something called the Arik and pinned the heavens of heavens the three things in which all
the possibilities of creation are put together and then from this tree emerged the other seven
Sefirath, which are the Sefirath of creation, of creation. The first one of this one, which
is number four, as you come down, one, two, three, four, is Hesed, which is the first
feature in God's face, God's love, sacred happiness, God's grace. The number five is
din, judgment. The number six is Sefirath, God's beauty. Number seven, Sefirah Nitzah,
divine victory. And the male element. Number eight, heart, glory, or majesty.
Number nine, Yesot, which is justice. And number ten, Markov, the feminine principle,
the kingdom. Now, what is this all about? This 10 Sefirath are essentially organized in a way
which corresponds to the following. The Arikhanpin, the first three
Sefirath are beyond man's comprehension. The next seven are the seventh
Sefirath of creation. And they have, and you could see how the number seven is
again repeated again and again and again. Please think of the importance of numbers.
Ten, you need ten Jews to make a minion. It is essentially, you cannot have a praying circle
unless you have the ten Jews to pray. Seven is the days of creation. Seven Sefirath of creation
correspond to the seven heavens. The seven heavens have an inverse world, which is the seven earth.
This is so hard, postulates the idea that they are seven earth created. Ours is the last one.
There is a sort of on form earth below us. In between our seven earth and our seven heavens,
there are seven earthly paradises, seven hells. So in a sense, you have this repetition of sevens.
May I point out to you that the divine comedy is built upon the same model, which we are really
talking here is about a Ptolemaic model of a con inverted, and you move back and forth between
the two. And if you look at ways in which a divine comedy, that is to say, Hel Pugatori and
Heaven are presented, you could see that it follows the same pattern and so on. So you have
essentially seven days of creation, the seven ages of man. At the end of the great seventh,
there will be the great Jubilee when humanity returns to God. At the age, at the end of the
great Sabbath, the great Jubilee. What is the role of man here? Which is why Kabbalah would be so
fascinating for Renaissance humanists is that man is placed at that unique location where all the
emanations of God return to God. In some respects, man is that focal point from which the emanations
of God return to God. So in a sense is that point around which everything revolves.
I have a quote from you, because I know that this is not easy. Not yet. How is the world
created? The so hard deals also with the creation of the world. If God is everything and God is
everywhere, how is the world created? The world is created to a process which in the so hard is
called simsum, T-S-I-M-T-S-U-M, the contraction of God. The holy wand, blessed be he, withdrew his
powerful life from one part of himself and left the void to serve as a place for cosmic expansion.
This is a quote from Isaac Luria, a famous Kabbalah of the 15th century. So in a sense,
God-withdraw creates a space and the world of matter is created and man is created in this world
of matter to serve as it were as a bridge between God and God itself. Why? And this is where the
purpose of Kabbalah is all about. I can go on here for a long time explaining some of this very
difficult and intricate things, but I know very well that in my classes by this time,
the students are beginning to tune out completely. So please bear with me. Because the purpose of
Kabbalah and of this small handful of Jewish mystics, whom we call Kavelis, of this esoteric doctrine,
the purpose of this is essentially to return not just themselves, but the world as a hold to God.
Essentially, what we're really talking about here is the separation of man from God,
the alienation of man from God. How do you return the world to God? You returned the world to God
through teshubah, through repentance. Great is teshubah, says the Talmud, for it heals the world.
Great is repentance, for it reaches the throne of glory. Great is conversion,
for it brings about redemption. Don't think for a second that this suggests words
without meaning, told here in a kind of a lecture. They have historical significance then in the 13th
century as they do today. If you visit Brooklyn and you read some of the things that the Lubavitches
put out all the time, they are telling you that if you do good deeds, that if you repent, that if
you engage in teshubah, in repentance, eventually you can create a kind of critical mass of people
who repent so that the whole world can go back to God, so that the Messiah can come, that it
cannot come until there is this critical mass of people who repent. And so in some respects,
there is a kind of extraordinary, glorious, heroic quality to a bunch of people
living in a doomed place in Castile in the late 13th century, attempting through the minds and
through the heart to create the conditions in which they can return to God. And that they do
not give it on this and that they dedicate their lives to these studies and that it so hard includes
and has within it the kinds of formulas which allows you to enter into this redemptive stage.
One of them, of course, is the contemplation and the repetition of the shema, that kind of
formulaic phrase which is repeated every Shabbat night, here all Israel, the Lord is God,
the Lord is one, that repetition completely in which you pronounce in Hebrew in the sacred language
which brings man back to God. When man contemplates the shema and concentrates on it with all his heart,
with all his soul and with all his might, the shachinah, so says the Kabbalah, descends into him
and unites him with God, then all aspects of reality from the highest to the lowest,
from the infinite to the end of creations are united. The shema has been transformed
into a single word, a single name, a single reality. It had the one so that you could hear
these things formulaic recitations being done all the time. The extraordinary thing about the so hard
and Kabbalah is that it transcends a narrow group of people in Norten Castile.
It crosses over by the late 13th century, within years of the writing of the so hard.
By the early 14th century, there are Christian thinkers and Christian mystics reading the so hard,
translating it. Kabbalahs populate the entire world of the Renaissance. In the 15th century,
the greatest document of the Italian Renaissance, which is Pico della Mirandola oration on the dignity
of man, begins with a preface in which he mentions the Kabbalah as giving man this extraordinary
dignity of man being in the image and likeness of God and occupying a unique place, that they are
Christian Kabbalists who become involved not only in the mysticism of the Kabbalah, but in the
importance of numbers and letters that Kabbalists come to Italy, not only in the 15th century, but
after the expulsion from Spain, from Separat, and that they come and become an important component
of the cultural transformations of Europe, that they teach Hebrew to all these Italian humanists
and scientists who look and search in the text, in the original language, in the sacred language
of Israel, they seek indeed the meaning of the world, the ways essentially to come face to face
with God, so that the name of Jesus as written in Hebrew letters, if you drop one, it becomes a
tetragram, the sacred and unpronounceable name of God, a way, a magical way, a mystical way
to reach into the heart of divinity. Thank you.
