Recently, a contest was launched for those interested in making physics and or consciousness
explainer videos.
It's essentially the physics-slash-consciousness version of three blue-one-browns contest,
and Brilliant has come on board to divvy 5,000 USD equally among the top five.
The details are linked below.
If you'd like to submit your understanding or explanation of some CTMU concept or how
Bernardo's analytical idealism works, then feel free.
Chris Langan is an autodidact who has the highest reported IQ in America.
And he's conceived of an extremely inventive theory of everything based in language or
meta-language and logic or meta-logic called the Cognitive Theoretic Model of the Universe
or the CTMU for short.
The link to Chris's CTMU YouTube channel as well as other links are in the description.
Bernardo Castro is the Executive Director of the Ascension Foundation.
Bernardo is one of the most cogent champions of metaphysical idealism, that is the notion
that reality is essentially mental, and he puts this forward with analytical precision.
The link to Bernardo's YouTube page and other links are in the description as well.
In this podcast, Bernardo and Chris both expound on their views on consciousness, on
computation, and whether materialism or idealism is most coherent.
My name's Kurt Jaimungal.
I'm a Torontonian filmmaker with a background in mathematical physics dedicated to the explication
of the variegated terrain of theories of everything, that is, primarily from a physics
perspective, but as well as exploring the possible connection consciousness has to the
fundamental laws of nature, provided these laws exist at all and are knowable to us.
If you'd like to hear more podcasts like these, then do consider going to Patreon.com
slash Kurt Jaimungal and supporting with whatever you can, as support from the patrons and
the sponsors are the only reason I'm able to do this full time.
So thank you, and now thanks to the sponsors, the first of which is Brilliant.
Brilliant is a place to learn math, science, and engineering through bite-sized interactive
learning experiences.
If you're interested in theories of everything from a physics perspective, then you've likely
heard of constructor theory, which is a toe that's heavily predicated in information theory.
So I decided to take Brilliant's course on random variable distributions and knowledge
slash uncertainty.
And after taking that course, I can finally see why the formula for entropy is defined
the way that it is.
It's actually an extremely natural formula.
You can also learn group theory.
If you're interested in the standard model, then you'll need to know what you won cross
S U two cross S U three is visit brilliant.org slash toe to get 20% off the annual subscription.
I recommend that you don't stop before four lessons.
Keep pushing until you've done at least four.
And I think you'll be greatly surprised at the ease at which you can now comprehend
subjects.
You previously had a difficult time grokking.
The second sponsor is Nord VPN and the third is manscaped.
You'll be hearing much more about them later.
They're both joining us for the first time on toe.
So I'm extremely grateful to them.
Thank you and enjoy this Theo Locution with Bernardo Castro and Chris Langen.
Nice to meet you, Chris.
Nice to meet you too, Bernardo.
Plenty of people are excited for this.
By the way, this I think has the most upvotes slash comments of any pairing of any Theo Locution.
So if you have a fraction of the amount of excitement as I have, I'm super happy about
that.
People are probably when they watch this live people are like, oh my gosh, this I can't believe
this is happening.
Chris Langen and Bernardo Castro.
Okay.
Well, why don't we start just so you know, we'll talk about metaphysics, consciousness
and computation.
Those are the general themes for today.
We'll start with the substrate independence of consciousness, quote unquote.
So Lambda, I'm sure you've heard of this computer or this algorithm or this AI called Lambda.
Some people claim it's indeed conscious.
Why or why not?
And we'll start with you, Bernardo, if you don't mind.
Certainly not.
When we say something is conscious, what we normally mean is that something has private
conscious inner life that is separate from yours, from mine and from the rest of nature.
So to be conscious is to have private experience, private phenomenality, another way to put
it.
And I think we have absolutely no reason to think that a silicon mechanism has private
inner life of its own.
Is it in consciousness?
Absolutely.
Everything is in consciousness.
Everything begins unfolds and ends in a field of subjectivity that underlies all nature,
in my view.
So Lambda is in consciousness.
That doesn't mean that it is conscious in and of itself.
I think what nature is telling us empirically all the time is that private conscious inner
life correlates with, well, life, metabolism, protein folding, DNA transcription, ATP burning,
all that good stuff.
This is a far from trivial process, metabolism.
It uniquely separates biology from everything else in the universe, and it ties all biology
together despite the tremendous differences between, say, an amoeba, swimming in my toilet,
and me.
We are completely different, yet if you look down a microscope to the details of metabolism,
we are identical.
We all do protein folding, ATP burning, transcription, and all that stuff.
So nature is screaming to us that what private conscious inner life looks like is warm, moist
biology, metabolism.
And Lambda is a silicon computer.
Now can it emulate or simulate human cognitive processing very well?
Well, I have little doubt that it does, but the simulation of a phenomenon is not the
phenomenon.
I mean, I can simulate kidney function on my computer accurately down to the molecular
level, and yet my computer will not pee on my desk because a simulation of kidney function
is not kidney function.
So Lambda is simulating human intelligence.
That doesn't mean that it is conscious because a simulation is not the thing simulated.
It's a primary logical mistake that unfortunately has been rendered seemingly plausible by our
mad culture because it's being bombarded on you all the time by the media and Hollywood
movies and Netflix series that it is plausible for silicon machines to have private conscious
inner life of their own, even though we have absolutely zero rational and empirical reason
to think that that's the case.
Chris, what's your opinion on the same question?
If you want, I can reread the question.
Read the question again.
I agree with everything that Brown was saying, but go ahead and read it again for me, Chris.
So whether we basically want to know whether or not Lambda is indeed conscious.
Why or why not?
Are you talking about the Lambda calculus of the program recently in the news?
There is this AI from Google, which was much like a, like a talk, like a bot.
A talk bot, yeah.
I will probably explain it incorrectly.
So Bernardo, do you mind explaining what Lambda is?
It's a chat bot.
That's what it is.
Yeah.
And it's probably will pass the Turing test.
Well, for what that means, I mean, as Bernardo pointed out, the Turing test isn't the end
all be all.
You've still got a machine simulator, even if it stimulates very, very well and convinces
you that it's human.
Nevertheless, it is not human.
So basically you're asking me, well, the Lambda calculus is a construct.
It's a computer program, it's a mathematical construct, which exists in something that
can be likened to the syntax, the accepting syntax of something in computation theory
that's called an acceptor.
You've got acceptors and processes that transduce information.
They accept input and output from the external world and then they process it internally.
So we're talking about consciousness being the internal phase of that process.
And the idea is metaphysics, as far as metaphysics is concerned, as far as I'm concerned anyway,
in my opinion, metaphysics is about putting the metal side of your existence in contact
with the physical side.
We understand the physical side quite well, thanks to the empirical sciences and the metal
side.
We don't have such a firm grasp on Kant, you know, came up and started talking about mental
categories in terms of which we perceive phenomenal reality.
And that gives us a clue as to what we're talking about.
We are talking about something very much like accepting syntax with a computational acceptor.
Okay, the idea of putting those two things together requires something called all we
have to do is we...
It's a very simple operation, we basically say that cognition is akin to a cognitive
identity language.
It allows us to identify things.
So it's a language.
Then we say the physical universe is a manifold, a space-time manifold out there in which things
are happening.
The idea then is to connect these two things.
That takes a kind of metal language, language that spans both of these two object languages
that we have, one of which deals with values, coordinate systems and things like that.
And then you've got the other side, which is qualitative, qualitative, more attribute.
That's the mental side.
So we're uniting those two things in one metaphorable language that has to be quantized in a certain
way.
And those identity operators that I was just talking about, they're a little bit like
computational acceptors, those are the quanta, okay, they're active science.
If you look at the linguistic aspect of what I'm talking about, they are active science
in the language, but they are also the points of the manifold or the universe that contains
the content to which you refer it with the language, you know what I mean?
This is a mathematical, this is something that I did 30 years ago and I more or less
have my own way of talking about it.
Let me know if I'm losing it.
Sure.
So I have a quick question and then Bernardo, please jump in if you're unsure or you have
clarifying questions.
So you said that there's a mental world and then there's something like the physical
world, which you said is like a manifold.
Well, they're both, I'm saying they're metaphorally coupled, you can't, if you take a state, it
consists of attributes and values for the attributes, you can't take those two things
apart.
What I'm saying is they're metaphorally coupled, all right, you know, you can, you can deal
with pure attributes, but you can't do that without instances or at any rate, a cognitive
identity operator to actually perform the mental functions involved, right?
So there's no way, and as far as the values are concerned, you take an object without
attributes, that's an oxymoron, okay?
There is no object that is totally without attributes, you've pinned an attribute on
it by calling it an object, okay?
So you can't take those two things apart, there's simply no way to do it.
So this dualism between the mental and physical sides of reality, what I say is nonsense.
It takes this metaphoral approach and this metaphoral mentality, which is what I'm talking.
Bernardo, do you have any thoughts on that?
Or questions?
Chris jumped into probably more details of his theory, which I'm not acquainted with.
So if I start asking questions now, we'll probably speak for the next two hours just
for me to understand something I should have understood by reading a paper, which I haven't
read, so I'm not going to tax you with this, Chris.
Yeah, well, what I was trying to answer more or less was the idea of what metaphysics is
and how consciousness relates to metaphysics.
Okay, so what I'm saying is that metaphysics has to be this metaphoral meta language and
consciousness relates to it as a distributed property thereof.
That would be your particular usage of the word metaphysics, right?
Metaphysics, the word that has been used since the pre-socratic.
So there is a sort of a common meaning for the word in philosophy, metaphysics, that
which stands behind physics or the essence or the beingness of things as opposed to appearances
and behavior.
Precisely.
I'm saying that has to take the form of a metaphoral meta language of the mental and
physical sides of reality.
In other words, it's going to span between both of those things, building a bridge between
them.
That's the purpose of metaphysics.
And I understand that many different people have defined it in many different ways.
And the long and short of it is, although I respect people having their own ideas about
things, I don't find that especially useful.
You can go and look at everybody's definition and not come out with anything very stable
that it can work with.
So I settled on a mathematical structure that I can work with to make sense of these concepts,
metaphysical concepts.
Okay.
So how about we talk about computation?
So what does computation mean?
What is reality's relationship to computation, obviously that depends on one's definition
of reality?
Let me tell you the reason why I'm asking this question.
It's because some people think that our conscious experience is generated by an algorithmic
process.
And then some people don't think that.
So for example, Penrose famously.
And secondly, some people think reality is understood as or is equivalent to computation.
So Wolfram, for example, again, the question is, what is computation and what is its relationship
to reality, Bernardo?
In its most generic definition, computation just means changes of state.
When future states, states depend on previous states, then you have a computation.
It's the function by means of which you create future states based on past states.
That's the most generic possible definition of computation.
Some of the other things you brought up attach more qualifications to the word computation.
Wolfram considers the laws of physics to be emergent from cellular automata like computation.
In other words, local computations based on simple rules.
So now you're not saying only computation, now you're specifying more what kind of computation
is involved.
Then you have digital physics in which the idea is that the laws of physics should be
reducible to digital computations.
So you're specifying what kind of computation there are analog, there has been analog computers
in our history and less than 100 years ago.
So computation is not only digital.
So most people when they say, well, nature is a computer, usually they mean something
more than to just say computations happen because, yes, computations happen.
The state of the universe is changing.
So it's computing by definition.
There is nothing metaphysically polemical or complicated about it.
It is when you add more qualifications to what you mean, that's where it gets tricky.
When you say, for instance, that consciousness does not have a non-tick reality of its own,
but is the result of a computation and therefore epiphenomenal in some sense.
Now you're saying more than just that the universe computes.
Now you're saying not only does the universe compute, sometimes it structures its computations
in such a way that it produces an epiphenomenal result that we know as consciousness.
Now you're saying something distinct and absolutely wrong and internally contradictory and incoherent
and explanatorily powerless, but at least you are saying something.
Penrose would say that in orchestrated reduction together with the hammer-off, they would say
that it's when mass crosses a certain threshold that you have collapse and the moment of collapse
is an experience.
So they are saying a lot more than to just say the universe computes.
So if you stick to the general thing, the universe computes, I would say, of course,
because computation, generically speaking, just means that there are state transitions
and future states are based on prior states, which we know empirically is what's happening
in the universe. The universe doesn't begin at every moment independently of what the state
was before, otherwise it would be completely random, and it's not. It's predictable.
So yes, there are computations, but that's a very generic and non-polemical thing to say.
Chris, again, so the question is, what is computation and what's reality's relationship
to computation? And again, what's behind the question is some people think that the mind
has to be non-algorithmic, like Penrose. And then some people think that reality itself is
algorithmic or computational, like Wolfram.
Okay. The problem with computations with a Turing machine does. A Turing machine can do
its computations in one of two ways. It's got a recursive process, and it can either do things
deterministically, like Bernardo was talking about, something in the past happens, then you've got
causal efficacy within the machine, and then something else happens, or it can do it non-deterministically,
which means that it's making random choices. In either case, those don't describe consciousness
because those random junctures, they're disconnects. Consciousness is something that we understand
as a pretty much continuous process. Whereas if you take non-deterministic computation,
our computation, there is this disconnect there. Whereas if it's deterministic, then consciousness
is completely trivial. In other words, a deterministic process gives you no room for free will.
It doesn't allow you to make choices. It doesn't allow you to realize your will as Schopenhauer
put it. You see what I mean? So that's the main limitation of computation there. The fact that
you've got this pseudo-causal dichotomy between determinacy and randomness. Now there's a third
way to look at things, and that is called self-determinacy. And that is what occurs in the
metaphorical system, which is why instead of using computation to model this whole thing,
I use something called proto-computation. Because quantum-turing machine is a little
bit like a classical-turing machine. It's still got the tape. It's still got the
processor. That tape, by the way, that's like a typographical array in formal systems.
And this is once again inadequate. Reality is generative. It actually has a way of putting
itself together from scratch. It originates things rather than causing them. So that would be
my answer to the shortfalls of computation in modeling consciousness. If I can just
comment on something. When I said the universe certainly computes, I didn't mean to restrict it
to deterministic computation. I know that. There is indeterministic or non-deterministic
computation. Quantum computers are not deterministic, and yet they produce
precise solutions to very complicated problems, solutions that you can test and see while they
are really solutions. They do so mechanistically, right? Well, there has to be structure to
computation. We may call that mechanistic if we want. There has to be structure. Otherwise,
it's just randomness. The universe doesn't seem to be completely random. There is order. There are
regularities in nature. We model them in the form that we call the laws of physics. So there is at
least emergent order, even if it's not there from the beginning, which I think is a tough case to
make, but I'm sensitive to the possibility. There is at least emergent order. And even with a
fundamentally non-deterministic substrate at the bottom level, you can still perform meaningful
computations by playing with the emergent statistical rules. Quantum physics is indeterministic
on a case-by-case basis, but because of the law of large numbers, the statistics are very nicely
predictable. And that's what quantum computers will leverage. They will leverage that emerging
order that comes with the law of large numbers and produce very precise and accurate solutions
to problems. So computations can be meaningful and computations and non-deterministic.
Probability theory, you can't get the randomness out of it. You take all the randomness out of
probability theory and it ceases to be probability theory, then it becomes a classical mechanistic
system. In order to accommodate that, we change from classical mechanics to quantum mechanics.
We need something more than that, something that is pre-real, which John Wheeler called
pre-geometry. We need something that actually precedes mechanisms, that precedes computation,
that even precedes cognition. And that is what I refer to as what Schopenhauer referred to as will,
what I refer to as telecyst. So we would have this underlying kind of pre-mechanics,
which is teleo dynamics, which is what this metaphorical language works in terms of.
Schopenhauer, you could make a case that he was against determinism, or you could make a case
that he was a complete determinist. I am with the latter camp. I think Schopenhauer was a total
determinist. He believed in determinism. His famous statement that, yeah, you can act according
to your will, but you cannot will what you will. In other words, what you will is already determined.
So that you can follow your choices doesn't mean that there is no determinism, because your
willing is already determined. What I was referring to is the title of this magnum opus,
the word is will and representation. Basically, the will has to somehow proceed
the representation or is totally useless and trivial. I don't think that Schopenhauer
was saying something trivial. I think that he actually felt that the will had something to do
with reality above and beyond simple representation. Of course. The will was the essence of the world
for Schopenhauer. That's correct. But how can it be deterministic? How can it be deterministic
without idea or representation? If the flow and movements and dynamics of the will
fit with describable patterns, then it's not free. Actually, I like to make the case that
there is no semantic space between determinism and total randomness without structure. And we
try to fit free will somewhere in between, but I think it's incoherent. So for Schopenhauer,
the essence of the world is will. The essence of us is will. Everything is will. And by the way,
there is only one will, the one eye of the world that looks out from every creature as he wrote it.
But that will, the patterns of behavior of that will are archetypal. He even made a comparison
to Plato's ideal forms, which was his way to say the will is not arbitrary. It's not random.
It fits according to certain templates that he made. And then in the second edition of the world
as will and representation, he added something to say, well, I actually misrepresented Plato,
and then he tried to correct that. But he still insisted on the main point, which is the will
unfolds according to predictable templates. And in that sense, the unfolding of the will is not
random. Well, the way I interpret what Schopenhauer was saying, I know you're next,
but the way I interpret what he was saying was basically there is a combination of will and
representation, and it's the combination that's important. So that's what I mean. But when I
use the term metaphor, I mean, you're putting those two things together, right? So but there is
something else, there is a higher form of determinacy. I call it metacolization sometimes
that actually is determining what happens. It's not just the representation. It's not just the
will. It's the two things intended. Brief aside for today's sponsor Nord VPN, please continue
watching as doing so supports toe. For me, privacy is a large deal. I'm not a fan of the tech giants
or ISPs having such huge amount of information on my IP, my location. Nord VPN keeps my information
encrypted. So I don't have to worry about the immense data that I have that's being put out there,
being sold or even known. Nord VPN also has the added benefit that if you're jaded from the US
Netflix, for example, then you can switch to the UK Netflix, and it's as simple as a click of a
button. You know, I like referencing Dragon Ball Z and Miyazaki. Well, no need to travel to Japan
for your favorite anime when Nord VPN brings it directly to you. They even protect your phone's
internet usage all with one click of their software. Use the link Nord VPN dot com slash
theories. You'll receive a sizable discount on the two year plan plus one month free on top
of that. All links are in the description and the comments. What's meant by the word representation?
So for Schopenhauer, the will is the inner essence of everything. It's what really exists.
He he equates that to Kant's Numenna, the collection of numerons, numeron that forms
existence that forms the universe. And the representation is just the outside appearance
of the will. If I can quote him, the representation is how the will presents itself.
He can be an analogy or an example.
Combustion presents itself as flames. Combustion is the thing in itself,
an oxidation process that releases energy, forms ions leading to a plasma. And what we
call flames is how it looks like. It's what combustion looks like. So for Schopenhauer,
all there is is will. In other words, endogenous conscious states that that's what he means.
By using the word will, he means endogenous experiences. In other words, experiences that
are not perceptual in nature, they are endogenous, they arise from within. And representation is
how those experiences present themselves to external observation. So the world is will.
And the world presents itself to us as the physical world, which is pure representation.
And for Schopenhauer, causality as a concept applies only to representation.
So only when you're talking about the language of representation can you talk about causality.
The will behind it as the thing in itself precedes causality, but it is not random
because it follows certain archetypal templates. And he goes on and compares that with Plato's
ideal forms and so on. So in essence, Schopenhauer, I think, well, in spirit, Schopenhauer was a
determinist with the important caveat that he was a subtle determinist. He would say,
he wouldn't say that causality is the whole thing. He would say causality is emergent.
Causality is something that applies to the language of appearances, not of the things in
themselves. But the things in themselves are not purely random. They also unfold according to certain
templates. So in that sense, the spirit of determinism is preserved in Schopenhauer,
if not the latter. Yes, I would say that Schopenhauer was a metaphorical
metadeterminist. And I would say that basically he was a semi-autistician as well. I would say
that he had this idea that there was something called will, from which a semiotic representation
emerged. Emergence is, of course, a concept that you've already mentioned. So in my system,
in my system of metaphysics, ptelesis is primary, will is primary, and then it
factorizes itself. It actually fractionates or factors itself into two sides of representation,
which is the sign and the thing signified by it. Okay, plus something called thirdness, which of
course is the interpreter of the sign. And all of these three things are combined in the CTMU,
in the metaphorical system, by something called triality, which means that any object can be
regarded as a relation or an operation or a process. You can take all of those things at
everywhere, combine them. So that's very good. Yes, I think that this is something that Schopenhauer
was trying to formulate, but he didn't have the mathematics at the time. He lived a long time
ago and they didn't have most of these concepts out there. So he was unable to marshal them all
and scrape them together and build a system. So that's what I'm trying to make up for,
is lost time due to insufficient mathematical understanding of what was going on with these
concepts.
The reference to semiotics. Well, semiotics is language related. It's something that has to
do with language. That's the word semiotics. That's what it means. Actually, they're separated,
used language and semiotics. Semiotics is the pure science, the pure representational information
mappings that mediate between science and their reference. Whereas language is something that
takes those signs and puts them together in higher order combinations.
So I think for Schopenhauer, the will in itself would not be related to science or language.
Science and language would be the paradigm of the appearances, of the representations, the
Wurstelung, not anything inherent in the will itself. The will for Schopenhauer was beyond
time and space and therefore the distinctions that are presupposed by semiotics wouldn't be
there in the will in itself. Those distinctions would only appear in the appearances, in the
representations and then language could be applied or semiotics at first. And in Schopenhauer,
you would even have to get to what he called abstract representations, which was his old
fashion word for what we today would call metacognition. It's when you take a sign,
in other words, an appearance and then you cognitively process that sign. You think about
a thought or you think about a perception and that would be an abstract representation
in Schopenhauer's language. And language would require that first. It would require not only
representations but abstract representations. In other words, representations of representations.
And now we are talking about the world of semantics, signs and their meanings
and how those meanings are put together in a linguistic structure. So I'm not contradicting
what you said, Chris, but we are talking about Schopenhauer and I feel a responsibility for
adding more color and nuance to Schopenhauer. Yeah, no problem whatsoever. Yeah, I'm just
saying that basically I do think that Schopenhauer was, although he may not have realized it completely,
he was a he was a monist. He believed in a monarch theory in which in which it's not the
telecessor or will and representation are not just dualistically linked and separated.
I say that on some level he understood that the representations have to be coming from the will.
Will wrote it. Yes, some kind of metacausal. Yes, exactly. Metacausal primacy. And that's
more or less what I'm talking about. I'm saying that that representation is a binary mapping
or a binary relation. And I'm saying that it's like cellular mitosis. I'm saying that
telluses has to split into those two things. While meanwhile forming itself from the bottom
by two things coming together in a physical event to particles whacking to each other is
something of this nature. And that's that's basically the metaphor concept I'm getting at.
And Schopenhauer is useful in this regard because that's what I think he was trying to get at too.
People today who think that Schopenhauer was in some sense a dualist or a dual aspect monist,
I can only say they haven't read Schopenhauer. They didn't even begin to read Schopenhauer
because the man couldn't have been more unambiguous, more explicit than he was in the world as Will
in the representation, particularly from the second edition on when he added, you know,
twice the material. He kept the original but then doubled it. He repeats himself so many times. He
says the same thing in so many different ways as though to make sure that he couldn't be misunderstood.
Other than he was being paid by the word. It's surreal. In Wikipedia the other day
it was still listing Schopenhauer as a dual aspect theorist. And even the world's supposed
greatest scholar in Schopenhauer, a character from the UK called Christopher Janeway,
the man just doesn't understand Schopenhauer. I mean I'm sure he has studied Schopenhauer a lot
but intensity of study does not guarantee understanding and the guy doesn't even begin to
understand Schopenhauer. He thinks Schopenhauer is a crass materialist and it's absurd.
I think I read some of your comments on Janeway in an essay about, I know you wrote a book on
Schopenhauer. Yeah, a few years ago. But yeah, but you also wrote an essay, I think,
that accompanied the book or was it some kind of a prequel to the book, right? In which you did
talk about this fellow Janeway. Yeah. I've been trying to bait him for a while but he doesn't
take the bait. He's wiser. Okay, let's talk about free will. It seems like that's what
is at the core here. So I'll do so by reading a question which is directed
toward Chris. But then obviously, if you pull something out even though it has some terminology
that's specific to the CTMU, Bernardo, please comment on it as well, okay? Hey Kurt, I'm reposting
this from YouTube. It's for Chris on the topic of free will derived from the CTMU. If you can ask
this, you'll forever be my hero. You once said, I believe he's referring to you, Chris. Chris,
you said that the universe, that because the universe has only itself to define itself,
everything in it must exemplify its elementary freedom. I think I understand from your defining
reality as as all real influence that reality cannot be abbreviated. Because if you were able to
simplify it with no loss, whatever was removed could not logically have been real. I understand
where to take this to imply that reality could not have come from anything simpler than its full
definition. And what can't be simplified must be contributory throughout. That said, you've still
maintained a strong distinction between tertiary syntactors, objects, and secondary syntactors
slash tellers, life forms, read life forms, in terms of the amount that they are determinative.
Considering that you've shown that reality is a mind, could we liken the distinction to the
difference between ideas of objects and ideas of self, where just like ideas, all objects have
some significance specific to them, however, seemingly banal, but only tellers as ideas of self
would be self modeling, and therefore truly take on self awareness. That's why they're called tellers.
That's why self type identity operators are called tellers, whereas tertiary identity operators are
fermionic models, and they are inanimate, or at least usually considered to be inanimate. But
basically, they're embedded in secondary tellers, and therefore they take that higher order
metacolization, that ability to self model from the secondary tellers.
So I assume you're answering the question right now, but Chris, I didn't understand the question.
So can you explain the question back to myself, and then answer it?
Well, states, you know, there's no such thing as a state in isolation. States are always
relatively defined. That's why we have theories of relativity and things. But what must the state
be defined relative to? Well, to completely define any state in the universe, you need to refer to
every other state in the universe because it parameterizes that state. Okay, and you don't
get a complete parameterization unless you have the full matter distribution and the full metric.
Okay, so that's what it takes. Can I see if I can make an analogy? There is a duality between a set
and the complement of a set, assuming that the set is within some other large set,
that we can call. So let's say the large set is S, you have a subset U, then there's a duality
between U and U with a C, which is the complement of it. The tellor and the environment, right,
exactly, self and non-self. Okay, sorry, continue. Okay, well, the environment, of course, is just
the medium minus the tellor. In other words, what is external to the medium, what is outside the
boundary of the tellor. And so you get this basically the self dual construct, which is a
tellor environment coupling. Okay, and this tellor environment coupling is very important to the
CTME because that's kind of a metaphorical, it's one way of expressing CTME quantization. Okay,
you have to put the medium together with the object. The object is its own medium through
this process called conspansion, which is the operation through which the universe evolves
on the global level. Now, in order to get semantic meaning out of that, you know, basically,
it's basically, it's called cosmic expansion. To get meaning out of that, then you need
another process called tellic recursion, which then specifies that semantic structure
through the syntactic structure that's built up by conspansion.
Chris, it's been almost a year since I studied the CTMU and when I did, I didn't go back to it,
which means I've forgotten so much of it, so much of the terminology.
As I would have done myself, okay.
So much of the terminology, it goes through me. So tellic recursion, I have a vague recollection
that it's where the universe exercises free will. It looks at some generalized utility state
and then makes a decision.
That's where Tellor is self-configured. That's where secondary identity operators or Tellor
is self-configured. They actually become the medium. Okay. And I know that Bernardo actually
embraces something like this in his analytic idealism, I think, is what he calls. Basically,
you've got to have that going.
Okay. So let me be blunt. So free will in your theory, in your model, Chris, exists.
And Bernardo, if I'm correct, you're against the idea of free will at least currently.
Well, let me tell you what free will is first before Bernardo gets going.
Okay. Yes. As I said, there is no typical array in the metaphor system. Okay.
You can't use the parameter as a state. You cannot just use a fixed array, a fixed array.
The array has to be changing geometric dynamically is the term that the followers of
Einstein came up with to describe what must be going on. It's happening behind the scenes.
Okay. Free will happens because things are determined
metacosally and metiformally, which means that things have to be coupled or factorized.
Right? In other words, it's just not this linear process, this causal process,
but it's this high-order process called metacosation that is occur. And this is free will.
If we look at a conspensive cycle in the CTMU, it's an alpha-omega cycle. In other words, it
starts at an origin and ends with the boundary. And those two things are in advanced and retarded
communication with each other. Right? Free will is in determining one of those conspensive cycles,
regardless of what its size is. So, in other words, I do, there is a, there is a way to define
free will that gets out of this pseudo-causal dichotomy between determinacy and indeterminacy
that we were talking about earlier. Right? In other words, you're creating the media.
You're actually creating space-time as you create a new state. Right? When you bring that new
mental state into your head, you've actually done it by creating space-time. Right? This is a,
this is kind of a very profound, very weird way of looking at it. I understand that it sounds weird,
but it's the only way, in my opinion, things can work. I will comment more generically,
because I'm not familiar with the Chris's terminology. So, it's impossible for me
to go into the details of that. But you offered Kurt that I am currently against free will.
There's a lot of nuance to this. So, let me try to clarify this. If the question of free will
is linked to a materialist metaphysics, like people worrying that, oh, if my choices are
determined by the patterns of brain activity in my brain, then I don't have free will. Well,
on that account, I think people need not be afraid, because I don't think
physiological patterns of brain activity cause your choices. I think they are what your choices
look like. In Schopenhauer's terminology, they are appearances, representations.
The thing in itself is your choice. So, no, your choices are not determined by your brain
activity. Your brain activity is what the process of making choices look like. And then you would
say, well, then I am endorsing free will. Well, now we have now to understand what people mean
by free will. What people mean by it is that their choices are determined by that which they
identify themselves with, as opposed to being determined by something that they don't identify
with. And most people don't identify with their brain activity. They never get to see it. They
don't identify with it. That's why when a physicalist says, well, your choices are determined by your
brain activity, people feel that as a violation of their free will because they identify with their
own mental processes, the flow of their consciousness, not with physical patterns of brain activity
inside their skull, which they never saw in their lives. Now, let's think about the mind of nature.
The mind of nature is the only thing there is. So, need and will are the same thing. There is
nothing, I mean, I have to work, right? I'm forced by my society to work. So, my choice to work is
not freely determined by me. It's a need imposed on me by the society and I don't identify with
the rest of the society. So, my free will has been cut short in that regard. But if you are the
mind of nature, there is no society, there is no world outside of you, there's nothing
beyond you. So, whatever choices you make as the mind of nature are free in the sense that they
are determined, but they are determined by you. You see what I mean? You're on identification,
exactly. Yeah. The need and the choice are one and the same. There is no semantic difference
between determinism and free will at the level of the mind of nature. Because, yes, the choices
are determined. Even people who believe in free will, they are not saying that their choices are
random. They are saying that their choices are determined by their preferences, their tastes.
They are determined by them. At the level of the mind of nature, every choice is determined by the
mind of nature because there is nothing beyond the universal mind, the universal consciousness.
Even the question of free will disappears. There is a semantic space for it. It doesn't
make sense to talk about it. But the choices are still determined in the sense that they are not
random. The choices of the mind of nature are determined by what the mind of nature is.
Its characteristics, its properties determine the choices it makes. It cannot abstract of
itself. Otherwise, the choices would be completely random. That's incoherent to say that.
I would merely add that what we have to do is we have to distinguish free will what's happening
there from determinacy and non-deterministic. It is useful to talk about free will just to
distinguish it from what we usually mean by causation. Once we do that, then we find out
that we can describe it in a certain way in terms of this conspansion and teleprocursion
thing that I was talking about earlier. I think ultimately everything is determined.
Even your choices are determined by your tastes, by your dispositions, your opinions.
Well, can I ask you a question? Just imagine the origin of reality. What determined the structure
of reality? In other words, there was nothing outside. According to general relativity,
reality is ontically and geometrically closed. There's nothing outside. There's no extrinsic
causation that could have caused the universe to take any particular form. Aren't we talking about
the universe taking its own form, somehow deciding within itself what form it should take?
Deciding within itself can only happen if that decision is determined by what it is.
Yes, but who decides what it is?
Nobody. At the end of the day, at the bottom level of nature, something exists that cannot be
explained in terms of anything else. We cannot explain one thing in terms of another forever.
It doesn't matter what metaphysics one subscribes to, one cannot keep on reducing forever.
Otherwise, eventually you will go back to the beginning and it will be circular reasoning.
Unless it's idempotent, unless it's idempotent, that actually applies to themselves.
You don't get to the top of the ladder. You just keep on going from run to run,
run to rung, and each rung is identical to the last rung.
Then it's in some form of infinity to regress. At the end of-
No, idempotent says that it stays the same. You're not regressing any. It reaches a static
point of maximum generalization and then it holds steady. It doesn't make any difference what you
do. You're going the other way around now. I'm thinking about reduction. I'm going down
to the bottom. There has to be something at the bottom that simply is. It simply is what it is.
Now earlier you said for something to exist, it needs to have properties. To say that something
is an object means that it has properties. To be is to have properties. I agree with you there.
To be is to have properties. Whatever it is that you are, you are one thing and not another. In
other words, there are properties associated to your beingness. Now whatever there is at the end
of the chain of reduction, the bottom line of nature, it just is and therefore it has properties.
Everything that it does is then determined by its properties. It's determined by what it is
as opposed to what it is not or to what it could have been. Even the mind of nature
is a mind that has properties. That's awfully in specific though. I mean, we're not attaching
any properties to this ultimate reduction that you're talking about. Yet everything that the
universe is is somehow determined by it. I don't think that's quite kosher. I think that we have to
actually try to attach some properties to it in order to derive. I just said to be is to have
properties. So whatever there is at the bottom level of the chain of reduction, it has properties.
Now we may not know directly. Self-assigned properties, right? Yes. Intrinsic.
Not self-assigned. It's intrinsic to the beingness of the thing. To be is to have properties.
But against what background are we distinguishing those properties?
The background of what could have been. So the laws of nature are what they are.
So gravity makes objects fall. We could live in a universe in which gravity pulls objects up.
It's a repellent as opposed to an attractor. Now that's not what is. The laws of nature are
what they are as opposed to what they could have been in our imagination. So whatever nature is,
it has properties. And that's why objects fall and static electricity is produced when you rub amber
to a cloth. So the stuff that is. I understand everything that you're saying.
But if it had properties, then those properties had negations. And something had to distinguish
those properties from negations. Otherwise, it is useless to talk about them having properties at all.
There's got to be the property. There's got to be the logical complement of that property.
And something has to be doing the logic of it all for us to for for reality itself or
ultimate reality to perceive what its properties are or to act as though those properties exist.
You follow me? That's something is us and our ability to conceive of nature being different
than what it is. And we are parts of reality where sense or control is for reality as a whole.
So that's our function. To conceive of what could have been in theory or right and then
after conceiving of that to conceive of what is. Yeah, but I'm trying to speak of something even
much simpler than we are getting to right now. What I'm trying to say is the following.
Wherever there is at the chain of reduction, it has properties and its behavior is determined
by the properties it has. In other words, the behavior of nature is determined by what nature
is as opposed to anything else we could conceive nature to be.
So ultimately, everything is determined that ought to be determined. Otherwise, we just throw
science down down the toilet. But that's a that's a tautology. You're not actually we're looking
for something when you say determined. I'm looking for a causal dependency. I'm looking for a cause
and an effect of some kind. Okay, that's what we're talking about the same. Right. Right. Okay.
So that what we're talking about, however, is a tautology. Everything is intrinsic.
Yes, it is. Everything is intrinsic because reality is ontically closed. There is nothing
outside of reality that is real enough to affect reality. It's a logical contradiction to disagree.
What I said is not a tautology. It's not a tautology. What I'm saying is that
of all things that nature could conceivably have been, it is what it is and not anything else.
And what it is is properties and those properties determine what happens. So the universe expands
as opposed to collapsing, because the properties of the universe are such that they cause the
universe to expand. I agree. So you can speak of causation in the language of representation in
that sense without being tautological. And if we speak of minds, then we have to abandon. Well,
I'm trying to get down to the properties that you're ascribing to ultimate reality.
Reality is what it is. As you say, you're 100% right about that. But what are its properties
and how do things happen because of those properties? So I'm trying to get to that.
To that. So we've been speaking with the language of Schopenhauer's representations,
the physical world and science and causation. But you and I agree that at the end of the day,
there is only one mind, one consciousness. So what is the language of the will? How do we describe
what I'm saying in the language of the will of the thing in itself? Well, Jung gave us the language.
Jung talked about the archetypes, which are these intrinsic primordial templates of mental behavior.
And those templates are intrinsic. They are there because mind is what it is.
And if nature is a mind, then the archetypes of nature are those properties.
So you don't think the mind is conditioned to have those properties? You don't think there's
any kind of mind? Do you think the mind just is what it is?
To be is to have properties. And I'm saying those properties are the archetypes in Jungian psychology,
applied to the collective unconscious and applied to a mind that's not an individual mind.
Okay, so you realize you are assigning a property there.
But that's what I'm saying, Chris. I'm saying that to be is to have properties.
Yes, I would agree with that. And it's also to have values or instances.
So that way, it's self-dual. You don't have to separate the instances from the properties.
Okay, and if you can call reality an instance of itself. And that's the tautology that I'm talking
about. Okay, so I call it a super tautology. I don't know why you're saying this. I don't know
what you're talking about, to be honest. I don't know what you're talking about instances of itself.
Reality is what it is to be is to have properties. Those properties are what we could call archetypes,
templates of behavior of mind. And that's why nature behaves the way it does, because it has
whatever archetypes it does have by virtue of existing. Nature instantiates those properties.
You're assigning or distributing properties to nature, and then nature is instantiating the
properties. Am I right? If you want to speak the language of mathematics, you can speak that way.
I'm not sure how helpful it is to the audience. It's very helpful because that's what a super
tautology is. It's something that is its own properties and its own instances.
Why do we speak of instances if there is only one thing? I don't think this language is helpful at
all. It's obscurantism. Well, with all due respect, it's not just obscurantism. There are instances
of properties out there. You are an instance of the properties that make up Bernardo. Okay,
I'm an instance of the properties that make up Chris. And likewise, for Curt.
Yeah, but Chris and Bernardo exist in a broader context, but the mind of nature is what there is.
There is nothing else. So why to speak of instances?
I'm not arguing against you there. I'd be the last person in the world to argue with you about that.
I'm just trying to pin down some of these properties that we're ascribing to ultimate or
basic reality. Once you get all the way down to the bottom of the reduction, as you said,
then there's got to be something there. What is it? So now we're stuck. You see,
we have to say, okay, well, whatever it is, it's part of reality. Therefore, reality goes in a
circle. It's this big self-defined loop. Right? That's my point. You follow that?
Fair enough. Now, do we know what those properties are directly? Of course not.
And we know what results from those properties, the behavior of the universe,
results from those properties or those archetypes, whatever those intrinsic properties are.
And it turns out that the behavior of nature is regular, fairly predictable. So I would say,
yeah, they are determined by those properties, which we don't know directly, but we can infer
that they exist because nature behaves in a fairly regular and predictable way.
Do you think that we have anything to do with determining any of those properties?
The properties are what they are by virtue of the fact that the universe is what it is,
and we are part of the universe. So we don't determine them. We are determined by them.
Well, could there be a reciprocity there? I mean, could there be,
they determine us and then we determine them back?
I don't think so. I think if you're talking about the most innate properties,
then they are the properties of what there is. They are what they are because the universe is
what it is. Now, we could determine metaproperties or we could play a role in the causal unfolding
that derives from those properties. Yes, that we could do, but I don't think...
There we go. And by participating in that unfold, you mean we're just like passive
things that allow properties to emerge through us, but have nothing to do with creating the
properties themselves? I'm talking about the fundamental properties. Now,
you could talk about properties at many levels that are not fundamental. Of course.
Like human beings have properties, but those are not the fundamental properties of the universe,
or black holes have properties, but those are not the fundamental properties of the universe
at the bottom of the chain, of course. And you don't see yourself as implicated at all
in actually configuring those larger properties. Those secondary derivative properties, yes,
of course, we are part of the unfolding dynamics of the universe. There we go. So,
now, if you detonate a nuclear bomb on the moon, we will change the properties of the moon.
Yeah, we can influence that. That's trivial, trivially so. But I was talking about the bottom
level, fundamental properties of existence. I don't think we can change those for the same reason
that a human being can't change his or her own mental archetypes. Those are inherent to the
beingness of the universe. I agree. I agree with almost everything you said, except for you seem
to be saying, okay, it just is, that's it. And I'm saying maybe we can actually reach in there and
induce some properties, some actual specific properties that lead to this whole thing being
structured the way it is. Well, I commented on that already. So, I think it's clear, hopefully.
Okay, well, that would you seem to be saying the universe is metadeterministic
or super determined? I don't know what you mean by that. So, I cannot say yes or no, but maybe.
Well, you say that the structure of the universe is determined by what it is and what it's
properties are. All right. What it is and what its properties are are the same thing,
sad in two different ways. Well, yes, but there's also an extension with the intention.
The intention is the properties, no, we need the instances as well.
Those are the things that the properties intersect. If you could talk about a red, heavy object,
okay, and then you could take a cannonball and paint it red. That's an instance instantiating
both of those properties, right? The properties don't refer to each other. Heavy isn't red and red
isn't heavy, right? But if we have instances, then we can make the properties interact. So,
we need both of those things. And I'm just saying that they're metaphorically coupled,
and that's what we do in the CTM. I think you're very insightful, and I think we agree on almost
everything, but there are a couple of sticking points here. Otherwise, it wouldn't really be a
deal location, would it? Last brief aside for today's sponsor, Manscaped.
You may have noticed that I'm brown, and what's concomitant with being brown is being
hairy. That's why I'm happy that support for theories of everything is brought to you by Manscaped,
who's number one in men's grooming below the waist. There's also an ear and nose trimmer,
which I use and happily so, as you can see. The package I have is the performance package 4.0.
It comes with crop preserver and crop reviver, which are male genitalia, deodorant, and toner,
respectively. If you thought condoms were difficult to ask for, well, try asking the 65-year-old lady
behind the counter for what will improve your gonads texture. Luckily, you don't have to,
since Manscaped is online. This package even comes with this shirt, which I wear pretty much
exclusively to the gym. I may not be able to bench the most, but I can pretty much guarantee
that I'm the most testically hygienic. Get 20% off and free shipping with the code
everything20 at manscaped.com. That's 20% off with free shipping at manscaped.com using the code
everything20. Unlock your confidence and always use the right tools for the job with Manscaped.
Let's get to this with a more mythological question. Are Jesus and Buddha attempting to answer
the same problem but from different perspectives? Are they answering different problems?
Are their answers, their teachings, whatever they may be, are they commensurate,
though on the surface, at least to me, they contradict? There's quite a few questions there,
Bernardo, if you don't mind starting that off. I'm not a religious studies specialist, so you
have to take anything and everything I'm about to say with an enormous grain of salt, maybe a whole
bag of it. I have a good friend who is a specialist, Jeffrey Kreipo. If Jeff is listening to this,
I hope he will not cringe with what I'm about to say. I think they were trying to answer the same
question and I think if you penetrate beyond the surface of appearances and different metaphors
and symbols and the different languages they spoke, there is a difference of 500 years between them
and a difference in geographies as well. If you can penetrate beyond all that and look at the essence
of their answers, I think it was essentially the same answer. Actually, there are serious studies
and there's a serious academic opinion that Christianity, in fact, may be derived from Buddhism.
There is even speculation about where Jesus might have been during that time between his 12th
year and his 30th year when the Bible says... Do you mean Vettism? Or do you really mean that
Christianity was derived from Buddhism? Christianity derived from Buddhism. That's one academic opinion
that has been put forward. There's even speculation that Jesus was in India during that time of his
life where the Bible says nothing about him. I think the fundamental question they were both
trying to answer is, what is the relation between us as human beings and the universe at large?
What is that relationship? Jung put it in the following words. Are we related to something
transcendent, to something infinite or not? That is the the gazillion-dollar question.
Are we related to something infinite or not? I think they both were trying to answer this
question, that relationship between us as individuals and the universe at large,
existence at large. What is that relationship? Because we take the cue for our behavior from
our tentative answer to that question, our inner narrative about what that relation is.
And I would even go as far and to say that they gave the same answer.
When Jesus talked of himself as the Son of God, he was talking about a fundamental kinship
between a human being and the divinity, a fundamental kinship. Now the Son of a Father
is of the same kind as the Father, their force, because it's something that came from the Father.
And he also emphasized the need to surrender the direction of our lives to a greater power.
And if that's not Buddhism, what is it? Buddhism is the surrender of the ego,
is seen through the illusion of personal identity, individual identity. It is connecting to a greater
mental context, a greater cognitive context. So I think, in essence, yes, they were both
saying the same thing. And then 600 years later, a little bit more, there came the prophet
and said the same thing. And that's why Muslims bow to a greater power five times a day, which I
think is a fantastic ritual. It's a daily reminder that our lives are not about us. Our lives are
about something much bigger than us. They're in line, the meaning of our lives. And the kinship
in Christianity between Jesus and us is also very explicit. When the Holy Ghost descends into
every righteous man, woman, and child, and remember, the Holy Ghost is Jesus. So when the Holy Ghost
descends not only into the apostles, but every righteous human being, what is being said is that
there is a direct kinship between you and the Son of God, and of course, a direct kinship
between the Son of God and the Godhead. It's a hierarchy of kinships, so to say, of identical
kinds, which basically tell us that we are leafs in a great tree, and existence is about the tree,
not about the leaves. Imagine if the blossom of my apple tree in my backyard in the spring would say,
my life's about me. I should take the reins of my life as a blossom because my life's about me.
Well, we would laugh at the little flower, because no, it's not about the flower. It's about the tree,
it's about the fruit that will come after the flower is gone, and the tree that will come from
the fruit after the fruit is gone. It's about a much bigger context, and I think that's the
message of Christianity and Buddhism, the need to surrender ourselves to the greater directions
of existence and understand that it's not about us, has never been and will never be, and we do not
need to invest ourselves with this crushing responsibility of manufacturing meaning for
our lives. It's unnecessary. Meaning is intrinsic. As long as you are in touch with the movements of
the impersonal within us, we are in touch with meaning. It's just that we've become blind to it
because of the crazy narratives of our current civilization. Chris. Well, I agree with a lot
of that. Very poetic. Thank you, Bernardo. There is the primary issue is the relationship between
man and reality, the ultimate reality, which is God and to Christians anyway. And I think that
it's productive to formulate this question in terms of the goal of life. Now, in Buddhism,
the goal of life is nirvana, achieve nirvana. For the Vedic, it was moksha. Okay, and for the
Christians, it is salvation. Those are distinct concepts. All right. The two of them have to do
with completely extricating yourself from samsara, you know, the cycle of birth and death and rebirth.
You extricate yourself completely from that and totally free yourself from the world that exists.
What Christ was trying to tell people is that you cannot extricate yourself from God, from the
world that exists. You have moral responsibility. Here are your moral responsibilities. They're
enumerated in the Ten Commandments, et cetera, et cetera. And here's the golden rule. So now
you've got a mathematical law of moral symmetry that you can apply to the whole thing. So they're
really, in some respects, the answers are the same. They give an answer for what is the relationship
between man and reality, but in other respects, they're very different. We have a moral responsibility
to our fellow human beings and to reality and to God in Christianity, whereas in Buddhism,
it's not quite the same thing. There is a sum of that, of course. There is an equivalent to
morality in Buddhism and Vedism. Now, that being said, I mean, that's, I'm going to
shove Buddhism aside for a second. Let me just talk about Vedism, you know, and if you take a
look at Vedism, and then you take a look at Christian Neoplatonism, as set forth by Plotinus,
for example, and other, you know, people like him, you find that they're very, very simple.
You've got this, this Vedic model where you've, you know, you've got Brahman, and then from
Brahman, you come down to mind, and then from mind, you go down to the world, right? And this is
basically what Neoplatonism is. Okay. And Neoplatonism, of course, was very popular among these
scholastics, medieval Christians, right? And basically what they were doing was they were
embracing something very much like Vedism. So that's what we're, that's, that's, these are things
that we have to observe when we're trying to compare these separate religions and what they're
all talking about. Okay. A Christian says that, well, our job is to achieve salvation. We do that
by moral goodness. Okay, Vedism says much the same thing. Okay, you've got a, you know, you've got,
you've got this, you've got dharma, which is righteousness, and then you go from, from righteousness
into moksha. Buddha was a little bit more, he was less, less prescriptive about these things,
right? I mean, there's, there's, there's degrees of freedom in Buddhism, you know, it's very,
very popular because it seems to limit your moral responsibility. Whereas, this is something that
Jesus and, and the Hindus were not necessarily interested in doing. There is this moral responsibility,
it's inescapable, and that's that. Bernardo, are you shamping at the bit?
Just have a small quirk. I'm not sure it's even worthwhile to mention it, but I agree with, with
Grace, that medieval scholars from before the 11th century, they flirted with Neoplatonism.
John Scottus, Erigena was one of them. But this scholastics embraced Aristotle and tried to root
out Neoplatonism. But, but okay, it's just a small, small detail. Well, there are nevertheless
similar, Aristotle didn't really have anything comparable to what we're talking about. So it was
the Neoplatonics or else that, you know, there's this idea of the one, and then you go down from
the one to noose, right? No, US, I don't know how it's pronounced. And then you come down from
there into the world. Now, what I have, what I've found is that you can liken this whole, this whole
thing to a reality self simulation, which can actually be mathematically and scientifically
described. Okay, in other words, there's this this emanation, this series of emanations that
leads to what we are in this world. And when we die, then we are retracted into this bundle of
emanations. And then we, you know, it may be possible to reemerge into another world, a heaven,
hell, a new life, whatever you may call it. All right, but there's enough structure there that I
think we've got some very interesting possibilities. Okay, here's a set of questions that comes from
Charlie Ifrah. Where did the assumption that consciousness is good come from? Where did the
assumption that consciousness matters come from? Where did the assumption that consciousness makes
a special come from? Why don't we assume that consciousness is just something we do? And it's
no more special than eyesight or scent. So I'm going to send this in the chat because it's a set
of questions that are similar. But it's probably useful to refer to. Okay, well, consciousness
is basically primitive. Okay, it's a primitive property. Bernardo was talking earlier about
the properties of what reality is. Consciousness is a primitive property of reality. Okay, it has
to be conscious. There's got to be this feedback that I was talking about, this tele feedback
between past and future. All right, that's what allows us to get out of this pseudo causal dichotomy
that we're talking about. So consciousness is primitive. It is there. It is what it is.
Nobody has to say anything about it. Nobody has to pronounce it this or make assumptions about it.
It is what it is. It's there. It distributes over reality in different forms that are appropriate
to the circumstances under which it emerges. Okay, a tiny little particle, an electron has
consciousness in a certain way. All right, and then a teller, a secondary, an organism has
consciousness in another way. Okay, then we get up to big brain human beings. We have a higher
kind of self modeling consciousness still. Then we get all the way up to God that has all of these
forms of consciousness at once. Right? So consciousness is absolutely intrinsic to the
nature of the universe. And we needn't make any assumptions about its importance or its primacy
or anything else. Bernard, do you want to tackle? Let me tackle them one by one. Where did the
assumption that consciousness is important come from? I don't know. I don't make that assumption.
I know that consciousness is that is all I have, ultimately. So if that's not important,
then probably nothing is, which may be a valid answer. But I don't make that assumption. Where
did the assumption that consciousness is good come from? I don't know. I don't make that assumption.
Consciousness is whether it's good or bad. I'm not determined on a case by case basis.
I think there is as many good reasons to think that consciousness has bad in it as there are
reasons to think that it has good in it. Where did the assumption that consciousness matters
come from? He's freeing everything as if it were an assumption. Well, I don't know. But if
consciousness doesn't matter, then what does? Because we are cooped up in consciousness at all
times. So if that doesn't matter, then nothing does. For where did the assumption that consciousness
makes a special come from? I don't know. I don't make that assumption. I don't think it makes a
special. I think consciousness permeates the whole of existence. So we are not special on that
account because it's just something that permeates the whole of existence, not only us. And five,
why don't we assume that consciousness is just something we do? Because it's not a question
of assumption. It's a question of theorizing coherently. So our theories stand up to reason
and to the evidence. So you can assume that, I don't know, that your consciousness is the sun.
Good luck with that. But that's not the game you're playing. We are not playing the game
of arbitrary assumptions. We are playing the game of trying to find the most
coherent, empirically tenable, internally consistent, most explanatorily powerful narrative,
or model, or theory about what's going on. And the most coherent and explanatorily powerful,
the one that avoids most problems, all problems, arguably, is that consciousness is fundamental.
It's not an assumption. It's a consequence of a careful line of reasoning and an investigation of
the evidence. And the source of that line, and the source and medium of that line of reasoning,
we should add. Everything you said is 100% right. But it's not just a consequence,
okay? It is the origin as well. It's right there. It's all distributed throughout the entire
process of elation or inference. There's no escape from it. Okay, go ahead.
Yeah. Sorry, Bernardo. Bernardo, why is it that you call your theory analytical idealism?
What's the difference between some other account of idealism and yours?
There is nothing new in this. This stuff has been put forward by many people for thousands of years.
I think there is a perfectly good word in history called idealism. That's what I'm talking about.
So why will I use another word? But under pressure to differentiate what I'm talking about from, say,
Barclay's idealism, which I think is flawed, I needed to add a qualifier.
And because I arrive at idealism from a rational investigation that holds up to the values of
analytic philosophy, the philosophy that was stated by Bertrand Russell in the 1920s,
Wittgenstein and others that say, no, you have to be conceptually explicit and coherent. You
have to avoid ambiguity. You cannot be internally inconsistent. And you have to ground everything
in empirical evidence. So I espouse all that. I espouse the values of analytic philosophy,
not to the detriment of continental philosophy, but next to those I espouse the values of
analytic philosophy. And I defend my idealism in a way that can only be characterized as analytical,
you know, based on the values of the analytic philosophy school. That's why I call it
analytic idealism. It's my very best effort to not come up with new words, but to stick to old
words so people know that I'm not saying anything new at all here. Okay. Can I ask a question? I mean,
analytic basically means having to do with concepts and language. So somehow, in other words,
you're talking about the language you use is just more careful than it is an ordinary dialogue.
You're actually theorizing very carefully. And that's how language enters into this. Is that
the accurate? That's fair enough. That would be the reason why Russell chose the word analytic
philosophy back then. So I'm just using the word he used. If he had used another word,
I would be using that word instead. Well, then we have the Kantian meaning too, which refers to
tautology. Basically, your predicate is implicit in your subject or vice versa.
My usage of analytic in analytic philosophy is a reference. Sorry. My use of analytic in
analytic idealism is a reference to analytic in analytic philosophy. So I'm basically linking
it to analytic philosophy because I make my argument according to the style and value system
of analytic philosophy. If they had chosen the word x philosophy, I would be saying x idealism.
So we talked about this, but didn't use the word non dualism. And many people in the non dualist
community would say that love is fundamental, that consciousness is fundamental, but love is too.
And somehow those are the same or somehow love is more fundamental than consciousness.
Okay, explain to someone as confused as myself what you make of that. How does that make sense?
How can love be fundamental? What is love? Bernardo, if you don't mind. Well, I never said that love
is fundamental. I'm not saying you did. I apologize if I said that. I'm saying some non dualists.
I'm sure you've heard you didn't say that. I'm just I'm just emphasizing it for clarity and
lack of ambiguity. I think love is a particular pattern of excitation of consciousness.
Fear is another. So if love is fundamental, so is fear. And so is, I don't know,
delight and any other emotion. So from that perspective, I think it is subjectivity that is
fundamental, not to the particular excitation of subjectivity that we describe with words such as
love, fear and all the other emotions. So I think empirically, if I if I look at nature,
I don't see compelling reason to think that love is somehow more primordial or more fundamental
than fear than evil. Because you see this stuff all around the nature. I mean, animals are killing
each other slowly and painfully so they can survive. It's a bloodbath, volcanoes erupt,
and millions of animals are killed in very painful circumstances. It's not a pretty picture. So I
don't particularly see a reason to prioritize love over over anything else. I mean, Dante wrote about
the love that moves the sun and the other stars, suggesting that, you know, what we see as stars
is is the representation of love, the external appearance of love, and that stars in and of
themselves experience themselves as an outpouring of love. That may be. But then black holes are
the opposite, right? Because instead of irradiating, they suck everything in. And I see no reason to
say that stars are more fundamental than black holes. As a matter of fact, you know, black holes
form when stars collapse into themselves. So no, I know I'm afraid I don't see love as
fundamental. I see subjectivity, phenomenal consciousness as fundamental. And I would love
if love were fundamental, I would love it. But I don't see good reasons to think that it is, no.
Why would you love it if it was fundamental? Well, because now we would feel all fuzzy and warm
and protected and safe. But I don't think there is good reason to think that. I think
what and now I'm speculating and I'm speculating without authority here. So take it with a with
a bag of salt. I think what some spiritual teachers, I think what motivates them to say
that love is fundamental is that there is a phase during meditation or during a psychedelic
experience. You pass through a threshold right around the ego dissolution phase,
when you sort of shed personal identity. There's a lot of fear with that. But then you land,
tend to land in a place for a little while, where you sort of remember. And what you remember,
I can't put in English, I can't put in any, there are no words for what you remember.
So I can't say, but you remember. And that remembrance feel like a reconnection with
your own umbilical cord with your own home, your own source. And it feels very warm and loving,
that remembrance, that reconnection with your roots. But it is a transitory phase.
If if you persist in that, then even that is shed, even that feeling of love, fuzzy,
coziness, you know, remembrance back home, even that is shadowy.
As just one more phase of experience, but nothing fundamental. And then you go somewhere else.
And I'm not going to talk about that somewhere else, but I can imagine that
if you have not visited the deeper levels in the Palace of Mind, you just went one level lower,
one or two level lowers, then you would say, well, I found love there. So love is fundamental.
I can clearly see that happening. But then I would think arrogantly, maybe that, well,
we just haven't gone deep enough, because below that, there is stuff that you wouldn't call love.
Chris, would it be all right if I ask Bernardo one more question? And then if you want, if there's
anything that comes to your mind, just take a note and then that's fine. Okay, great. So Bernardo,
in some of the conferences, I'm sure that you've attended on spirituality and non dualism.
There seems to be a special place for love and there seems to be a special place for fear,
namely that one is to shed fear and that almost all of suffering, if not all of suffering,
comes from fear. And for me, just to get my point of view across, it doesn't seem completely correct
unless they're using a different definition of fear, because there are people who have a part
of their brain that's that they lack. There's a there's a disconnection in some part of their
brain. They don't actually experience fear. And it's deleterious. It's not good for them.
They stand too close to people. They are more likely to get into fights. They have to be watched
over. There's also sociopathy, which is related to a lack of fear, but social fear. So it doesn't
seem to me that one should just shed all of one's fear in order to live more peaceably. Well,
maybe in order to live more peaceably, but that existence doesn't persist for a while. And it
also doesn't seem to be good for the other people around you. Either way, that's my thoughts on it.
Do you see the same distinction between love and fear, like there's a special place for fear,
namely, we should shed it. And what are your thoughts on that?
So I'll give you a personal opinion. This is not grounded on my work as a
philosopher or my previous work as a scientist. So I'm not sure my opinion should count more than
anybody else's opinion. But I sympathize with what you said. I think there is a place for fear.
There is a reason we've evolved to feel fearful in certain circumstances. It is healthy. It helps
preserve your own safety. I think what maybe is trying to be expressed in those conferences
is that you shouldn't be in the grip of fear. Fear shouldn't control your life. And unfortunately,
that's what happens a lot in our civilization. That fear, instead of being just one more ingredient
in this great melting pot of emotions that we carry along through life, that fear becomes
the dominating force. And I have experienced with that. I have suffered from anxiety. And fear can
make your world very small. It can make you blind to everything else. It can destroy your ability to
empathize. It can destroy your ability to tune into what's happening around you, destroys your
ability to enjoy the present moment, because your mind is always in that narrative making of what
might happen that could be very bad for you. So not surrendering control to fear, I think is important.
But eliminating fear altogether, I think that's like cutting a limb. It's taking away a part of
your own humanity. If you become unable to feel fear, how will you empathize with the Ukrainians
now? So surrendering to fear eliminates empathy. But destroying fear completely eliminates empathy
as well, because you become unable to relate to what other people are going through. And you
become less human. And I don't think that's the game to play. I think the game to play
is to mature our own humanity to its full. And fear is certainly an ingredient of that. There is
nothing, I think, a priori bad about fear. The only bad thing is when you have an imbalance,
and that imbalance can be an excess of fear, or even a lack of fear. I think the point is
balance. And I understand these conferences when they put emphasis on reducing fear,
because in our civilization, in our society today, most of the times we are not in balance,
and the imbalance is precisely an excess of fear. So that's where you put the emphasis.
You try to reduce that which is excessive. But I don't think it should be extrapolated to the
point of rooting out fear altogether. Then you're not human. You will be a mutilated human being.
That's not something to desire. At least I don't desire that.
Okay. So Chris, there was plenty that was said. And if you want to comment on any of it, please
do. I'll restate the original question, which is essentially, well, what is love, and what's
its relationship to what's fundamental? Well, love, it's all about identification and identity.
Obviously, reality identifies with itself. There's no, not necessarily any emotion attached to that,
but in order to make this work in the world, reality configures itself as syntax. There's a
kind of syntax in the metaphorical system called the ETS for emotelix syntax. Emotions like
fear and love inform you of a need. That's basically what they do. They're telling you as a deficit
of utility in your life and that you need to fill it. And this is what causes you to configure
yourself as a telon and then affect causation. All right. Telon brings together causation in
certain ways by certain mechanisms. And this is actually what happens. There is no way to do without
things like fear and love. As far as love is concerned, the love between two human beings
is concerned. They love each other and they feel that wonderful emotion because of the ETS.
Those feelings, the moods, they come out of this particular kind of this quality that has been put
in your mind by reality itself so that it can survive, so that it can renew its identity over
and over and over again. Two people who are on love are basically, they want to unite, they want
to merge their identities in one destiny, one shared destiny. That's what love is. So love starts
as an extremely fundamental property of reality, then creates the ETS, which then causes us to
behave in certain ways that cause us to unite our destinies and do things like marry and have
children, which reality needs in order to renew the cycle of life. What's the ETS?
The emo-telic syntax. Emo standing for emotion and telic, of course, meaning basically
emotion. You experience emotions because they are usually, most emotions, because they are
informing you of some kind of need. You have a need, that their fear means the need to fight
or flee. Love means the need to care for, nurture and appropriate. You can attach this to virtually
anything. Basically, this is the part of our minds that tells us what we need and then we
configure ourselves telically by means of telecrecursion or telecausation, configure
ourselves to fulfill those needs. And it's like a charge system. On the one hand, you've got negative
charge, filling that need amounts to a positive charge. So you've got this duality of charges.
And that's the way things work in CTNU. There's utility deficit and then there's utility.
So that's what the ETS is, just that part of your mind, that syntactic module that tells you
what you should be doing. It makes you feel very fight, flee, go up and ask that girl for a date.
This is the kind of thing that it's telling you about pain. I've got to jerk my hand away from
the flame. Then you've got fulfillment. You've got emotions of fulfillment, which then tell
they reinforce this cycle of charge and deficit and fulfill it. When you feel happy,
it means that you've just performed that thing properly. You've actually just closed that loop.
And it reinforces you to do the same thing in the future. And that's how reality more or less
conditions itself to fulfill its own nature. Chris, can you give me an example of a time
when you felt fear for weeks, so not just momentary fear, particularly with regard to
something existential? So this is a personal question. I want to know how is it that you
overcame some dread and then Bernardo similarly, you mentioned that you had problems with anxiety
in the past, probably still do, but a specific problem is likely in your mind.
Well, I can't say that I have felt prolonged dread in the past. Bouts of dread, of course,
we all do. But in terms of prolonged dread, I've been mercifully free of that kind. I have felt
things protracted uncomfortable feelings like loneliness. I mean, I feel lonely. I cope with
those things by basically turning my mind in a direction that I know can be fulfilled. If there's
no one around that I could be my companion and I'm going to have to remain lonely, I make sure
that I use my time well by immersing myself in something that makes me feel better,
distracting myself from that need, which cannot yet be fulfilled, and kind of transferring that
into the future. Okay, I will solve this problem later. But now I'm going to do what needs do.
Okay. Bernardo.
I have experienced dread for over a decade, pretty much continuously. A lot of my philosophy work
has been a sort of an alchemy of translating that undesired, undesirable energy of dread into
something positive. Nietzsche talked about this being the job of philosophers, turning everything
we are, everything we fear into love and flame, as he put it. That was the job of philosophy,
and I think he was right. For me, it started in my mid 30s. When I was 34, I had achieved
everything that I set myself to achieve when I was 12. When I was 12, my father died, and I made a
list of everything I wanted to achieve in my life. One day, I woke up at 34 and I realized
everything is ticked. It's all there. And I thought, I've arrived. I'm in control. I have control
of the world because I had external control of the world. I had a good job. I had sufficient
money. I had the house I always wanted to have. I was married to my youth sweetheart.
And then in life has a funny way to confront you with your own bullshit very, very quickly.
So it didn't take weeks of that feeling. I am in control for me to find a nodule in my wife's
breast, which took doctors two weeks to rule out as cancer. And in those two weeks, I thought,
shit, I'm not in control at all. My wife can get sick and die. I can get sick and die.
Everything that I find important, all those people can. I have no control over my own body,
let alone the world. And that realization was terrible to me. I internalized that into health
anxiety for myself, health anxiety for everybody that I cared about. And it took well over 10 years
for that claustrophobic feeling to sort of dissipate. And I wish I would have the seven
steps to getting rid of that. Two things happened to me prior to it dissipating. One, I accepted
that it would never go away, which is amazing. When you truly accept in your heart of hearts,
that's okay, this is not something I can fight. This is not a problem I can solve. I've tried
everything for over 10 years, every recipe in the book, everything, and didn't solve it. So I might
have to live with it. And I truly accepted that in the core of my being that I will live with
anxiety. That was one precursor. The other precursor was reconnecting with my child self.
My child self from before my father died, and I suddenly instantly turned into an adult,
reconnecting with that way of being in the world that is when you are not trying to control the
world, when you are in full communion with the world, you're not trying to control your destiny,
you're not thinking about the future, you don't have lists about things that need to be achieved.
You're just there for the world, enjoying the moment, and you're taken by the wind with the
flow of life. And reconnecting with that, which to me had to do with my passion for computers.
And I started designing my own computers, what I always wanted to do when I was a kid. And I went
to university at 17, and I designed computers for others, but never designed my own computer. So
I started doing that. And somewhere in the course of two years, that conjunction of accepting fear,
accepting that it will never go away, that it's not a problem to be solved,
and reconnecting with my child self. Somehow, don't tell me, I cannot tell you how or when,
one day I woke up and I looked back over the previous two years and I realized,
wow, I haven't been anxious. I still have some crisis here and there, but I tuned into
what I like to call the movements of the impersonal in my mind. Sometimes I personalize it and I call
it the diamond. And I say, my life now is about doing the diamonds bidding. My life's not about me
anymore. And that sort of, that acceptance that my life is not about me, that I'm just here
riding a wave, nature's trying to do something through me. And my only choice is, do I resist
that or do I not? And naturally, and very spontaneously, making the choice to not resist it
means that you surrender control. So if you ask me, where do I want to be in five years,
I would just laugh at your face. I have no idea. And I have no need to know.
I will be, where are we will be in five years? So long as I keep in tune with the movements of
the impersonal within me. And I'm completely relaxed with that. And that surrender of control
was a surrender of fear. Because if you don't feel that you need to be in control,
fear does not have fertile grounds to grow and take hold. Because you're not trying to be in
control. There is a kind of an acceptance of the impersonal, an acceptance that you're just a part
of nature. It's like that blossom of my apple tree telling itself, where do I want to be in five
days? It's ridiculous. It's not about the blossom. It's not even about the tree. It's about the whole
flow of nature. And when you internalize that insight, at least for me, when I internalized
that insight, not because I tried, not because I had a plan to internalize it, it just happened.
I realized it with hindsight. You know, just by looking back, I realized this dynamic played
out. It happened. I somehow let go of the need to control of the need to plan. I surrendered into
the movements of the impersonal. And I'm fine. I'm surprisingly fine. I still have horrible
tinnitus in both ears. I hear dentist's drill in both my ears very loud, constantly 24 hours a day.
Thought about seaside twice, three and a half years ago. I'm in peace with that even. How did
this happen? I have no idea how this happened. I have no recipes. I can't tell you, follow these
steps. I can only tell you what the precursors for me were. And I still experience fear and
dread occasionally, but it's nowhere near that right I used to have. Now, the bad news is
I feel a lot less energy to write. I feel a lot less need to write. It's like the diamond used my
dread to corral me into doing its bidding. And now that it can't use it anymore, I'm much more in
the now. If you ask me what my intuition points to, my intuition is that I will still play with
computers, old computers and designing my own computers for another year or two to exhaust
that that childhood need and to be really in communion with my child self. And after that,
I sense I see it coming on the horizon. A whole new phase of writing will come,
but much more mature writing, much more centered writing, not writing driven by
dread driven by the diamond, but more centered, more mature, more adult
writing, which will be a lot less conceptual because it's more adult. That's what I sense. So
knock on wood. Let's hope that that's how things will play out. But I don't need to know if that's
what will happen. What will happen is what will happen. That's how I live now.
Chris, do you have any thoughts on that? Does anything occur to you or any stories
come to mind after you hear that? Well, it's, of course, there's value in Bernardo's
advice and his anecdote. I tend to have a much more focused
view of the future. That's not to say that I plan everything in advance,
but I strive to see the possibilities and then strive to make out the one that best,
that is optimal for my purposes and constantly just, you know, I'm more of a driven person.
I don't have these, these emotions that plague me all, you know, all the time the way some people
do. God bless them. I mean, it's difficult to have to put up with that, but I'm more of a purpose
driven animal. Okay. And this is what, this is the way I approach reality. And when I have,
when I have some, you know, some people, for example, I was in the bar business for years,
I was a bar bouncer and there are some people who just, you know, you throw them out of a bar,
they don't forgive and forget, you know, they now become, they fixate on revenge and they can't
let go of it. And they can, I'm the kind of person who can instantly let go of that kind of thing.
I feel anger, you know, sometimes, and if the anger is too intense that bad things can happen,
but if I, if I can get through that, if I can stop from becoming enraged,
then 10 minutes later, I'm just fine. Unless, unless it was such a serious thing that I can't
afford to be fine, if you know what I mean. Okay. But I can let go of things very easily,
and then divert myself onto what I consider to be a more productive track. This is something that,
you know, if I have the energy, and as Bernardo was talking about, sometimes you just don't feel
the energy because it's like there's a diamond sucking the energy out of you for its own purposes
and trying to turn you in a certain direction or whatnot. And that is something that I very much
try to avoid. If I realize, well, there seems to be something beyond me that is using me in some way,
I curtail it, unless I discern that it's good for me. So I'm constantly making these judgments
about purpose and about, you know, what I should be doing, you know, and about my impulses,
subjecting them to cognition. And, you know, cognition is not primary. It's basically not a
primary function. It comes out of, out of will, out of tellysis, which is what we've been talking
about here. Okay, just like, just like access consciousness, for example, as opposed to phenomenal
consciousness. Okay, that's it. That all is, is post-tellic to me, right? So, so although I do use
cognition for purposes of reflection, you know, all of this takes place with me on an emotional
level beneath the surface. Okay, in other words, I realize, okay, it's not good, this is going to
lead to bad feelings. I'm not going to be satisfied doing this immediately. I change directions and
try to get myself on a track that is going to be more productive for me, and not going to subject me
to, you know, any kind of bad feelings or ill will or anything like that.
Let me be personal for a couple minutes, maybe three minutes. I've spoken about this issue on
the podcast before. You can see either the Carl Friston part two podcast or the Diana Posolka
podcast for more information. You can also skip forward five minutes. I didn't know what it meant
to take that seriously until I felt it. It's different to feel something than it is to analyze it.
Anyway, so I felt it terrified, terrified out of my mind. And I remember something calling me to
the center, something calling me saying, Kurt, you have, you've been keeping your mind far too open.
There is such a thing as when people say, keep your mind open, but not so open that your head
falls out. I remember saying, oh, yeah, that's just to justify your own close-mindedness.
Something was saying, there's truth to that, come back to the center, come back. Not to say that
it's not real, like you have to decide there is a reality to it, but you have to decide this.
And so from like, like, I feel like my for the past few months, almost all of my thoughts,
like it's abating, my anxiety is abating, but I feel like I'm constantly preventing myself from a
nervous breakdown. And what's helped is a middle ground between you both, which is to retain a
sense of control. So something called act therapy, acceptance and commitment therapy. So you accept,
that's where Bernardo, you come in, where it's like, okay, you accept that, you know, these thoughts
are simply thoughts and they may occur just like thoughts occur to everyone. Don't think you're
ever going to get rid of them. And maybe they will become zero, but don't think that. And then
also to accept the thoughts, but not merge with them, not fuse with them, accept simply means
acknowledge softly, gently. I see you thought interesting that you're there. I don't need to
take you seriously, and then just go to where your values are and you commit to where your values
are, which is where the control comes in. So you have to have some values. So my values are my wife
and love and this world and seeing behind my eyes and actually feeling like I'm behind my eyes,
which was not there from two months or so, like it's depersonalized.
Anyway, I've come to the decision now that what matters is
is not a toll is like I used to love to like doing everything, speaking to to and learning
great theories. And I still love that I still do that actually gives me some same, some sanity,
if it's not consciousness related, if it's math and physics, because it's dispassionate. But
what's primary is my relationship with my wife and love. And so if I have to sacrifice a toaday
of studying to go spend time with my wife, I do almost invariably, that was never there before
work comes first before. Now it's like no, no, no, Kurt almost everything may fade in some manner.
All of what I'm putting out on YouTube may fit people may take it out of context, people may
shape it just like the Nirvana logo kids wear it. It used to be from Nirvana the band kids have no
idea who Nirvana is, but they wear the shirt. The term Nirvana used to mean something Buddhist,
but Nirvana took that. And so constantly something will get taken away from you and change.
That's out of your hand. Love is primary. Just follow that. So that's what I guide myself by now.
And that's given me some sanity. The way I imagine it is almost like a pendulum.
Instead of now swinging it to the other side, which was me before trying to avoid. No,
I don't want to think I don't want to think that that makes it come back. It's a gentle
nudge to the center. I try not to run from it, but it's not the same as facing it,
which is what I thought I had to do. It's more the same as just interesting.
Okay, let me move toward what I what I value. I want to put warning signs on all my interviews
now because of that, because like some people just advice should be advice should be
taken slowly. Anyway, they're saying that this is some awakening and there's this quote from
HP Lovecraft, which I agree with, which is, hey, the one of the greatest mercies of the world is
our inability to correlate its contents, the whole reality's contents. And as soon as you do,
you may go mad from the revelation or or beg for the ignorance of the past and flee into the
darkness from the light. And Jacobi last quote, Jacobi had a quote, don't know which Jacobi,
there's like 12 of them, that the humans have one choice, but a single choice, either God or
nothingness. By choosing nothingness, man makes himself into a God because it means everything
around you is an apparition. I don't follow that logic. But regardless, I like the the poetics
behind it. He said, so there's only one choice. God exists outside of me as a living being in
and of himself, or I am God, there is no third. I think that's true. That's that. All right.
So now you have like great insight into Kurt the past few months. The reason I tell you all this
is because, well, hey, any delicate advice, if you've gone through something similar, I am
extremely appreciative of. Well, I don't think that it's quite accurate to say there are only
these two alternatives. Either I have to be God or God has to exist entirely outside of me.
Okay, there is a there's a middle ground there. As a matter of fact, I would affirm that middle
ground and say that if you if you make this false dichotomy out of it, either I have to be God,
you know, totally solipsistic universe. Yeah, I mean, right, that that is a mistake. Basically,
you're dissociating yourself from your true highest level of identity. And you can't afford to do that.
You have to try to take in a little structure and understand it's very, very difficult, you know,
I mean, Lovecraft may have thought that this is, you know, something that drives you into the arms
of Thulu, you know, or whatever, you know, nevertheless, it is absolutely necessary for you
to maintain your psychological equilibrium. It's only a static. Okay, you mentioned God a lot during
this this this position here. And God is a is a fixture now in your awareness. And that's a very,
very good thing. Okay, when you talk about God says, you know, you're in Philippians, it says,
you know, through your, your cares on to God. Okay, you can't hand your cares off to God unless
you're close to God, unless you're actually standing this, you can hand them off. And that's
the whole point of that. Basically, you, you know, to hand things off to God is the same as
handing them off to your own highest level of identity. It's not outside you, you're a part of
it, you're a lower stratum. But that identity actually spans you and spans all of reality,
your feature of reality, or an aspect that a part of reality. So you have to keep this in mind,
it's a myriology, it's the relationship of a part to its whole. And if you keep that in mind,
that is what the CTMU is about, by the way, it's a myriology. If you keep that in mind,
then you will remain in balance with the rest of reality. That would be my helpful advice.
Bernardo, man. Who am I to render advice? I'm younger than Chris.
If I can share something with you is that it, this is life. It's, it's the process of life.
Life buffets us and brings us to the edge. And it should, if you, if it's not bringing you to the
edge, you're not living fully. The artist to navigate the edge without falling down the precipice,
but navigating the edge, because that's the path of maturation. That's the path of change. Otherwise,
you will always remain with your, then the same narratives, the same illusions, such as the illusion
of identity, the illusion of control. These things don't go away. If you, if you're not tested
by life. So, hey, who rate what's happening to you? It may feel extremely uncomfortable, but
that's the point. That's the point. If you're always in your comfort zone, you're not going
anywhere. And one day you will wake up in your death bed and think, what was this all about?
What was this for? I wasted the whole thing. Now that's not going to be your destiny, my friend.
You're, you're, you're not going to that dark place. There was something else I wanted to share
with you, but it just escaped my mind. You just said, you used the phrase, you know,
not interjecting. You basically said the illusion of identity. Now I understand that you have that
in analytic idealism, you've got the idea that this is something like, like some kind of identity
disorder, you know, this dissociative identity disorder in which everybody is an alter of this
one primary primal identity, right? Is that what you're referring to? That it is illusory to think
of you? Is that what the illusion of identity is? If you force me down the conceptual path,
I would have to say yes, but I was not trying to speak conceptually. I'm not trying to speak theory
to Kurt. The theory is here. And Kurt, oh, I remember now. What you're suffering from
is something that the vast majority of people have the opposite problem. You internalize
a narrative. You internalize a worldview. You are able of, you're capable of internalizing it.
It comes from your head, purely conceptual. It sinks into the body and you can live from
the perspective of that worldview. And that's what you experience as testing your balance,
testing your centeredness, or threatening to make you lose yourself. Because you can embody
what for most people is purely a conceptual narrative. Most people have the opposite problem.
They cannot embody a narrative. They are incapable of making that translation. And what that means
is that even if they understand certain things and they make progress cognitively in understanding,
it doesn't change their lives. It doesn't touch their emotions. They continue to live according
to old patterns, to old references, because there's a level in which they don't actually
believe the conceptual narratives. You have your gates open. That is a tremendous advantage compared
to most people, but also a liability, because you have to watch that gate carefully. You can
put yourself in a place from which it's very hard to emerge again. But everything you said,
to me, I would just say, hooray, cheers to life. You're living. Congratulations, man.
I'm going to comment on the illusory aspect, because here's one aspect that gave me
groundedness, was when I was speaking to this professor of religion named Diana Posolka,
she was saying, Kurt, don't worry that half of the world thinks that I am God and so on,
because you don't know what they mean by that. I have an idea of what they mean.
It could be misinterpreting what they mean. They could be wrong at the same time.
Millions and billions of people have been wrong. All of these practices, meditation,
and psychedelics, they're meant to be done with a community. And all these insights,
she said, she would imagine if you went to some leader and you told them this insight,
they'd be like, oh, no, no, that's completely wrong. You are not God. You are an aspect of God,
or whatever it may be. And then she also said, the Plato's cave journeys, what's happening,
or the dark night of the soul, she used that phrase. She said, the actual full story of that,
or you think this is reality, the wall, you come out, you feel like that's an illusion,
then the end of the story is to somehow realize that what you thought was real in the beginning is
indeed real. It's just real in another manner, like somehow more real. And then I remember
something Bernardo that you said, look at this, this we think of as solid, we feel it, there's
solidity to it. Yet we look at it through a microscope and we say, yeah, the atoms are far
apart, this solidity is an illusion. That's if you take materialism as primary. What if you
take your conscious experience? No, no, this is solid. This actually is solid. There's something
real about that. There's something real about this table. There's something real about me inhabiting
this world. I can go through this process where I feel like, oh, that's all an illusion. But then
there's this quote about T.S. Eliot that the point of the journey is to come back where you
started and know the place for the first time. I feel like that I'm slowly starting,
where I feel the reality of this more. I feel it. But then there's a negging part of me that's like,
yeah, you're tricking yourself, you're tricking yourself. We let our theories hijack the reality
of our experiences. And that's a tragedy. Experiences are not nothing. They're the only
thing that is really real. That's not just abstraction. So it doesn't matter that you,
oh, there are atoms here and then the distance between the electron orbitals and the nucleus
is enormous relative to the diameter of the particles themselves. Yeah, it's all true. But
you experience this, you hold this, it has weight, it has texture, it feels moist, and it satiates
my thirst. This is all real stuff. Now, a conceptual understanding, a conceptual narrative behind
that may be true or not, but it doesn't take away from the experience. Whatever this is,
it is an experience. And it is real as such. The problem is that we are in a society
which implicitly tells us experiences in themselves are nothing. It's the thing
that lies behind the experience that counts. That's absolutely nonsensical. All we have
is experience. The narrative behind it can help us develop a certain understanding,
but not by robbing us of the immediacy of experience, which ultimately is all we have.
We can add understanding to that, but that understanding is a layer on top of the immediacy
of experience. And look, the ego exists. It's a tool. Without it, I wouldn't know to which
mouth to bring the fork. So there is something there that we call the ego. Now, is it your
subjectivity in and of itself or not? That's a valid question. I would answer that the ego is not
your subjectivity. It's a certain configuration of experiences or a narrative within your
subjectivity. And yes, idealism ultimately is a form of cosmic solipsism. And you can
dip your toes in those waters and you recoil from it. I call it the vertigo of eternity.
It's a place that is very hard to visit, very hard to confront, which may be a clue to why we
are here in this form. But maturing has always to do with poking you out of your comfort zone
and buffeting you a little. And you just have to hold the boat together so we can continue to
navigate and not sink. But I don't think there is anything intrinsically bad about the fact that
the waters are trying. It's trying stuff. And that's how we progress. I'm not a prophet. I'm not
going to predict your future. And you come from a different place than me. Your life has a different
context. What holds to me may not hold to you. It doesn't hold to you. But now I'm going to do
exactly what I said I wouldn't do, which is make a prediction. So forgive me for that.
But there will come a moment when you realize that your problems will dissipate not because you
answered your questions, but because you no longer feel the need to ask them.
Yeah, I'll leave it at that. Okay, so Chris, whatever thoughts come to you,
and then we can move on to another couple of questions. I'm sorry to go on this side.
You were just communicating with your own highest level of identity. That's basically God.
And the reason that you are able to communicate with God is that you are an aspect of God.
God is reality. It's the ultimate reality. It almost has to be that way. Otherwise,
it makes no sense to call something God. Okay, you are a part of God. And you are a stratum
of God's identity. It's as simple as that. And you give rise to things. Your experiences,
they are identities. Your experiences, experience is not something that can't, it is, it's one
unary, you know, coherent thing. And yet it can be teased apart into this idea of form and substance.
Okay, it's basically an experience is an interface. It's an interface between you and reality. It's
you accepting input from the outside world or internal input from yourself. Okay, and transducing
it and then turning that into a thought or into behavior. Okay, this is, this is what it is.
This is what it's doing for you. So your experiences, even your purely mental experiences
are of utmost value to you. They are identities that are a part of your identity and you are a
part of a greater identity. Okay, so you've got this continuum of identities. All right,
and it's a nested, it's kind of a, you know, it's a, it's a Russian doll. So it's, it's, you know,
Matruska, Matruska dolls, I forget. Anyway, basically, it's one thing nested within another.
You've got a highest level of identity. Your identity is nested in it and your experiences
are nested in you. They're all identities. Okay, putting all those things together is what it
seems to me that you're doing. A very, very valuable thing. So I would say keep up the good work.
Well, hey, man, it's like any compliment from you is an honor. So let's just end this with
what you all value. What do you value most? Chris? What do I value most?
God, in other words, the identity of reality. And of course,
supporting and, and aiding the fulfillment of reality. I believe that reality actually has
a goal, a teleological purpose that it, that it is, that it is determined by its structure.
Basically, it's built into what it is. And then it is my job to fulfill, help reality fulfill
that, that, that its goals, its teleological impetus, which derives from its structure.
Because I'm a part of it. And it's my own highest level of identity. And it's my job to help it just
as, as it helps me. Okay, I'm carried within it. I exist within it. So I'm going to return the favor.
I'm going to try to reinforce it as much as I can. That's what's valuable to me. And then, of course,
we have all of the things that are valuable to everybody. You know, the idea of love, you know,
I mean, I have a wife, I have home, I have, you know, pets, I have dogs that, that love me,
you know, the taste of a good meal, you know, or a good drink, right, having fun with your friends,
right, going out and enjoying nature, all of those things are valuable to me. But the one,
the one basic imperative that I feel is to integrate with reality perfectly. Help reality
reinforce itself. Right, because that's all there is, there is nothing outside of that.
You try to extricate yourself from reality like the Buddhists are trying to do. And you end up in
Nirvana and you're nothing. Your identity has at that point fused without the entire universe,
and you no longer have an individual identity at all. Your identity is a self distributed thing
that covers everything. And you have lost your identity as you know, okay, you're here and you
feel your individual identity. And that's very, very important. Okay, your job, your job, the job
of your identity is not only to enjoy life, as you will put here to do, but also to help life
and to help reality reinforce itself. Right, that's what I consider value.
Bernardo.
The answer I will give you is not the answer I would like to give you. I would like to tell you
I value love the most relationships, the most human decency and justice.
Nietzsche struggled with this question. And he answered power. Power is what
he considered the most important, the will to power and contrast to Freud's will to pleasure.
But the truth is, and you know, part of maturing is accepting your own truths. And the truth is
about yourself, even when you don't like it. The truth is that for me, the most important thing
is truth. And that how to probably surrender everything else to stare the truth in the face,
whatever the price, whatever the cost, that for me is the highest calling. It's how I'm put together.
It's not how I wish I was put together to prioritize truth above all else is not trivial.
Again, Nietzsche, he was very explicit about that. He said, why do we want to know the truth?
What's the point? He thought it was ridiculous. It was a knee jerk reflex that if we thought it
through, we would abandon. It's not about what is true. And I have meditated on that for years.
I went to the extreme of visiting the places where Nietzsche had those thoughts, which,
thank goodness, are recorded. We know where he was. And I probably stood within a meter
of where he stood. But at the end of all, that struggle, it's the truth that shines through.
And the truth is my highest commitment is the truth. That's how I am. I hated,
in a sense, but that's how I am. Thank you all so much for coming out.
Thank you. Thank you all. This was, well, enlightening in many ways.
Okay. I would just once again repeat after that inspiring comment by Bernardo that
truth and reality are basically two ways of looking at the same thing. When you say,
that's real or something is real, you are saying that it is true. Okay. And when you
say that something is true, you're saying that it's real. So in dedicating yourself to truth,
you also dedicate yourself to reality and both of our comments, both what both of us said,
combined in this one truth. It's one real truth. The same thing.
Okay. Thank you all.
I hope you had fun. More than that. And thank you for being so open, for being so
truthful and so out there with the rest of us. It's been very much my pleasure. Thank you so much.
Thanks both of you. Yes, you too Bernardo. Take care. All right, man. Bye-bye.
The podcast is now finished. If you'd like to support conversations like this, then do consider
going to patreon.com slash C-U-R-T-J-A-I-M-U-N-G-A-L. That is Kurt Jaimungal. It's support from
the patrons and from the sponsors that allow me to do this full time. Every dollar helps
tremendously. Thank you. And a special thank you to Jeanie Langen, whose diligence made this all
possible. Thank you, Jeanie.
