But I think that you actually get it, you know, it's half tongue-in-cheek the way you call it.
And you don't call it theory of everything, right? You call it theories of everything.
So, which kind of suggests that it's not as simple as one might think.
Edward Frankel is a prominent figure in the mathematical community. In fact, he was a
professor at Harvard at 21, which is unparalleled. He's known for his work on the Langlands program,
which is a blueprint aiming to bridge seemingly unrelated areas of math.
A key aspect of Frankel's contributions lie in his investigations of Hitchin-Moduli spaces
and Caq-Mudi algebras, but what are they? Hitchin-Moduli spaces generalize certain types
of differential equations, specifically ones related to something called connections on vector
bundles over Riemann surfaces. These are akin to trying to categorize different shapes based on
how many corners they have. Technically, these are called invariants. On the other hand, Caq-Mudi
algebras are infinite-dimensional algebras, which are usually introduced as extensions of other
familiar structures in math. In fact, there's even a question posed by Richard Borchards,
a field medallist, who took the Caq-Mudi concept and put it on steroids with something called
vertex operator algebras, posing a question to Edward. Also, to be clear, certain representations
of those Caq-Mudi algebras are realized as vector operator algebras. VOAs aren't an extension
of Caq-Mudi. As usual, timestamps to everything mentioned are in the description, as well as
links to everything mentioned are in the description. You can even skip this intro if you like.
More important than the math, this podcast delves into Edward's personal reflections. Edward touches
on what it means to reconnect with yourself, and he does so while confronting vast topics like
infinity, death, and childhood trauma. My name is Kirchay Mungle, and on this channel,
I use my background in mathematical physics to analyze various theories of everything,
from Wolframs to string theory. We even explore consciousness and AI. As an aside,
though this is an important theme in this conversation, is a theme that I resonate with
from The Lord of the Rings, which is the story where Frodo gets stabbed by a special blade
early on in the book, and then toward the end of the book, while everyone else is happy, and
the problems are resolved, including with Frodo. He succeeded in what he was attempting to do.
The scar never heals. The wound still hurts him years and years later, and the lesson,
or the symbolism, is that there are some things that can happen to you that don't go away.
There are some wounds that while on the surface they heal, they shape you. That's always touched me.
That touches me more than any other aspect of Lord of the Rings, and it's something that
comes up in this conversation. Enjoy this revelatory podcast, this intimate podcast,
with Professor of Mathematics at Berkeley, Edward Frankel, one of my favorite podcasts.
Welcome, Professor Frankel. Thank you. I've been very much looking forward to this conversation
for weeks and weeks, so it's an honor. I'm happy. I'm privileged. Thank you for coming on.
It's my pleasure. It's great to be here. Being interviewed by you, Kurt, I have
watched some of the videos on your channel and found them inspiring and fascinating.
I'm glad to join the family. Even that's an honor that you've watched,
that you've heard of the channel, let alone watched some of them.
What are you up to these days, and what excites you about it? Okay. Well, I'm a mathematician
and a Berkeley professor. I feel like my day job, in other words, something that has been
the constant throughout my life is my research. Teaching too, but research is something that I
have really devoted, I suppose, most of my energy in my adult life. My research is on a subject
which is called the Langlands program. It's named after mathematician Robert Langlands,
who is a professor emeritus now at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton,
where I would like to mention that he used to occupy the office that was formerly Albert
Einstein's office at the Institute. In the late 1960s, Langlands came up with a bunch of conjectures
and ideas which became known as Langlands program. What this is, what it was originally, was
trying to connect seemingly unrelated questions in different parts of mathematics, specifically
number theory on one side, and harmonic analysis on the other side. I don't know if I can talk
more about this if you like later, I can explain more detail, but just to set the stage. This is
something that excited mathematicians for several generations, more than 50 years, obviously.
In the 1980s, a new domain in the Langlands program emerged, which has to do with things
that are connected not so much to number theory, but to geometry and eventually quantum physics,
and it has to do with what's called Riemann surfaces, such as a sphere or the surface of a
donut and so on, so-called Riemann surfaces. My research has been on this subject for many years,
but there was something interesting about it that distinguished it from the original formulation
of the Langlands program. In the Langlands program, it's about functions and operators acting on
functions. We can think about it in terms of quantum mechanics. There is a Hilbert space and
there is some computing operators acting in a Hilbert space, and we want to diagonalize them.
We want to find their eigenvectors and eigenvalues. That's the original formulation,
but in the geometric formulation, people couldn't find it initially, a framework like that. Instead,
what was proposed was that it should be about this weird esoteric object called sheaves,
and so it became known as a geometric Langlands correspondence. But in the last five years or
so, with my two colleagues, Pavel Ettingof and David Kashtan, we were able to find this new
formulation in the geometric setting, in the setting of Riemann surfaces, where in fact we do
have a Hilbert space and we do have computing operators, and we can pose the question of finding
the eigenvectors and eigenvalues. It's kind of a new flavor of the Langlands program. It's something
that really excited me for the last five years. It's so interesting because for me, it's been like
my research has not been a linear path in some sense. For a long time, it was like when you're
young and ambitious, you want to be the best you can be. It's all about achieving and finding your
place in the community and so on. That was a period of rapid growth. At some point, I started
asking myself, why am I doing this? Am I doing it because I want to achieve something?
Recognition or awards? Or am I doing it really because I love it? And it's not so easy in a
later point in life to regain that. And so there was kind of a period where I suppose I was a
little jaded, maybe about 10 years ago. Well, conveniently around that time, I wrote my book
Love and Math and so I was in high demand for public speaking and so on. So it's kind of like,
it worked out actually in a way that gave me a little more time to reflect. And so interestingly
enough, I did remember that excitement that I had as a student in the teenagers in my early
where I literally went to sleep. I went to fall asleep faster so I could wake up in the morning
and resume my inquiry, my asking those questions and working on this. And so I kind of regained,
I kind of remember this. It was so exciting. So I'm just kind of trying to give you a sense
where I am. This project especially, which like I said, I've been working on for about five years
now. And it still excites me and it's still something that I feel that there are so many
interesting questions there that draw my attention. This appetite that you have to be number one or
that you used to have when you were in your younger years, this striving, you said that you
started to question it and think, okay, well, what am I truly motivated by? That's right versus
what do I want other people to recognize me for? When did you start to question that? You
mentioned 10 years ago? Yeah, yeah, maybe about 10 years ago. Well,
about 10 years ago. Well, you know, after the book gave me a certain framework. Oh, well, thank you.
I read this book cover to cover. And when I say cover to cover, I mean, including the index
and the glossary. So I love this book. Oh, thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Appreciate it. The
book is called Love and Math and it'll be in the description. It's on screen right now if
you're watching this on video. The first half is like an ode to mathematics in general. This is
my perspective. So you have your own. And then the last half is some, I'm surprised if anyone who
isn't a mathematician can keep up with the last half. But it's something that for me, who is
extremely interested in math was extremely interested in, especially love the dictionaries,
which by the way are like translation dictionaries. Mathematicians call them dictionaries, but
they're more like translation dictionaries or the sources because you can substitute the words.
Whereas a dictionary is like a word and then you have a longer word that defines it.
Whereas a translation dictionary is the Rosetta stone.
Rosetta stone. Yes. And I do, I do, I do frame it as a Rosetta stone, right? And it's, it is about
the language program. It's exactly the subject that I, I was just, you know, I gave a brief
outline of just now. I would love to talk to you about the process of writing this book later on
this interview as well. If you don't mind. Yeah, sure, sure. Of course. But anyway, we're getting to
you questioning your own motivations, how that came about, how that unfolded and where that led
you now. Yes. So, you know, it's so interesting. Well, you're an artist. So you know how it works.
It's the results when you actually dedicate yourself to an artistic project, you cannot
know what will come out. And of course, true dedication means that you, you, it's sincere.
It's a sincere effort. You want to connect to your audience, right? So I wanted to connect to my
audience. I wanted them to be excited about the subject. So what the primary motivation for writing
Love and Mask for me was that I said, I thought that nobody knows what mathematics is really about,
apart from a very small elite, very small group of people, professional mathematicians like myself.
And I opened the book with this analogy of saying, imagine you had an art class in which they only
taught you how to paint fences and walls and never taught you the paintings of the great masters,
never show them to you, never even told you that they existed, never told you that there were
museums where you could go and look at them. What would you think of art? The way art is presented
to you is just painting fences and walls and then watching paint dry. So of course, years later,
you'll say, art is not for me. Okay, so it's not something I find. Yeah, maybe there are these
weird people who like painting fences and walls, but if I ever need that, I will just hire someone
to do it. And that's it. So then they completely miss what this is all about. In both cases,
of course, paint is involved, but in very different ways. And so I felt my job was to try to convey
that. What is it about? What are these paintings? What are the Picasso's of mathematics? And cutting
through, obviously, if you are a math major, you take courses and it takes a long time,
but I wanted to address a general audience of people who don't have time to go
and take classes and learn the basics. And I wanted to cut through those
sort of the technical stuff and just get to the sense, give a sense of what it's like. What are
the objects, for instance, we're talking about? We're not talking about numbers necessarily, right?
We're not talking about quadratic equations. We're not talking about Euclidean geometry
or the subjects that we are. It's a very limited part of mathematics that we have yet exposed.
We talk about symmetry groups. We go talk about braid groups. We talk about human surfaces. We
talk about hybrid spaces. This kind of stuff, infinite dimensional stuff. What is this like?
What is it also? What is it like to do it? What is it like? Why did I get excited about it?
So I wanted to couple it with a human story. So that's the initial motivation. In other words,
I set out to write this book to teach the world something, to connect to my readers, to let them
experience something which perhaps they haven't had a chance to experience yet. But in a weird way,
what art does is, if you're successful in connecting to your audience, guess what? You will
receive feedback too from the book. It's a two-way street. This was an amazing thing about art.
With mathematics, by the way, not quite so because we operate within such rigid framework,
very rigorous rules and so on. So it is a passionate pursuit, but I discovered that
writing a book or earlier, I had a chance to be involved in filmmaking. And now recently,
I started recording my DJ sets, electronic music. I discovered that this is a totally
different game because not only you have a chance to give something to your audience,
but also you receive something. If you are sincere, if you really put your heart to it,
and so that in that sense, the book was a revelation for me. I learned so many things,
but it catalyzed a process of self-inquiry, you could say, where I start questioning things
about myself, about my life, about my outlook in a very strange way. It wasn't programmed
in some sense. It was just like happening. It brought me in contact with people who helped
me to accelerate that process. And one of the questions was indeed, what is this all about?
Why am I doing this? Is it real? By that time, I understood that it's not real if it is just
driven by ambition and the desire to be recognized and rewarded. It's not real. It may still be,
have a real undercurrent, but it's not fully real. And the sooner one realizes that, the better.
So that's how I came to that question. But then there were other things too. I realized
to what extent we are driven by our emotions. Scientists would like to pretend that we are
these sterile beings and we are just analyzing this so-called objective reality, but nothing
to do with me. There is this, electrons are weird, but not me. It has nothing to do with my life.
So I suddenly realized how much I'm driven by this undercurrent of emotions and unconsciously
unaware of all those weird processes that are happening in my psyche. And that's when that
brought me to reading a lot of interesting stuff. Carl Jung is one of my teachers. I've read a lot
of Carl Jung and Marie-Louise Van Frans, one of his students, because I love both Carl Jung and
Van Frans to me. It's like a source, endless source of inspiration and insight. And so then I connected,
I started studying Eastern philosophy and all this kind of stuff. And so that's what the book
catalyzed in me, my own, so to speak. So it kind of ricochets onto ourselves as authors.
It's a gift. It's a gift. I'd like to add to that. So you mentioned that art is a bit different than
math because there's more, at least if it's true art, there's an aspect of receiving.
But immediate, immediate respect. Yeah, immediate. It's like a wave. It's a different frequency.
So yes, of course, with math, you also receive eventually. And Alisson Rothendinger, my hero,
my hero, and he obviously was one of the revolutionary mathematician of the second half of the 20th century.
And then he had an awakening, one could say, in a kind of traditional Eastern philosophy sense,
awakening where he realized he was brought, that some questions of human existence and suffering
were really hit him hard and brought, you know, were brought into his attention. And you could say
that that's because he went very deep into mathematics. So it's another portal too. But I feel
that it's like, it takes longer in some sense. It's like a wave, which is much longer way. Whereas
art is luxury is much faster. And so response time is much faster also.
Carl Jung said that great art is one where you don't know what you're creating when you go into it.
And then by the end of it, you learn something, well, you mentioned learn something about yourself,
but it could be learn something about almost anything. So you shouldn't, if you were to know
what you're doing when you start, then he called it propaganda, because you're trying to convince
people of something. Yeah, it's not love. It's not, you're not conveying love, you're conveying power.
And so, right? And so Jung is famous for saying also that where love ends, the power begins and
conversely. It's which I find a very good way to look at things. In other words, the impact is real
when it comes from the place of love. It can also be felt when it comes from power. But we
know what the results are eventually. A historical prelude to the Langlands program is the vile
conjectures, which he infamously came up with while he was in jail. So can you please talk about that?
Well, Langlands wouldn't disagree with that, because Langlands was not, it was not particular.
So first of all, we pronounce his way, we say it way, under a way, because there is also hell
from a wild to make things even more confusing, right? So there are two great mathematicians
who have very similar names. And then there was also Andrew Wilde. Yes, yes. So for people like
myself who read it, I was confused for the longest time between Andre vile or Andre vile and Andrew
vile. Who comes up? Who comes up with this? And also, I still don't know how to pronounce Hecke
operators or Hecke operators or my erano particles. I don't know, because I just read them. I think
for one year, I called it lie algebras instead of lie algebras. That's right. That's right. Yes.
Who writes this script, right? I don't know. But it's true that there are three mathematicians
with like exceedingly similar names. There is Herman Wilde, who was a great German mathematician,
who worked at the Institute for Advanced Study, was one of the founding professors or first
professors there. He is the one who was famous and made famous contributions to study groups and
lead groups specifically and quantum mechanics and so on. And they're also very, very brilliant
philosopher. Then there is Andre vile, who's a French mathematician, also ended up working
at the Institute for Advanced Study a little bit later. And he came up with this vile conjectures.
So his name is spelled W-E-I-L. And in French tradition, we pronounce it vile.
Oh, okay. So that's my mistake. Whereas Herman Wilde last name is spelled W-E-I-L.
And in the German tradition, we say vile. I just assume everything is German.
Right. So there is also the Andrew Wilde, who proved Hermann's last name with Richard Taylor.
So that's more, more contemporary mathematician. So Andre vile was a very brilliant mathematician
who came up with this vile conjecture, one of the most important, most fascinating and original
contributions. He also was the one who created this framework, came up with this framework,
the Rosetta Stone of mathematics, where number theory and geometry were connected
in a particular way, which actually gives a good context for understanding the Languages program.
But it would not necessarily be correct to say that Languages was motivated by the very conjectures.
They're kind of a little bit apart from each other. So Languages was motivated by other issues.
We can talk about this, but it's maybe a little bit later. So your question was more
about Andre vile or more about Languages? Well, the way that I understand it is that
even if Languages didn't see it when he was coming up with his program as an extension of the vile,
vile, how do I pronounce it? Way, way, way, way, like way, no way, the way, the way,
okay, this is the way. All right. Yeah, that's right. This is the way. So the way conjectures
that it's seen now, and I think even in your book you had on the x-axis, like in this matrix,
this translation dictionary, the way conjectures, but then if you go downward on one of them,
you have the Languages program. So in a sense, the way conjectures are more general, more encompassing.
But it's not exactly, so there is way conjectures, which is a very specific technical term for
some specific statements, but way conjectures, but way conjectures were an outcome of a certain
overarching framework that Andre vile came up with. In your right, he wrote that letter in 1940
to his sister, Simone, who was a famous philosopher and humanist, trying to explain
his ideas, and that's where he outlined this picture of Rosetta Stone, so to speak. The way
conjectures were an outcome for him from that conceptual understanding of how things fit in
mathematics, that he was able to argue by analogy. So you have Riemann hypothesis in number theory,
and because he had this framework where he could move things from number theory to other domains,
then he said, what would Riemann hypothesis look like in this domain? And it came up with
way conjectures, more or less. So what matters here, if we talk about the Languages program,
is not way conjectures themselves, which is a very particular application of that general
overarching framework, but the framework itself, the framework itself helps you see how the Languages
program can play out in different domains. That's the point I was trying to make in my book.
And Wei, Andre Wei, right. Andre Wei also, he gave an analogy of curves, points, and surfaces
as being different avatars of Vishnu. So can you please tell the audience about that as well?
Oh yes, so this is very interesting. So Andre Wei was very attuned to the Eastern tradition,
and he actually visited India, and I think lectured at the Tata Institute,
Fundamental Science in Bombay, Mumbai. And so in his letter to his sister, which was written in 1940,
he talks about how mathematicians perceive this analogies. And so it's kind of a very interesting,
I don't know if I should actually, I have my book here, so I don't know if I could,
if I should actually quote, this quote is here somewhere. And he mentions Abhagavad Gita,
Abhagavad Gita, which is a kind of a sacred text of Hinduism. So, and he says,
when you get an insight, it's just kind of an inkling of an idea, as opposed to when it's already
understood. He talks about this dialectics of the experience of passing from that moment of
recognition. But you're not sure yet, you just start seeing the outline, and then when it's actually
already done. And it's something very interesting, because like you fall in love kind of, you know,
so you wouldn't, you would, most people probably would least expect a mathematician
to be so poetic about it, about the nature of discovery in mathematics. But he says,
so what happened, this is a translation into English. So when, what happens when this
inkling of an analogy between two theories, turned into concrete knowledge, he says,
gone are the two theories, gone are their troubles, and delicious, delicious reflections in one
another, their furtive caresses, their inexplicable quarrels. Alas, we have but one theory now,
whose majestic beauty can no longer excite us. So the excitement comes from that moment,
recognition is basically saying, nothing is more fertile than this illicit liaisons.
Nothing gives more pleasure to the connoisseur. This initial moment of discovery, this initial
moment of insight. And he says, the pleasure comes from the illusion and the kindling of the
senses. Once the illusion disappears and knowledge is acquired, we attain indifference.
In the Bhagavad Gita, there are some, there are some lucid verses to this effect. And then he goes,
but let's go back to the algebraic function. So in other words, there is this depth of
understanding. So mathematics does give one this vantage point as opposed, which is very poetic,
and one could say romantic. And I can, I can, I can feel that basically what he's talking about,
because, you know, coming up with a discovery in mathematics does feel like that. But so does
everything else. Fall in love is kind of like this, although one could say it's not necessarily that
you kind of attain indifference of once it settles, it settles. The idea is that
that's the difference between, you know, human relationship, which is, which is living, which
can live and evolve and transform itself and reinvent itself forever or for a long time.
In mathematics, once the theory is completed, in some sense, it's already fixed. It doesn't grow.
It can grow then the next level and so on. But there is a, indeed, there is a sense of indifference.
So that's kind of connected to what I was talking about, the difference between art and mathematics.
That in art, in some sense, there is a more of a living, it's more of a living thing.
Yes, yes. Something that's popular nowadays is to say that there is no theory of everything.
And in part, they'll quote Feynman and say, well, it's supposed to be like an onion,
even though onions are finite, they have like 10 to 20 layers. So that's actually,
it's a poor analogy because we've revolutionized physics maybe 10 to 20 times in different ways.
So we should be at the core. But also that there's something romantic about it,
about there not being a theory of everything, because if there was, then we think the ultimate
questions are done. But the theory of everything in physics has a certain meaning of like reconciling
dynamic space-time with quantum theory. And so that's not exactly like the answers to everything,
quote unquote. But even if there was, it could be that the answer to everything, quote unquote,
is something that's animated. So it could be something like at the bottom of, I know this is
extremely poetic to say, but it could be like the theory of everything is to live lovingly,
in which case it's not like an apprehensible, timeless, dead fact, like certain theorems are.
But rather something to, rather a process rather than a state.
I agree that's a process. It's a process. It's a process. The connotation I think most people
have of theory of everything is that it's something static that is done. And then we have this knowledge
which somehow will cover everything. And that is very counterproductive in my view. And even,
I would say, dangerous and has unfortunately impeded progress and caused a lot of suffering
to scientists, but not only because it's a mindset. Because today people trust scientists to be
the forward-looking and kind of like more advanced, the way they used to look up to the
ologians or priests or poets or artists now, for better or for worse, it's the scientists who are
the priests, so to speak, in this era. And so if we are confused about this, if we entertain this
ideas, they propagate to a general culture. And this would happen in some sense, this idea of
insatiable, in my view, this insatiable appetite for trying to explain everything with the knowledge
I have right now. If you think about it, this is absurd. And all the history of humanity shows
that it's absurd. And yet the impulse is so strong. And I'm not going to say those other people have
to, it's me. I have been like this all my life, up until maybe very recently. So I know exactly
of how tempting this is. I also know how counterproductive it is and how much suffering comes
from it. So it's entertaining. It's kind of fun to engage in this activity. But I think it's
very important. And I'm glad you are... I'm speaking about this on the podcast, which is called Theories
of Everything, which is a bit paradoxical. But I think that you actually get it, kind of. It's
kind of half tongue-in-cheek, the way you called it. And you don't call it theory of everything.
Right? You call it theories of everything. So it's not as simple as one might think.
That's the observant mathematician in you.
That's why they pay me the big bucks, you know?
Yeah, exactly.
Not really.
Yeah. I think that the drive to come up with the theory of everything isn't,
even though people would say, well, I care about humanity and I want to solve global problems,
I don't think it's that. I think it's the desire to be crowned the title of the next Einstein.
Yeah. So it's ego-driven. So we can agree on that. Yeah. Of course.
To me, that means that you're not the next Einstein because Einstein never cared about
being the next Einstein because there was none. And also something I think about when people
say so-and-so is the next Einstein. We generally think of it in terms of, okay, are they creating
something that's a paradigm shift in physics or math? But it's unclear to me if Einstein was to be
born today. Would he be doing physics and math? So he was a creative, tuneful, poetic, romantic
person. Maybe he would, maybe the next Einstein is Christopher Nolan. Also, he played violin.
He played violin. Yes. Yeah. So literally, maybe he would be violinist.
Yeah. Maybe Yo-Yo Ma is the next Einstein. That's a good point.
The term theory of everything, let's unpack this because I think you've tongue-in-cheek
called the Langlois program a grand unified theory, which some people then take to say it's a theory
of everything of math. Of mathematics. Yes. Because you know, I was like, how come physicists always
talk about grand unified theories? This, I literally, I gave a colloquium in Princeton. And that's when
I first came up with this. It was kind of like on this program moment, I was like, how come physicists
always talk about grand unified theories, but we mathematicians don't. And actually, Langlois
was sitting in the audience and I said, well, guess what? I would like to call the Langlois program
the grand unified theory of mathematics. And they're all laughing because, of course, it doesn't
make sense because mathematics is just so diverse. It cannot have, nobody wants to have a theory of
everything. And then I said, well, maybe it doesn't describe everything, but at least it describes
something. So it's kind of a little, you know, like, so that's how it came about.
Well, in a sense, math already has a theory of everything. What I mean by that is it's the axioms.
So it's just, it's not interesting to anyone. Why I say that is that in physics,
but axioms, but axioms, now you're trading on our very features.
But I'll explain. In other words, the toe in physics is what are all those principles
from which all observations slash theories are emergent slash effective. That is what we
measure in the lab are just corollaries of these axioms. If we knew the axioms, like the
driver theory of everything in physics is what is the axioms of nature. And so in math, I know that
there's some controversies. But in math, we don't know what the axioms are either. That's a whole
point. That's a whole point, which is lost. Usually people don't realize because most people think
mathematics is written in stone. So of course, it's so predetermined. No, it's not. It is a very
important issue. In the way I like to talk about it is that, you know, there is an observer problem
in mathematics, just like quote unquote, or measurement problem mathematics, just like in
quantum physics, where the observer is involved in quantum physics, we know that from experiments.
In mathematics, it is much less, much easier to miss. And where it comes is there are several
places where it comes. But one of the most essential ones is who chooses the axioms. There
isn't one axiomatic system, which is God given. And even great mathematic logicians like Kurt
Gödel, for example, apparently he did believe that there is a kind of ultimate correct system.
And then he thought that his job as a mathematician was to find it. In other words,
it is somewhere there in some platonic world, and you have to go and find it. But it's not
obvious at all which one it is. So it's just the way you frame the search for it. In other words,
you may think that there is one special one, but you don't know what it is. And you devote
dedicate your life to finding it. Another alternative position is plurality, kind of
multiverse of axioms. So there are various axiomatic systems, they lead you to different
mathematics. And it's very interesting to analyze what are the differences, which is more fruitful,
which is less fruitful. So then you can say, okay, well, there must be some objective criteria
as to which a system of axioms is better. And the weird thing is that there isn't even consistency
cannot serve as a criterion, because the second incompleteness theorem of Kurt Gödel shows that
a formal system, that's kind of a assemblage of all the statements that you can get out of a
particular system of axioms. Formal system cannot prove its own consistency. You have to step out
of it, you have to step out of it, you have to add a joint some other axioms to be able to speak
about consistency. Consistency means that it's useful. You can't prove everything. And consistency
means that every statement, it can be derived. So it derives contradictions, it can derive
statement A, and then it's negation. And if that's the case, then it's true for every other statement.
So it means that it proves everything. So then it's useless. Yeah, you actually don't want to
be able to prove everything, because then it's trivial. That's right. You have to prove only
some select statements. And that is a property of a formal system called consistency. And the
point is that the system cannot prove its own consistency. So then how you cannot be sure
even that it's consistent, you have to take it on faith. And that's where the observer comes. So
then how does Kurt Gödel, for instance, how would he decide which system is the God-given one?
Because you did believe, apparently, that there was a correct one that you had to find.
And obviously, you do it on other principles like aesthetic principles,
this principle of beauty, principles of being concise, and stuff like that. But that's where
you, as a first person, your first person perspective becomes imprinted on this,
because there isn't an objective criterion, ultimately, there isn't. So the other possibility,
which is resnice with me, is this idea, which is, there is a philosopher, Penelope Marri,
who has written about this, and I really like the way she frames it. It's maximatical practice.
The system is, the better system is the one which is more fruitful, which allows you to
prove more things. And this is some, but see, it's beautiful, because it means, but who decides,
it's us, the living mathematicians today, we decide because we're practicing mathematicians,
we're applying those axioms in our practical work. And then it becomes a marketplace of axioms,
system of axioms, if you will, they compete with each other as different stories, so to speak.
And we choose the ones which are more fruitful, which give us more diverse, more beautiful
mathematics. So in other words, we're deciding it right now, not referring to authority of Pythagoras,
or Kurt Gödel, or Bertrand Russell, or some such great individual, but it's up to us.
That's where mathematics becomes a living process. So in that sense, one has to be careful to say that
whether mathematics is based on some unassailable foundation, it's not. If you look more closely,
it's actually very similar to other subjects of human endeavor, or other parts of science,
things like physics and so on. And I agree with you that in a way, you almost could say that the
job of a physicist is to try to find the axioms of the physical world of this universe.
So we don't see the laws themselves, we observe the ramifications.
Or at least some, or at least some of them, right? So then, but in mathematics actually
it's the same, but it's much more difficult to notice it unless you actually are practicing
mathematician, because the way mathematics is perceived by the general public is that it is
something where nothing ever changes. And the foundation is also perceived by many mathematicians.
And actually, I personally have not really thought about it deeply until recently,
because you do, and I think it's very common in general that you find something that interests
you, like for me, a language program. You can work on language program without
questioning the foundations. The reason I question the foundation is because of my
interest in philosophy, perhaps, is because of public speaking, kind of doing interviews like
conversations like this, where these kind of questions would come up, and I would really
be curious. So I'm really interested in those philosophical underpinnings of mathematics.
But a lot of people, as you know, they actually claim that philosophy is completely useless for
science. We shall not name any names, right? Yes, yes, yes. I will put an image on screen.
I disagree. I disagree violently with this position. I think it's very limiting.
And I think there are probably some parts of science where, you know, you can get by,
but I think we all benefit from opening our horizon and from being interested in the
foundations of what we are doing. This is called self-awareness, right? What are you doing?
So in other words, the public has the perception that there's the practical aspect of science,
so STEM, science, technology, engineering, mathematics, and the practical side are the
first three letters, the science, the technology, the engineering. And physics is seen as a pure
form of engineering. And then the most purest form of physics or the purest form of science
is math. And that's something that's extremely objective. But you're saying, well, in order for
us to establish something mathematically, we have to agree on the axioms. When we do so,
we generally do so with practical concerns like empiricism. And so there's something that's about...
Or you're driven by your Platonist. If you are a Platonist, which means that you believe that
mathematical ideas exist in this ideal domain, this platonic world, which is outside of space
and time and so on, which I respect this position. And I actually, to some extent, adhere to this
position when I was writing Love and Math. Then also you have your own methodology. You're kind of,
you're searching for the correct one in that platonic realm, which is also, you know, it's a
methodology. But there has to be some kind of methodology for you too, because there is no
objective methodology. You cannot even use consistency as a tool because it cannot prove
its own consistency. So you have to take it on faith. It's a very practical thing. For instance,
you have the ZFC, the standard axiomatics of set theory. Set is the most fundamental notion
in modern mathematics, introduced by German mathematician, Georg Cantor. And actually,
it's never been defined. So this is already a place where a whole of mirrors. We pretend that
it is something that is concrete and definite. But in fact, there is no definition of it.
There are only circular definitions. Cantor himself gave a very poetic definition. He said,
a set is a collection of many that think of things of itself as one, you see. So it's a poetic
definition. Now, in other words, here's a notion which we accept on faith. Then you have the ZFC
matrix which was developed in the first half of the 20th century and has become sort of a staple.
So you kind of like mathematicians follow it, even if you're not aware. It's called ZFC. Z for
Zermelo and one mathematician, F for Frankel, almost the same spelling as my name, no connection,
as far as I know. And C is the axiom of choice. So ZFC. Now, we do not know that it is consistent.
We can prove its consistency from another system, which is a bigger system where you introduce
additional axioms. But you don't know whether that system is consistent. And like this other
infant item. So how can we then do mathematics? You ask, well, we accept it on faith. People don't
talk about it. And most people, perhaps you might mention, never actually thought about it deeply.
But if you think about it, and it's all information is available, I'm not saying something
that is not known. Everybody knows it. Certainly, logicians know it. And the point is that
we take it on faith that it is consistent. Because if you don't, then how can you do mathematics
without assuming that it is consistent, you see? Yes. If it's not consistent means that you can
prove anything by from these axioms, including contract contradictory statements, right? So
there is this element of faith, even in mathematics, there is an element of fiction, there is an
element of story. And I think it's a very important observation, because it points us, again, to
the importance of the first person perspective. Science of 19th century tried to expunge the
first person perspective, even earlier science. And the whole point of science was to come up
with this narrative that somehow there is a subjective reality. And we are just detached
observers. We are not participants in it. Science of 20th century, physics of 20th century put an
end to this through quantum mechanics, through Einstein's relativity theory, where the observer
is involved and cannot be separated from what the observer is observing. But then you could say,
well, at least mathematics is objective. And so my point is, it's not. It's more camouflage.
It's better camouflage. Your current deliberation is that it's all subjective or it's an
intermingling of subjective and objective? It's always intermingling, of course. But the point
is that there is no objective core. There isn't something that's a strong foundation.
People, somebody who is not a mathematician, may think, obviously, there are some axioms in
mathematics which have existed forever and nobody questions them. That's not true. The simplest
example of this is non-Euclidean geometry. Euclid actually was the first one to come up with a
functional system of axioms, what we call formal system of Euclidean geometry. It's about 2,300
years ago, of course, building on earlier works by Pythagoras and Pythagoreans, where he came up
with a list of five axioms and tried to derive hundreds of different statements in his book
Elmets, a series of books, derived from those axioms. Now, the first four axioms were kind of
natural. The fifth axiom was about parallel lines, that if you have a line on the plane, so the
Euclidean geometry, as I'm sure everybody knows, since this is actually one subject that is studied
in school, is about the plane. Plane means a tabletop extended to infinity in all directions.
And on that plane, we have points, we have lines, we have circles, we have triangles, and then the
intersect and there are all kinds of statements that you want to make. For instance, Pythagoras'
theorem, that you have a right triangle and the square of the hypotenuse is equal to the sum of
squares of two other sides. This is the type of statements that we're talking about, which you
would like to deduce or drive from a small number of axioms. But then how do you choose these
axioms? The first one, you want them to be non-contradictory, that's consistency that I talked
about, and yet you want them to be broad enough so that you can derive many interesting things.
So he came up with these five axioms, and the fifth axiom was the one which kind of looked weird,
and it stated that if you have a line on the plane and you have a point outside of this line,
then there is a unique line passing through it, which is parallel to the original one. Parallel
means that they never intersect. So there is one, and it's unique. And after that, for centuries,
people tried to derive this fifth axiom. They used to call it fifth posthumous from the first four,
and they all failed for about 2,000 years when several mathematicians around the same time said,
what if we replace it with another axiom where either you say there are no such lines,
and there was every line that passes through this point, intersects the original line,
or you say that there are infinitely many lines, not one, which do not intersect. And this way,
you get what's called non-euclidean geometry. The first example, now when you say axioms,
when you talk about euclidean geometry, you have to make it very detached from reality. So
we have a model of this euclidean geometry where we really think of lines and dots and
circles and triangles. But when you formulate things in mathematics in the formal system,
it has to be completely detached from reality. It's almost all syntactic. It's just symbolic
manipulation. So you don't necessarily have to refer to a particular model for it. So then you
say, well, in my experience on the plane, I can't imagine that there is no parallel line passing
through another point. But you don't have to look on the plane. You can look on the sphere.
And on the sphere, the role of lines is played by meridians, and every two meridians intersect.
You see? So in other words, the formal system doesn't care about how you want to model it.
Formal system only cares about things like consistency, whether these axioms contradict
each other or not. And it turns out that if you replace the fifth axiom of euclide
with another statement, it turns out that it's still, in this case, we can actually prove its
consistency because it's kind of summed without doing much. So it is actually independent from
the other axioms, and you can actually replace it by its negation, and you'll still get a consistent
system. And that system can be realized either on the sphere. That's the kind of spherical geometry
where every two instead of, but it's not a line, it's a meridian which plays the role of the line.
So you take all the statements about lines in euclide, but they replace lines by meridians,
meridians meaning big circles on the on the sphere. It doesn't mean this has to go through
north and south pole. You could have any any big circle is a lot is what plays the role of a line
in spherical geometry. And if you replace the axiom in the opposite direction, you say that
infinitely many lines, which do not intersect, you get what's called hyperbolic geometry. So it's
a geometry on hyper on a hyper below it, where the the role of the of the lines is played by
hyperbolic. And then you can see that there are infinitely many hyperbolic which do not intersect.
Okay, so this is a good illustration of the fallacy of the idea that there is one
axiomatic system which services all of mathematics, which is has been given to us somehow that the
way the tablets, you know, the 10 commandments were given to Moses. That's just that's just not
the case at all. However, it doesn't mean that it's not a postmodernist position either that
anything goes. This is what I also try to explain to my students always, because the next temptation
is to say, okay, it's all fiction. Yes, that's what it sounds like. Then what are we talking about?
But the point is that there is practice. This axioms they don't nobody needs this axioms if you
are not going to apply them to actually prove statements and make progress in mathematics
and different and it's not true that all axiomatic systems are created equal. No, in some of them,
you get a lot of interesting stuff done. And in some of them, it's somewhat not limiting.
And a good example of this is whether you accept the existence of infinity, the existence of
infinite sets like the set of natural numbers, 12345 and so on, as a totality, not just infinity
light that for every number, there is a number greater by one, this is called potential infinity.
But you accept absolute infinity that there is such a thing as a collection of all natural numbers.
This is a very, it seems like a small thing, but actually leads to a lot of paradoxical
statements like the famous Hilbert Hotel, you know, where you have infinitely many rooms and
then you can always accommodate more people because you could shift them all by one to the
next room and then freeing up, freeing up. There was very paradoxical behavior. So now,
what is the status of this statement of existence of absolute infinity?
It's actually an axiom. It's not cannot be derived from anything. It isn't one of the axioms in
ZFC in this axiomatic system that I talked about, Zermelo-Franko axiom of choice. And there are
mathematicians which are called affinities who refuse to accept this axiom. So they can see
that ZFC without the axiom of infinity. And then the race is on. Okay, so here 99% of mathematicians
who accept infinity and they work with this axiom, whether they are aware of it or not.
Okay. And here is a small group of mathematicians who refuse to accept this axiom and they
work with ZFC minus infinity. This is very real. I'm not making this up. This is our current situation.
Yeah, I've spoken to some people who dislike the axiom of infinity and the axiom of choice,
Norman Weilberger and... Sure. And Jorbar Nathen. Do you know Jorbar Nathen?
Dror. Yeah, of course I know Dror. Okay. Well, we'll speak about him afterward. But anyway,
continue. Yeah. This is very interesting. How do you decide? How do you decide which is correct
and which is not? So my point is this is a market of ideas. This is a market of formal system.
Market of formal systems. You show me what you can do with your formal system and I'll show you
what I can do with my formal system. People will look at this and they will decide which way they
want to go. For now, maybe somebody else will come over the third system of axioms, which will be
superior to both and so on. I don't want to do it on ideological grounds. You see, and this is
where a lot of people go astray today in today's science. They pretend that they are not ideological.
They pretend that they're not driven by their metaphysical preferences, ontological preferences.
For instance, that I like local determinism or I dislike local determinism. And then I am willing
to sacrifice this and this and this for that particular thing, aspect of a theory. But it's
not because it's my preference. It's just a better theory. No, it doesn't work this way.
You have to detach yourself from your ideology. If you want to do good science, in my opinion,
which in this particular scenario that I'm talking about and it's not a scenario, it's a reality of
modern mathematics. You have a small number of people who refuse to take axiom of infinity. Now,
my feeling is that there is something deep in their psychology, which rebels against the idea of
infinity. They believe it's not real. And they would like to do mathematics according to this
ideology. Okay, I accept also that on the contrary, I like the idea of infinity. To me, infinity
in mathematics symbolizes transcendence, symbolizes something that is beyond logic and reason in
some sense. But we formalize it in mathematics as an infinite set. You see, I admit, I admit,
okay, I admit that I have a confession. I'm drawn to it because of my psychological
composition. That's what it is. It's my preference, my psychological preference, my aesthetic preference,
my ontological, philosophical preference. Like you don't mind the paradoxes that come about. In fact,
they're welcome. But it cannot be. But the whole point of science that we do not resolve our disputes
on ideological ground, this is not a fertile approach. This is not a fruitful approach. There's
a much better way to do it. I will do, I will do, I will work with the system of axioms,
which is closer to me, to my psychological, philosophical, you know, metaphysical ideas.
But I should not be judged on that. I will, I will, me and my colleagues who accept that
somehow infinity, we will work and we will produce results. And my colleagues who do not accept
infinity will work and produce results and will compare. And then we will see in the next generation
young mathematicians who are not yet burdened by all this ideology, they will look and this,
and they will, you know how they say, vote with your legs, with your feet, they will go in the
direction which is more fruitful. That is real science in my opinion. That's how you resolve it.
You resolve it. Now the problem is that you can have people who are blocking that process. For
instance, let's suppose somebody is attracting a lot of resources to their theory, you know,
because they say it's correct. Then it puts others at disadvantage. So I think that's unfair.
So everybody has to have a chance to develop things unless it's clearly like wrong, inconsistent.
Do you have an example in mind when you're saying this? Oh, yes.
Many examples are just one in particular. One very special example. I'll get to it. So for instance,
what skinnities do, it does not resonate with me. It does not resonate with me because I think,
because, you know, I'll tell you why. So they basically accept only finite set
because they exclude this action. So okay, but then you can prove, for example, that within
their formal system, you cannot prove some statements even back finite sets. In other words,
some statements about finite sets, you can only prove if you accept the axiom of infinity. That's
the weird paradoxical aspect of it. You can actually prove that you cannot prove that you
cannot prove some statement of finite sets. So to me, it means a straight jacket. You put a straight
jacket on yourself. You limit yourself. Why? Simply because you don't like the idea of infinity.
Well, okay. Why limit yourself? Why limit yourself when you can? So that's my view.
But I respect them. And I would like, for instance, there is a project
to try to re-prove various statements. For example, Fermat's last theorem,
proof of the last theorem, try to write a proof which never uses infinite sets.
There's a project on which several very distinguished logicians, you know, mathematicians
have worked on. And I, last time I looked, it's inconclusive. They don't claim that they can do
it. But there are some other famous problems in mathematics that they were able to prove
without appealing to infinity. And I applaud that because at the end of the day,
it's also helpful to know what is the minimal set of requirements for you to prove something.
Okay. But ultimately, I think the correct argument why the theory with the axiom of infinity is
superior today to the system of axioms without infinity is that we can produce a lot more.
And there are many statements which are not known to be derivable
without axiom infinity. There are many statements which we know cannot be derived without axiom
of infinity and so on. So therefore, it becomes limiting to our progress. And, you know, I also,
the other thing I want to say is that today, there are algorithms based on elliptic curve
encryption, stuff like that, which is actually used in a Bitcoin blockchain, for instance.
And it's not clear to me whether the mathematical theorems which underpin these algorithms
can be proved without axiom infinity. So, in fact, if that is the case, effectively,
it means that it becomes part of our life. The infinity finds a backdoor into our life through
various theoretical statements on which our technology is based. Now, I'm not claiming that
that's the case, but that's how, for instance, that's how it can actually affect us because
somebody could say, okay, this is some really zoteric argument between these weird mathematicians,
like who cares? You care because technology is woven into the fabric of our lives to such an
extent that, yes, a lot of very hard, difficult mathematics is now being used in, for instance,
in transactions on a Bitcoin blockchain. And that's just one example.
Okay, we're going to get to examples.
These examples I have given were to illustrate the point that number one is mathematics is also
based on there is a choice involved. But number two, so in other words, there is a subjective
element. And this is only one. So just a brief addition to this, this is one way in which
the observer is involved. The first person perspective is involved. The other one is,
of course, when we write proofs, who decides if it is correct or not? We are not yet at the stage
of full automation of verification of proofs. And eventually, probably some of it can be done by
computers. It's not there yet. So it's human mathematicians who are reading those papers,
and ascertaining whether the proof is correct or not. A famous example is Andrew Wiles,
we talked about earlier. His original proof of thermozalast theorem had a gap. How was it found?
The gap was found by mathematician Nicholas Katz, who was Andrew Wiles' colleague at Princeton
University, who looked very carefully and he asked a question, probing questions,
finally asked the question, how does this follow from this? And Andrew Wiles could not answer it.
So it was determined that there is a gap. And luckily, here later, Andrew Wiles,
with the help of his former student Richard Taylor, was able to close this gap. And after that,
so what gives us the confidence that the proof is correct? What if there is another gap?
We cannot be 100% sure this is the point. It is accepted as a true proof by other practicing
mathematicians. That's the market of ideas that I'm talking about. Even in mathematics, you have
this market of ideas. There isn't something that is objective and completely detached from our
personalities, from our real living breathing mathematician. That is something that is very
important. And it's an indication that even mathematics is like this. Then for sure, it's
like this in many other subjects, which do not even have the appearance of objective reality.
Mathematics does have the appearance of objective reality more so than any other subject in science,
in my opinion. But what I'm trying to argue is that it's an illusion. At the bottom of it,
there are choices made by living mathematicians. That's the first point. The second point,
however, it doesn't mean that anything goes. It doesn't mean that anyone come up with some
fancy mathematical objects. There is a notion of a group. It's one of the cornerstones
of mathematics, a notion of a group. A group is like a symmetry. It's a collection of symmetries
operating on a particular object, like a glass around glass, all rotations of the glass.
So it is encapsulated by some axioms, where you have some binary operations such and such
as associativity being the most important one. Or if somebody comes up and plays
associativity with something else, you know, a different property. And actually people try to
do that. Guess what? Groups are fundamental. Those other things are not. Why? Because groups
have led to very important advances. They have applications in many areas. And those other
fancy objects don't. And that's how that's why mathematicians work on groups and not on those
other things, which to detach the observer who is not involved in the subject will look like,
okay, so in this axiom, you have three terms and this I have four terms. What's the difference?
They look very similar. But we choose one and not the other for a reason. And that is a objective
element, you see, because it comes now from the community of mathematicians working on it,
applying it to different areas. And there's a criterion of fruitfulness. That's what replaces
objectivity in some sense. But it's a notion which is accepted today by the community. Maybe
one of those fancy objects that we don't pay attention to today, because we think that they're
useless, maybe somebody will find applications for them in a few years, and then they will become,
a lot of people will work on that, you see. But it's a process. It's a process. So there isn't,
obviously, there is no theory of everything in this process. Or if there are many, maybe there are
many. How do we overcome this, then need or this fallacy of confusing some things, effectiveness,
it's ubiquitous application with this ontological status. So this is something that
computationalists do, where they see the effectiveness of computers and they say, well,
then at the basis of reality is computers. Yeah, that's right. Or some people, well,
I have several examples in mind. This, absolutely. And that's why I am, that's why I devote time
to talk about this, because this is one of the policies that you said that I have in mind.
I think that this discussion of what mathematics is about is very much relevant to understanding
why there's a policy. We have to overcome this temptation to believe that the knowledge we
have acquired is sufficient to explain everything, or at least like a large portion of reality.
This has never worked. It has never worked and never will work, in my opinion. And case
in point, computation. A lot of people today say that everything is computation.
And what do they mean by this? So they learned computation, they think they've learned computer
science or computer mathematics. Yeah. And it's a, it's a child who learned trigonometry,
11 year old who learned trigonometry. And now he sees trigonometry in everything. Look,
there is a wheel. It's trigonometry. Look at the triangle. It's trigonometry. Everything is
trigonometry. It's a very natural and almost endearing quality of human beings. But unfortunately,
leads us astray. And I think that maybe time has come for us to finally let go of this,
of this approach. And for instance, in the case of computation, since you mentioned,
it's something that, which is very much relevant today, because all the computer,
so-called AI, all these computer programs that charge GPD and so on.
I have spent some time reading the founders, like Alan Turing. Okay. So Alan Turing is
credited as the father of modern computation, creating the framework for modern computation,
proving the most important result. What was the most important result that he immediately proved
after he came up with his idea of encapsulating computation as a Turing machine? It was a statement
that there are things which are not computable by Turing machines. In other words, computation,
the paradigm of computation contains within itself its own demise, the realization that it's not
everything. And the great ones, in this case, the founder Alan Turing, one of the smartest people
who have ever lived, he saw it right away. And he did not see it as a bug. He saw it as a feature.
And if you read his work, it's an incredibly deep and honest, sincere analysis of what it means,
or what its implications are. Because of course, he was fascinated with the idea of thinking machines,
of intelligent machines. But if you read his paper on intelligent machines, I actually have it somewhere.
So first of all, he writes in 1945, the class of problems capable of solutions by the machine
can be defined fairly specifically. They are a subset of those problems which can be solved by
human clerical labor, working to fix rules and without understanding, without understanding.
Now, intelligence, by the way, comes from the word intelligere, which means to understand.
How can we talk about intelligence of computers when the father of computing
can see it at the point that they're not understanding what they're doing?
How many computer scientists are aware? So computer scientists who speak out on this and say,
we already entered the age of AI, it's going to take over human beings, if we are lucky,
they will use it as plants, as decorations in their homes and so on. How many of them are even
aware of this quote? That's my first question. Yes. Okay, my second question.
Few questions here. So my second question. So here's another paper in which is called
Intelligent Machinery. I think it's called Intelligent Machinery. And he talks about objections
to the possibility of intelligent machines. He says, the original question can machines think
is too meaningless to deserve discussion. Nevertheless, I believe that at the end of the
century, the use of words and general educated opinion will have altered so much that one will
be able to speak of machine thinking without expecting to be contradicted. You see? We'll have
what so much? I believe that at the end of the century, and that means 20th century, the use of
words and general educated opinion will have altered so much that one will be able to speak
of machines thinking without expecting to be contradicted. In other words, he's basically
saying that's not a good way to phrase it, but he's resigned to the fact that that's how people
will talk about it. Right? Yes. I believe further that no useful purpose is served by concealing
these beliefs. By concealing, sorry, by concealing these beliefs. The popular view that scientists
proceed inexorably from well established fact to well established fact, never being influenced by
any unproved conjecture is quite mistaken. You see, conjectures are of great importance
since they suggest useful lines of research. So for him, from the beginning, the possibility of
intelligent machines was a conjecture. And now he says, and now he says, I now proceed to consider
opinions opposed to my own. And he comes up, he comes up, listen to this, he comes up, not with
one, not with two, he comes up with nine objections, nine objections. And he carefully
considers each and every one of them. And the one which he finds most powerful is what he calls
mathematical objection, the fact that he himself showed that there are problems which are not
decidable, which are not computable, which are not solvable by machine, by computer.
This is a very important point. This is called halting problem. The halting problem, he realized
that it cannot be solved by the question, which Turing machines will halt, which Turing machines
will not go into loom? Because you couldn't enumerate all the Turing machines. And I can ask
whether there is an algorithm or a Turing machine, which will, which will send the halting problem
implicitly have an idea of the concept of infinity. Yes. Yes. So the objection would be, well,
hey, we just get rid of the infinity. You can't get rid of it. That's the point. You even,
you have to accept at least potential infinity, because otherwise the position is untenable.
Otherwise, your position is that there is a biggest number and an n plus one does not exist.
This even finitists today, they would not agree with. Finitists do not say that there isn't a
number greater by one and then any given number, meaning there is a billion, there's a billion
and one, there's a gazillion, there's a gazillion and one, okay? They don't, they don't argue with
that. That's called potential infinity. What they argue about is whether there is such a thing as a
totality of all positive natural numbers, whether it exists as a thing in and of itself. For them,
what exists is always a finite set of numbers from one to n or from one to n plus one, from one
to n plus two and so on, but not from one to infinity. That is, it seems like a subtle difference,
but that is what separates finitists from the rest of mathematicians. It's that. Finitists,
I don't know of any mathematician who actually seriously entertains the idea that there is a
biggest number. Because you know that there is this number and then there is also number one
and there is also the operational additional number. So how can it not give you n plus one,
you see? So therefore, you cannot avoid potential infinity. You can avoid absolute infinity,
which is what finitists do by saying that the set of all natural numbers does not exist.
Only it's finite subsets at any moment. That is a reasonable position,
but they still cannot avoid the fact that for a number there isn't one more. And that is what
is, that is what gives a culting problem. No, you don't need to assume absolute infinity for it at
all. Just the thing that the machine runs. If it stops, you're in luck. But what if it
doesn't stop? It means that in finite time, you cannot decide whether it stops, you see?
That is the cornerstone of the impossibility of solving the halting problem.
Infinity is underneath it, but it's an infinity light. It's a potential infinity.
I was speaking with Jor, Jor Barnaton. He's an ultra-finitist. So I asked him explicitly,
do you believe the number five to the power 100, to the power 100, to the power 200 doesn't exist?
And he paused and thought about it. He said, no, it doesn't exist.
Okay. And yet you just described it. So that's very interesting. It doesn't exist,
yet you just named it. So what did you name?
Yes. Well, you named the unicorn.
You named something, right?
Yeah. But anyway, I could be misquoting him or misremembering. So who knows? But there are
ultra-finitists. Maybe, I don't know. I think it's a bit of a post. If I may say so, a little bit
of posturing. It's a bit of posturing. So Professor, this seems, I see the same passion
that you have for math, that you have for this subject, this new philosophical subject.
No, for sure. When did this start? This also started 10 years ago?
Yes. So this started with the questioning of what am I doing this for?
Is it correlated? It's very much correlated, very much correlated. Yeah. So I was going to say,
yes, so I wanted to say what I quoted, I wanted to say which source. It's called
Computing Machinery and Intelligence. It's an article during growth in 1950.
Okay. And so where he gives nine, he gives nine objections to his own ideas,
and he analyzes them carefully. How many computer scientists do you know today who
are, number one, aware of the fact that Turing was trying to grapple with these issues
from the outset, and he was very uneasy about them. Right? Yes. How many computer scientists
and proponents of AI, so to speak, are collides of AI? How many of them actually aware what the
father of their subject was thinking about it? And number two, how many of them put in their
papers objections to their own ideas and seriously engage with those objections instead of dismissing
them outright? I'm not sure how many will answer yes to both questions. I'm not sure. And that is,
shall we say, troubling. So we say, disconcerting. Why is it that the father of the subject felt it
imperative upon himself to engage critics in a very serious way and sincere way? And by the way,
he was in dialogue with Gödel, because it's very connected to Gödel's incompleteness,
and he was aware, was aware right away of this, and Gödel too. And even years later, so Turing
died in 1954, in 1973, Gödel decided to add a remark to his earlier paper in which he argues
with Turing. So it's kind of, it's kind of weird, because you could say kind of unfair,
because Turing cannot respond. But I think it's on the contrary, it shows the great respect of
Gödel to Turing. So he writes, a philosophical error in Turing's work, Turing, Gödel writes,
and this is, I think, I believe in 1973, 74. And he says, Gödel, Kurt Gödel says Turing in his
1937 paper gives an argument, which is supposed to show that mental procedures cannot go beyond
mechanical procedures. However, this argument is inconclusive. Okay. But during these regards
completely is the fact that mind in its use is not static, but constantly developing.
For example, we understand absolute terms more and more precisely as we go on using them,
and that more and more absolute terms enter the sphere of our understanding and so on. So he
has a technical argument. And I'm not trying to say he's right or he's wrong. They engaged with
each other in a dialogue from the beginning, because they understood the importance of this
question. They understood the implications for our society. And Turing was right. He said,
by the end of the century, this will become commonplace. And a lot of people will be saying this,
even if I think the question, do can machines think is not a productive one? This is, this is
reality. This is going to happen. So we might as well, I might as well now lay the foundations
of this and have a framework for discussing this. What does it mean? And he goes to nine arguments,
nine arguments against it. And then the third one, the third argument, is the mathematical
objection, which is Kurt Gödel's incompleteness theorem. There are, he says, he writes, there
are a number of results of mathematical logic, which can be used to show that there are limitations
to the powers of discrete state machines. The best known of these results is known as
Gödel's theorem and shows that in any sufficiently powerful logical system, statements can be
formulated, which can neither be proved nor disproved within the system, unless possibly the
system itself is inconsistent, and so on. And then he writes, I do not think this view can be
dismissed quite so lightly. You see, he is himself not sure. And in fact, the year he died in 1954,
he talked about in his last article published in 1954, you know, kind of a popular, you know,
popular magazine, science news. At the very end, this is 1954, just about the time he died. He says
the results, it's called solvable and unsolvable problems. And he's arguing that that what what
theory of computer science shows is that there are unsolvable problems that are things which
cannot be solved by an algorithm. And this is important. I think a lot of people have not
really had the chance to think about it to a large extent because of atrocious state of our
education. And I feel it's imperative for somebody like me who got exposed to it. And I'm not saying
that I'm not saying I'm presenting some truth which has not been known. It's all very well known
to specialists, whether they would like to turn a blind eye to it or not. It is well known. But
to most people, it is not well known. So I think that this, and it's not present in the conversation
about AI. At least I don't see it that much present, you see. And this idea that as soon as you, that
computation includes within itself, the idea that things are uncomputable, they're undecidable,
unsolvable. Here's a book, for instance, there's a whole collection of articles here. What are the
words which are used in the title? Undecidable propositions, unsolvable problems, uncomputable
functions. Can you show that book once more? Okay, the Undecidable by Martin Davis, and that'll be
in the description as well as the link to the two articles that you mentioned of Turing. The limitations,
the inherent limitations of computation. Okay. He grappled with this from the beginning because
he's understood the power of it, the potentiality of it. He also liked the idea of intelligent
machines. But he also understood that it's not so simple. There are serious arguments why it's
not possible. So in 1954, and I have read through several papers of his, to see the evolution of
his views also. He's not dogmatic. He's not like, it's like that. And then I'm going to prove it.
All the power that I have, while ignoring all opposite arguments, which unfortunately we see
that today all too often. That's not his approach at all. And his last paper, his last paper,
in fact, he finishes with saying the results which have been described in this article are mainly
of a negative character, setting certain bounds to what we can hope to achieve purely by reasoning.
See, he's already expanding from computation to reasoning. He says this and some other results
of mathematical logic may be regarded as going some way towards a demonstration within mathematics
itself of the inadequacy of reason, unquote unquote, unsupported by common sense. Inadequacy
of reason, unsupported by common sense. Are you aware of Penrose's and Lucas's argument that says
that? Of course. Oh, yes. Penrose is a fantastic book. I have it here, you know, the book, this.
And actually there are two books, but this I love this one. You see how many bookmarks.
Yeah, yeah. So here's something that you made me think about. There's something called,
in ancient Greece, there's something called the unity virtues. Have you heard of that?
To some extent, I suppose, yes. Yeah. Okay. So basically it says that you can't have one of the
virtues without incorporating the rest as you increase in the virtues. You can't be brave
without being honest. True bravery requires honesty. And then true honesty requires courage.
I wish it works. I wish it was simple, but okay. Yeah. Well, anyway, they were saying that as you
have more and more of them, they unify at something like the most good, which they would equate with
God. Then you had me thinking, well, okay, look at this. We're taught more to think algebraically
and algorithmically than we are to think in the way that the Greeks did with lines and circles.
So less geometric, at least in this is my case for my education. And then I was thinking, well,
the people who are the most playful with their ideas and creative and poetic and romantic,
they tend to be the more geometric side of the mathematician. So for instance, Einstein,
Penrose, Michael Atiyah. And then I was wondering, this is a huge speculative jump.
Is this in some way related to prioritizing this algorithmic symbolic syntactic manipulation
over something that's more physical and geometric? I'll give another quick example.
I never cared about why can't you put a circle in a square? There's something like
squaring the circle or a circle outside of the square. Because I'm like, who cares? You can
just draw that. But then there's a specific set of rules with compasses and so on. That never,
I'm just trained algebraically, like trains in terms of that's how I studied in school.
I wonder, and most of my generation is maybe even your generation. And I wonder how much of this
dismissal of these grand ideas comes from a dismissal of geometry, like picture proofs are,
hey, look, if you rearrange this. There is something to what you say. And there is a famous quote,
which I don't remember who said it, maybe Atiyah, that God is like influence mathematicians through
geometry and devil through algebra. There is some truth to it. In other words, there is more
imagination in some sense in geometry. A language program, in a way, is what tries to unify discrete
and continuous and symbolic algebraic with geometric imaginative in a way. That's what I find beautiful.
Ultimately, all of these distinctions that we make, these are all distinctions in our mind.
They're all the distinctions. This is a story we tell ourselves. If I believe that there is a
boundary, there is a line between the two, this is how it is for me then. But it's like people
say truth and beauty, you know, so it's already implicit in that is that the truth they will find,
they don't expect to be beautiful. And the beauty they find, they don't expect to be true.
But you yourself made the distinction, you yourself drew the line between the two. It
doesn't have to be this way. You can say truth slash beauty, one thing or truth dash beauty,
you know, one thing. And then in your life, you are more likely to encounter two things which are
beautiful and beautiful things which are true. Same with geometry, algebra and so on. These are all,
ultimately, these are all frameworks to create. And in modern mathematics, you cannot do one
without the other. The progress is made when they hit upon each other, when they touch each other,
algebraic methods, geometric methods, and so on. That's why we have algebraic geometry,
which was created in the modern version was created by the genius Alexander Grozendik,
whom we mentioned earlier. His genius was precisely to be able to connect them,
put them together, you see. But there are people who are dogmatic on both sides,
who are predominantly algebraic or predominantly geometric. I think what is essential to understand
is how much we are informed by our own psychology, how much we are informed by our own aesthetic
preferences, our philosophical preferences, our metaphysical preferences. In other words,
the quantity of subjective, objective. A friend of mine who listened to my recent interview with
Alex Friedman, a conversation with Alex Friedman, where I talked about subjective,
kind of like similar to what we're discussing, subjective. He's like, well, but it's kind of
troubled. I feel it's uncomfortable with it because you're proposing to replace some objective things
by subjective. That is totally missing the point. What the point is to realize that you have always
been doing this. You have always admixed your subjective to what you believe is objective.
And then you try to come up with an argument presenting your ideas as if they're detached
from you. I would contend that that's not the case, that it's always present. So it is not about
replacing something with something. It's about acknowledging that's what you have been doing
all along or what I have been doing all along. To what extent my theories, which I like to think
of as objective, are driven, are motivated by my subjective preferences. For instance,
we talked about I like infinity. I just like it. So it's my aesthetic preference. But if on the
basis of this, I will start saying that everybody should like it. And those people who don't accept
maximum infinity are stupid or misguided. That's where I go astray. And that's where I introduce
unnecessary strain on my mathematics. And you know, it always, when somebody is really emotional
about it, they give themselves away. Because as a friend of mine once said, a very smart fellow,
he said, you're not going to argue with someone who will say gravity doesn't exist.
He said, yeah, good luck. Good luck. Gravity doesn't exist. You're not going to argue
with the frozen, you know, the corners of your mouth. That's not the case.
And likewise, when somebody is arguing too passionately about something,
means that it's something there in here and resolved. We are not paying attention to this.
We are pretending that in science, we are really driven by some objective reality.
Yes, we are to a large extent, like I said, as a community, we decide which actions are more
fruitful and so on. But as a human being, as an individual, I'm also very much driven by things
which are come from my psychology, my psychology composition with my philosophical preferences
from my, you know, and my job is to be aware of it. That's called self-awareness. Otherwise,
I'm asleep. I'm half asleep. I'm not here. And so therefore, I am not doing my job correctly
in my opinion. So Alan Turing was aware. So here is a good example. Alan Turing,
as someone who was aware of that raises very interesting question. And he was not,
he was not frustrated by it. I think it made it even more interesting for him in many ways.
It's a shame that he, the way he was treated by the British government, as I'm sure you know,
that he was subjected to hormonal therapy, you know, because he was gay. And he died at the age
of 32, as most people believe, by suicide or travesty, you know. And that's the machine,
the machine. That's the real machine that we should be aware of and careful about, you know.
What do you mean that's the machine? The machine, the government, the government power,
which is unleashed to destroy an individual, a brilliant individual. And you say, well,
it's because he's gay. No, it was not because he was different.
So more broadly speaking, societal norms or the government in particular?
Well, in these cases, obviously, it was a government, not government government,
but the government agents, obviously.
Sorry. What I mean to say is the machine in general for us, is it in your mind,
is it the government or is it societal norms or is it?
I don't know. I purposely, I purposely dropped this word because the machine could mean computer
or quote unquote artificial intelligence, which people are arguing about now, whether it has
the power to subjugate humans and so on. So here's a man who actually theorized that possibility
in the most advanced way possible all during. And he's actually destroyed by a machine of a
different kind. Interesting. I see how interesting. I'm not going to spoil it by revealing the punch
line. You know, let's think about this. Let's think about what does this tell us? What does it
tell us? In other words, he was so inconvenient somehow. And this is a man who was instrumental
in deciphering the enigma machine, you know, who has contributed so much to the defense of the
United Kingdom. And how many years passed before they finally apologized for what they did? Or at
least acknowledged the government of the UK? What does it tell us? Is this like an isolated
incident? Or is this something that has been a kind of a norm that somebody who is different,
somebody who is different, no matter how much they contributed to a given society is ostracized
and ultimately destroyed. So how do you not get destroyed from thinking about, well, okay,
you mentioned self-awareness. Self-awareness. So he is a man who was self-aware. You see,
and that's why I would like to, I would like to emphasize this point. And I would like more people
to pay attention and say Alan Turing could do that. Can I, can I also look in a kind of,
what's the word? A neutral kind of way on the things, without emotional investment in it,
but look at the facts, way different ideas, different opinions without being engaging in at
home in attacks or, you know, like getting overly emotional about it. Can I? And if not,
and if I can't, let's find out why. Let's find out what is really, what within me
is creating trouble, so to speak. And it's not a bad thing. It's not a bad thing.
Is there something that's bad about being emotional about it? Because you're clearly
passionate about what you're saying, but I wouldn't say that what you said is wrong because it means
you're emotional. So yes, but it's important for me to know where it comes from.
Like you did ask me this and I will, I can explain briefly, but yes, I'm not arguing that
it shouldn't be passion. Of course, this is the engine of progress. But the question is,
your passion comes from something you're aware of or something in your unconscious.
Okay. You see? And that is essential because if I'm, if I'm not aware what is actually driving me,
chances are I'm not actually going to be effective, even if I'm proposing good ideas
because there's too much spurious stuff at mixed, which are on me, which I can resolve within me.
I don't need Albert Einstein to resolve it for me or Alan Turing. I can resolve it myself
if I'm interested. You see? Yeah. Specifically speaking, how did you come to this? How do you
realize, quote unquote realize, I have to be careful about? How did I get interested in this
subject? More like, let's say you have predilections or flaws or pros and cons, but they're unconscious.
And then to go back to this onion metaphor. That's right. There's a finite layer, but you can
start to peel away the layers. What is this process of peeling for you? Is it I go to therapy?
Is it I read a certain amount of books and I ask myself, is it I meditate? The process is different
for everyone. Yes. There isn't one. I believe there's no one formula. Actually, all the methods you
Yeah, it's useful to hear the stories when people have gone through. Absolutely. I think that we
absolutely the way the best way that we can address this is by actually sharing our stories
and not trying to say it should be done this way or that way. Yeah, but this is was the first step.
You see, this is what led me to the process of self inquiry. So I already mentioned how
it led me to questioning, for instance, why am I doing mathematics? Am I doing it because I love
it? Or am I doing it because I want to achieve recognition and awards and so on. That's what
was one of the things came out of it. But the much bigger thing that came out of it is the
whole idea of self inquiry, the whole idea that there are some things which I'm not aware of.
The question, who am I? I thought I heard this question before. I knew that it was inscribed
on the Apollo temple in Delphi, but I didn't understand what it meant. Who am I? I am Edward
Frankel. I am a Berkeley professor. It's a dangerous question. It's a very dangerous question
when you're actually engaged with it, for real. Yeah, it's a terrifying question.
And we can't do it on our own, I think, because ultimately it has to be somebody in your life.
So it could be a therapist, for instance. In my case, I was lucky. There was some human being who
just came into my world who was a wise woman, let's just say wise woman, and somebody I respected
who, and this is about a year after the book came out. So this is summer of 2014. The book
was published in October 2013. So I was ready to go beyond Edward 1.0 to Edward 2.0. You have
to be ready for it, in some sense. And then the universe quote unquote will conspire. At least
that's what happened to me. And I have seen heard stories, similar stories from other people.
So what happened was that she basically started talking about life and so on. And I was very
curious about reality. What is reality? Because I was obsessed with the idea that where mathematics
comes from. It was very clear to me it doesn't come from human minds, specific human minds,
like Pythagoras did not create Pythagoras theorem, you know? Or if I was Gallo, I did not
create Gallo groups, they were there for him to discover. But then what does it mean? What is
reality then? What is at the base of reality? And in fact, if you look at the title of my book,
is Love and Math. And the subtitle is the heart of hidden reality. So it's kind of like my search
for hidden reality was happening, even if I was not fully aware of what I'm doing, even when I was
writing it. And then the crucial thing that she told me, she said, yes, Edward, there is hidden
reality, quote unquote. But it's not outside. You think you find it somewhere. In fact, it's within
you. You have to learn more about yourself. And so, and I said, what does it mean? So then she
told me some stories of what it means, what it meant in her case, that she was able to be connected
to some childhood experiences that she had when she was an adult already. And that completely
changed her view, her outlook. And suddenly things started happening. I started remembering things
that happened to me as a child. In particular, the experience that I described in the book
in chapter three about my exam when I was 16 years old, and I was not accepted, was not,
was failed at the Russlesley exam at Moscow University. I thought I knew, I remembered it,
I remembered it factually, I remembered it as a third person from a third person perspective.
But I did not remember it from the first person. And so then suddenly this happened in September
of 2014, where I was asked to speak about it. And the night before, at my hotel, I was able to
connect with that boy. And it was like a tsunami. I realized what happened. Did you break down,
Crane? Oh, of course. But it was, it was worse because in some sense, it was worse because
the thought that I had in my mind was no amount of tears justify this world, justify this life.
Why? What is the point? Oh, Jesus. It's really, really kind of sad moment because you realize
that part of you died. I realized part of me died when I was 16 years old, and I was not even aware
of it for 30 years. Okay. So I am moving with a battlefield of life crippled, basically,
like I'm missing a limb, and I'm not even aware of it. And my mind, my constant mind concept,
don't look there, don't look there, don't look there. That's why I was coming up with all of this
ideas about the universe and reality, the objective reality and so on. Because how convenient?
It's all deterministic. And it's all a bag of particles. So particles don't feel pain or a human
is an algorithm. So it's a coping mechanism. Coping mechanism. For me, for me, it definitely was.
And I will never say that that's true for everybody. Maybe it is for some people,
maybe it's not. All I'm doing, I'm sharing my story. This is my story. I am convinced that some of the
naive and vapid, quite frankly, ideas that I entertained about the world were to a large extent
motivated by me not willing to find out what happened to me when I was 16 years old.
Because it was too painful. Because it was too painful. I wrote a piece about this, by the way,
I was asked to, I spoken about this number of times, including my last conversation with Lex
But I also wrote a short piece for volume by my friend who is an expert
Jim Polsky, who is an expert on AI safety. So she published a volume.
Yeah. Academic volume on AI safety and security. And he asked me to contribute
about first person perspective. So I wrote about this and what extent this defined me,
not knowing, not knowing, because then your life becomes driven to a large extent by creating
barriers of finding out. And that's what it means who you are, who am I, right? So I understood
what it means. If I, if there is this part of me, which I chopped off, why? Because it was too
painful. So it is a defense mechanism. Nothing wrong with it. We all happens to all of us,
I believe, to some extent. And there is a lot of literature about this, by the way, and neuroscience
confirmations and so on. So, but it's me, it's part of me. And yet I'm no longer connected to it.
So do I know who I am? No, because there is this part of me, which I'm not connected to.
So that's one way in which you can become a very practical question. Who am I? Am I aware of all
my secret little adverts? And not necessarily, it could happen in adolescence and in adult life.
Most traumatic experience, most difficult experiences usually happen when the children
were not yet equipped to deal with this pain. And for me, it definitely, it defined my life.
It gave me a lot of fuel, it propelled me to become a mathematician and so to achieve and so on.
To prove those guys who failed me that how good I am, you see, so five years after I failed at 16,
I get a letter from the president of Harvard University inviting me to come to Harvard as a
visiting professor. I'm barely 21 because I wrote some papers, which became famous or well known,
you know, why? Because the drive, you know, but then the cost of it, the downside of it is that
I'm not, I lose that spontaneity, spontaneity of a child, that ability to look at the world with
fresh eyes. I'm afraid of things. I'm scared. I want control. I want safety.
Do you feel like that was a cost that if you were able to rewind time, you wouldn't pay?
Because another perspective is, you know what, Edward? Everything that happened to you made you.
I did it myself, of course. Of course, I would not change a thing. But I can say it only now,
because I have connected to that child, I connect to some other painful experiences,
that I can say it. If somebody came to me before it happened and told me that Edward,
you should be grateful to your examiners who failed you, because that's what made you who you are,
I would just hit them in the face. Like, what are you talking about? How dare you? But now,
of course, I know. Yes, of course, I would not change a thing. It was all me, all along.
And I am not no qualms about it. I would not have been who I am without any of those experiences,
unless I still refuse to connect to them. If I'm still refusing, then I'm not myself fully.
You see what I mean? And so you ask, how did I get interested in this subject? So then,
this is 2014. Then I started getting invited to various forums to speak about this thing.
And that's when there was the first wave when AI became controversial. This is
mind you, nine years ago. But already, you had people like Stephen Hawking and Elon Musk and
Bill Gates already voiced concerns. And so this becomes my playground, this conversation, because
I think up until that point, I am in sort of this half asleep state, where I am still thinking
partially about myself as a kind of a machine, or I would like to be a machine, because the
machine doesn't feel pain. So, you know, kind of feel safe. Also, I feel that I know how things
work. Again, it makes me feel in control. Suddenly, all of that is swept away. My child,
my inner child, you know, such becomes such a trope. I don't want to use this expression, but
but it's true. It's like you gain this dimension, this dimension over,
you know, you talked about this archetype of divine child. That's the part of you which always
wants to grow, which wants to look at the world in a fresh with a fresh eyes, which is spontaneous,
which is spontaneous, which is playful. I lost it to a large extent, because my real my connection
to very specific child 16 year old Edward was severed, severed, you know, at that exam. And
suddenly I'm connected. So that now I am like, wow, you know, so now I am going opposite extreme.
And I'm saying, you know, this, so then for me, AI becomes this ideas of AI, the ideas of
uploading like that singularity and uploading your mind and so on, it becomes totally
opposite to what I'm experiencing, right? It almost becomes the idea of me being captured by this,
but again, by the by my cerebral side. Because ultimately, for me, this discussion about AI,
it's just a safe way to talk about ourselves. AI represents our, our cerebral logical side,
like in the movie 2001 space Odyssey by the great Stanley Kubrick, how 9000 what is how
9000 is that the cerebral part of Dave Bowman, the astronaut, which has run amok.
I know a few familiar with this movie. Yes, yes, yes, yes. So that becomes the motivation for this,
for this, for this interest, you see. And so ultimately, I understand also that we need to
find balance because of course, this is amazing technological innovations. And there's nothing
wrong with them. As long as we put phrase the phrase our inquiry, our questions properly,
not as a question of, as we said, it's not a good way. Are they thinking? Are they conscious? Are
they intelligent? The question is, to what extent they are here to facilitate, to help me to be as
good a network as I can be. It's like, it's like artists in the end of the 19th, the beginning
of 20th century after photography was discovered. So suddenly, you don't need to be being an artist
is not about rendering things realistically. Because a camera can do it better than you.
So what do you do? Did artists say it's over for us? We become the captives, the slaves of the
photo camera. No, they discover other ways to express themselves. That's how you get
impressionism, abstract art, cubism, you know, surrealism, and so on, where the focus is more on
the inner experience of the viewer and the artist, you see. They accepted the challenge
and it propelled them to the next level. And likewise for us, I think, it's very clear that
Chad GPT is showing us that some of the things that perhaps we thought were creative, they're not
that creative. A computer program, which is basically trained on just correlations of things
in various texts throughout the internet, can actually reproduce it and maybe do a better job
than you do. So I take it as a challenge. What am I bringing to the table if this computer program
can replace these things? So what can I, what can I do that it cannot do? Yes, yes. You see?
Yeah, so there's something called the moving of the goalpost fallacy, which I don't see as always
a fallacy. So for instance, you just mentioned, we thought that creativity was the ability to draw
accurately, let's say in the early days. That's right. Then we realized, okay, something else can
do that. So we changed what creative means. But it's not because in the one sense, you can say we've
moved the goalpost, but it's not a fallacy because our original definition reflects our ignorance.
We realize because we can grow. That's the whole point. Everybody, especially I love it when it
comes from people who are actually completely sold on evolution. They say it's only, it's the only
force in development of say human beings or other species. You may agree or disagree with it. And
some people say that maybe there are some other things that have to be taken account. I'm not
going to make a judgment, but I'm just curious. What do you think evolution is for human beings?
If it's not, this is a very good example, how we can evolve is because we are challenged by the
technology that we ourselves create. Now, this is a very different framework, a very different
mindset that the mindset of the sort of end of the world and how these things are going to capture
us and kill us and so on. It's not productive, obviously, but this challenge, take it as a challenge,
how you respond to it. I think it's very productive. And a lot of people are, I'm not saying something
original. I've heard a lot of people say that. It's just that it's not necessarily represented
in the debate that you could see in the media, because usually it's computer scientists who
are being questioned. And let me tell you, if somebody asked me 10 years ago before I had my,
I have to say, before I started to ask the question, who am I? I would have given you an answer.
I would have given you an answer. Yeah, very, very confidently, you know.
Maybe that's another sign that you should trust someone is how assertive and
how little self-doubt do they show. I want to be personal, if you don't mind, and reveal something
to you. Maybe this will go and maybe it won't. When you mentioned, look, you had some childhood
issues. I've always heard this like childhood issues, childhood issues, and I've explored my
childhood. I can't find issues. But then I realized, okay, well, you said 16. So I think I had, well,
when I was 17, I had my heart so broken. Like, I don't think it's been broken as much since,
like ever. And, and man, with this podcast, Edward, like almost with everything I do,
I struggle like so hard. I struggle, struggle, struggle, struggle, struggle. I push and this,
there's this ambition, competitiveness, and there's a desire in me. It has to be the best.
It has to be undeniably the best. Like when I interview someone, it has to be that someone
could watch all the interviews of that person say this toll theories of everything was the
deepest with this person. And luckily, luckily, often I'll get the interviewees saying something
like like this, these were insightful questions. I've never been asked this or whatever. Okay,
so I get some validation or from the commenters. But, but so I'd often think, you know what,
I don't have childhood issues. I have adult issues, meaning that like, I have this distinct
feeling that 10 years from now, I'll look at myself now and want to hug him, like just say,
hey, man, like you, I'm sorry, like I'm broken now. But I also think that much of that comes from
crippling feelings of self doubt and inadequacy from when I was 17. Sure. Sure. Exactly. Right.
Exactly. Right. And then the thing is, in what you say is, isn't it complicated? But one thing,
one has to be very careful of saying, there was no issue over it. It's our thinking mind who says
that I'm thinking about is very limited. So Jung, one of the main ideas that he brought sort of out
and became part of our collective discourse is the idea of unconscious. Freud talked about
subconscious, I prefer unconscious. So this idea that there are some realms of the psyche,
which are not accessible to the thinking mind yet. And it's very important to accept that,
I think, because then it's not anymore that the thinking mind is the final arbiter of what did
or did not happen. In my case, if you ask me in 2014, before I had my sort of experience,
every connection, are you connected to that boy that was suffered in 1984 in this exam?
I would say yes, of course, because I remember every fact of it. And in fact, I wrote it.
I wrote the story in my book, which was published a year before.
Interestingly enough, a lot of people were inspired by it. And a lot of people came or
wrote to me or talked to me about it. They were touched by it. And I was surprised because I was
not yet touched by it. But because that's the power of art. Because I wanted to write a book
and to connect to my readers. I allowed the boy to speak. I was not yet ready to speak to the boy.
Me, adult Edward, in 2013 or 2012. But because I wanted to book the book to be
real, I delegated this chapter to him. And it was the first time that he was unfiltered. He spoke.
Not to me yet. He spoke to the readers of the book. But the ice was broken. So barely a year later,
I finally found the courage and the strength to speak to him directly and to understand,
to remember what happened. So my thinking mind was not aware of it. It's very important to understand.
And it cannot force it. It's very important not to force. Because if you're not ready for it,
I could commit suicide easily. Easily. I could see that. Easily, because you're so disenchanted.
You're so disappointed in this cruel, cruel world. You feel like there is no reason to live.
And you have to be very strong to withstand that. And in fact, the point is that it passes. It passed.
And I had this amazing experience of like, he comes alive. He's within me. Like I hold him.
He's here. And I spoke to him, to the little Edward. And I said, look, you know, I'm sorry,
I have neglected you for three years. I did not know. But look what we have done.
Look what we have done. It was not in vain. It was not in vain. And now you're back,
and I will never let anybody hurt you.
And what did the little boy say in response?
It was just beaming, you know. And the next day, I was invited to speak at this spoken word kind
of event in New York in 2014. There is actually audio on my website. It's called the test.
And I spoke and the boy spoke. And it was like, I never experienced that kind of connection with
the audience. It was the first time he actually spoke through a microphone in the audience,
because he was with me and let him speak. So the point I was trying to make is that when we are
ready, if we are sincere, if we are not actively trying to prevent this type of experience,
it will happen. Don't try to force it. But always ask when something is off, like when you feel,
get agitated, for me, it's like this, it'll get agitated unnecessarily triggered. What is the
source? When was the first time I experienced that? Under what circumstances? So that kind of gives
a path to finding out the source. Because usually some kind of event, I think oftentimes,
it could be serious of things. It may not be just a single event, I suppose. But most powerful
are events like you said, when we get broken. And it doesn't have to be child. It could be
adolescent, teenager. It could even be a young adult. But an experience as a young adult,
once you process it, it may lead you to an experience as a teenager, and which can lead
you to an experience when you were six years old or something. And there is nothing wrong.
Ultimately, it becomes this beautiful journey of self-discovery. It's beautiful because it's you,
you learn more about yourself. People go, you know, like Columbus, he has to get on the ship and
try to find India, then he doesn't find India, he finds America and so on. Here, it's you,
you're here. You cannot run away from yourself anyway. And it becomes this beautiful process
of self-discovery. And each time a new layer is left, you see, you start, for me, it's like this.
It's been like this. I start seeing things which I couldn't see before. And I'm pretty sure it
influenced my mathematics also. Did you feel like a weight was lifted and you're actually even
physically more flexible? Oh, of course. Oh, it's on the level of body. It's an incredible
restructuring. Which, by the way, is another way. So there is yoga, there's meditation,
all kinds of things which are also meant to be connect us to this other dimension.
The problem is for somebody like me is in the mind, I'm in the mind. I'm in the mind,
in the mind meaning like the cerebral logical stuff. And I'm become a prisoner of it.
That I try to apply, that becomes my only tool. So if I'm confused, if I'm, if I'm not sure,
it means used to be, for me, think about it harder, think about it more. That's the only way
through logic, through reason, and so on. William James said that that's like
trying to see more of the darkness by turning up the gas.
Yeah, or it's like trying to find darkness with the lamp at night. Just where is it? Where is it?
Or trying to find the white snow when you have orange glasses. Where is the white? Where is the
white? Let me put on more glasses, more glasses. More, more yellow, more yellow. I mean, it's very
clear. So the thing is, and then going back to your earlier question, if you asked me 10 years ago
about AI and all this stuff or, you know, before all this experience. So of course, I'll give you
a particular answer because I actually chose mathematics as a way to escape from reality
because reality was too cruel for me. I didn't want to deal with this stuff. So I found this,
what I consider to be a pure world of plateauing forms, where there was no bigotry,
there was nobody to hurt me, where I could just revel in the beauty of it, you know?
And don't bother me with your so-called wicked world, you know? So then how can you trust me?
So some people, then people would come, if they came to me and they, because they look up to me
as a scientist, as a mathematician, so that I have some expertise that they don't have,
they would trust me to give them kind of a wise answer. But I was not capable of giving a wise
answer by virtue of my psychological composition. Isn't it obvious? If I have not done any work
of self-discovery, of finding out who I am, of reconnecting to the parts of myself that
were lost on the battlefield of life, so to speak, how can I possibly give a good answer? But people
don't realize because they think of us as our gurus, you know? And because they don't have,
because our education system is broken. And also the popular book sometimes suggests things,
which are like, I go like, whoa, this is 19th century science, which has been thoroughly repudiated
by 20th century, but as a math and physics. So that's where we are. But I think, luckily,
because you have your podcast and others, and I think that it starts moving, it starts moving
finally in the right direction. And the right direction is understanding that our personality,
our first person perspective is intricately connected, is intertwined with our theories.
They do not exist on their own. And we are not independent spectators and observers.
We are in the thick of it.
With you forgiving your examiners, did you have to, well, okay, firstly, do you still feel like
you're able to forgive them or is there a part of you that...
Absolutely. They suffered. I know one of them actually, it came to my attention that one of
them around the same time when I was reconnecting in 2014, he died in a... He was kind of... He
liked to go on hiking trips, like in the north of Russia alone, and that they found his body and he
died in one of those trips in 2014. And the other one, I don't know, the other guy, I don't know.
But I absolutely believe that they suffered. They must have suffered. I mean, how do you feel
by if you do this to a young kid who's done nothing wrong, right? So it's just because of my
Jewish name, last name, my dad is Jewish. So Frank is a Jewish name. My mom's Russian, by the way,
you know, by blood, you know, and not religious at all and so on. And then yet you single out
somebody like that. And then they give this, you give this hard questions. It's a setup.
Right. So this is well documented. I'm trying to say, I see that they must have suffered.
I see that they were misguided. And so that's number one. And number two, also, you know,
thank you for giving me all this fuel. Without which, I mean, if I was accepted to Moscow University,
oh boy, I would be living in a dorm. Okay. I had probably party like there is no tomorrow.
Would I become a good mathematician? I'm not sure. Which okay, it would still be an interesting life.
But this definitely shaped my life in a particular way. And brought me to places which I may not
have been able to reach otherwise. So in some sense, yes, thank you. It sounds weird. But it's
only because my boy is here. And he's not going to let me fly. You know, it's not going to say
he's laughing with me. It's like, yeah. That's the paradox. That's that. That's how
that's the transformation of life. That is evolution and growth from somebody who's not
willing to look that pain in the eye, so to speak, you know, face that reality. And therefore,
is bound to run away from certain experiences in life or from certain insights or from certain ways
of understanding life to someone who becomes friends with that through suffering, of course,
through suffering, you cannot avoid it in my opinion. And by the way, you know, it's not I
listen to is a great conversation, you know, in Lex Friedman and Yuval Harari, you know,
he wrote sapiens, a great historian and writer. And he's something he said a bunch of things,
which I really really didn't resonate with me. He's suffering. He's a human. This is what
distinguishes that from robots ultimately. So in other words, during had this imitation
game, where you have a conversation with an interrogator, and the robot is trying to convince
the interrogator that it is human. But in fact, the real criterion is can it suffer?
Because that is, I would say, unavoidable and essential part of human life. You know, and so
running away from it limits us. Being able to process it liberates us. That's my view. Okay.
Again, I prefaced by saying that's been true for me. It may not be the case for everyone else. I
don't know. I have no way of knowing. I do have anecdotal evidence that it works for other people
that in this way too, but I cannot be sure. Is your forgiveness of your examiners predicated on
them suffering? So that is to say, if you thought that they didn't suffer, would you still forgive them?
I don't know. Good question. Good question. I mean, like I said, there are two aspects of it.
First of all, me recognizing that they may have suffered themselves. And second, my gratitude
for setting up, for participating in this experience, which gave me so much fuel that
it launched me into the stratosphere. So they were participants in this,
maybe motivated by something abhorrent and terrible. But the fact of the matter is,
they played their role very well. You're making me realize something, which is that I,
so again, I don't know how much of this I'll keep in. But for myself, with when I was 17,
I would say that, oh, no, no, no, I forgive this person because I'm the wretched,
sordid, despicable person who, who looks at other people who are successful. And I'm like,
I have no mentor. I, when I went to university, like I had depression for seven years. So I skipped
classes. I didn't have a peer group. And I would look at people who are successful and be like,
yeah, well, that's because you had advantages and I didn't. So in a sense, it's like a prisoner
with a door locked from the inside. And I say all of this with some, well, with a large amount
of saltiness and, and just because I'm trying to be blunt, but also because I'm overcompensating
for my urge to sugarcoat it. And I just lost years of my life. And so I would point the finger at
myself. And I think part of the problem is, is that some of what was done to me, let's just put
that in quotations was not okay. But I'm not able to say that because I have to point the finger
to myself. But then subconsciously, I'm still pointing the finger at someone else.
And that's okay. Don't, don't force it. That's my advice. In other words, don't forgive prematurely
because then it means a short, you're trying to short circuit something. That's my view.
There may, there may well be something for you to discover in this, in this memory,
in this memory. Don't try to do it fast. What's the point of, you know, it's like Alan Woods said,
you know, when you play music, it's the purpose is not to get to the end of the piece. Because if
that were the case, then the fastest musicians would be the best. No, it's the point is to play.
And so just be open, maybe be, be open to the idea that there is more to discover.
Speaking of paradoxes, Edward, like, look at this, man, like, I get to speak with you.
Like, look at what you do. Like, you get to study math, even though you're saying like, well,
initially was an escape route. Like, I, I have the, I have a beautiful, I have the best life,
the best wife, the best, I love my car, even though it's just a Toyota. Like, I love every aspect of
my life and more and more and more. And interestingly, despite the suffering, perhaps because of the
suffering, like, hey, who knows? Yeah, that, that the struggle, sorry, not suffering. I don't, I don't,
I don't suffer. Sure, whatever, whatever. Yeah. More and more. I've been biking recently, Edward.
So, and I, there's this new feeling, a new feeling. I don't know how to describe it other than
when I look out at the world, it's like a, it's like the feeling when you're extremely
thirsty and then you take a gulp, but it's of satisfaction and beauty. Something like being
transfixed by the splendor of the world or amazement. Something, I look out, I'm like,
whoa, and I haven't seen that for my entire life, except for the past few months, like more and more
and more. That's awesome. And, and I don't know where I was going with that now, but oh, what,
what I'm saying is that despite all of this talk, like the, of, of, of working super, super hard,
working hard, like understanding different physical theories and dealing with consciousness
theories, like that that's rattling. And at the same time, juggling editing, family obligations,
so on. So, okay, this is what an honor that I get to speak with you. Like, holy moly, you're,
like for years, I actually, I didn't, I remember recognizing your face and you've influenced me
years ago and I had forgotten. And now I get to speak with you. Now I get to read your book
and speak with the author. Like, what a beautiful privilege. Like, it's the best,
it's the best, man. And say, I'm sure you're like, holy moly, what, no, I get to speak with Kurt.
Wow, no, I'm just kidding. But I get, I get to study the Langlands program. I get to make contributions
that stay in math. Man, what lives? Yeah, well, but this, it's beautiful. It is beautiful. Edward.
Okay, one last thing. And now I feel guilty, because this is something that comes up,
is that whenever I have this feeling of, wow, look how great life is, then I think, yeah, but most
other people, or at least in my mind, most other people and many other people are suffering,
who am I to feel so good? And then that impinges. And it prevents me from fully appreciating a
moment. Because I'm like, yeah, but there are people who are starving. Yeah, but there are people
who can't make ends meet. And yeah, but there are people who so and so and so. So how do you ever
struggle with that? And how do you deal with that? No, of course. But I don't know, I feel that
we cannot do, but we have a life, a human being has limited resources, we have limited life,
you know, like in terms of the longevity, you know, how many years we got, we have limited
spatial dimensions and so on, and resources energy. So the question is not to spread ourselves in.
And that's why I'm not so, I'm not so happy when people go on Twitter, and they start
venting their anger, because it's actually, it means run away from your two responsibilities.
It's cheap to go and accuse and blame on people. It's an emotional discharge. But what are you,
so if you really care about this, just go to that war zone, go to that poor country, and so on,
and do it, do action is not the same as war, as war, which are not supported by action. So,
so then what's the, what's the, how to resolve, what's the resolution of this resolution is to
find what you truly love, and dedicate yourself to it 100%. And this way you will contribute in a
positive way to the society. And then your own, you know, self recriminations and thoughts about
you deserve, don't deserve and so on is, is you're blocking yourself from building fully
dedicating and really impacting things. It takes energy away. That's how I see it.
That's like self doubt. It's natural. I'm not, I'm not saying it's not, it's, well, I'm, I'm given to
sometimes about self doubt and self criticism and so on. It's normal, I think. But ideally, ideally,
I would like, I consider it as something that is a waste. And the way to, to overcome it is to
truly do what you love and, and just keep going with it and look, you know, how successful your
podcast is, for instance, you know, it's only been around a couple of years, you have so many
some people, such a dedicated audience, and really great interviews, you know, I've watched a bunch
of them. So that's how that's what we can do when we really dedicate ourselves to something that we
truly love. And I think that's the, that's the only way we can do it. So what else can we do?
Be aware of yourself, be aware also of the world, be aware of the suffering in the world,
but also be aware that you cannot go, you cannot pretend that you are the almighty God who is going
to solve everything for everybody. No, that's not how we set up. You have your mission. It's not
like, also, it's not like a mission, which is written, which is given by somebody. I feel like
it's, it happens as we go, you choose it as your life. It's part of life. But if you're open,
you don't believe it's co-created, like there's a part that's innate, and there's a part that you
choose. It's a narrative. So maybe who knows, I feel like all of this, what you described, any
such theory is a theory, is a story that we tell ourselves. And we are human, a very important,
essential part of being human is to the ability to tell stories to each other and to ourselves.
By the way, this is where I love Yuval Harari also. He explains very clearly that history of our
civilization is the history of ideas and stories, mostly stories, not even ideas, stories. We tell
each other stories, and it creates the sort of market of stories, and they evolve, and they merge,
and they separate. And who knows how it happens. But we also tell ourselves stories. Now, if these
stories are different, so if it's helping me to be the best I can be, and this is something
which we can feel, right? Am I on the right path? Am I not on the right path? Kind of like a general
sense. Then, okay, go along with the story, be open to changing the story at some point when it
becomes more of a hindrance than something that propels you. So what you described is a very
reasonable way to think about things. And I've tried many other ways to approach.
I've conceptualized. And my feeling today is that
sometimes I need it, sometimes I don't, sometimes I just feel, you know, sometimes I'm guided by
something like you described, that there is this higher self and lower self and this collaboration
between the two or something. Sometimes I feel that I don't need it, as it changes, kind of.
But what's important is not to say it's like that, and that's it. That would be theory of everything.
Right, right. Death is love exposed. That's a quotation from a wise man.
Oh, yeah?
Yeah. Do you know who said this? You said this on the Let's Readman podcast.
Something similar, yes. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Death is love at its barest or at its most exposed,
it's most wrong.
Yes, when you're faced with death, this is when you face an unfiltered love.
Yeah, explain that, explain that, please.
Well, I feel like, you know, death is something that does not accept any spurious stuff.
You can, I specifically talked about my experience when my father died
four and a half years ago, and we were very close, and I was devastated by it.
And I tried, I was kind of immature enough, so to speak, to ask myself to say, just live through
it and observe, and observe what is happening, what is happening here. So I was able to see
these things, which maybe if I was just completely overwhelmed by grief, I wouldn't be able to see.
And what I saw was that there was a natural tendency to come up with some explanation of what's going
on. It's like we just discussed, you know, the story, some story, but they could not hold those
stories. Like they melt it in the face of death. Death is staring at you. And any stories you
throw at it to protect yourself. So then what is it then? And then why do I feel
so much pain? And then I realized that the intensity is simply my realization that my,
you know, my father, well, you could say my father is gone, I will not be able to spend time with him
and to laugh together and to enjoy things together. But also, but why does it bother me so much?
Because I love him. So at the root of it is love. And then I thought, the reason why it is so painful
is because normally we put filters because we pretend that it's for different beings communicating
with each other. But ultimately, when you're in love, and I strongly believe in this,
you cannot love another. You always love when it is true love in this moment of experiencing it,
you become one. It could be your father, your parent, it could be your friend, it could be your
lover, your partner, you know. And this is a kind of cornerstone of the
Eastern tradition for me, this idea of oneness. And it sounds, it has been perverted, obviously,
by New Age stuff, you know, it's kind of when it becomes, it makes it a bit facile, you know, a bit
too facetious, you know, but the corner, the core of idea, the core idea is precisely that,
in my interpretation, is that the moment of love is the moment when a separate being
seizes to exist, when the boundary melts. Whether we conceptualize it this way or not,
it doesn't matter. We feel it. We feel this very strong emotion. It's a particular way of conceptualizing
it, of course. But I think it's a helpful one, because ultimately it points out to another way
of cognition, which is not tainted by the sense of a separate being, which is, to me, the root of
a lot of suffering, is the idea that there is a separate being, actually. I can always argue to
what extent it's real, and to what extent is the construct. Obviously, it's a very useful construct,
since I'm using it, you know, but it's important to know that there are other ways of experiencing
life. And love, to me, is what points to it, what points to the ability to experience life
without the burden of an idea of there being a separate individual who is experiencing it,
but something bigger, something bigger than that. And so, death is one experience where
one is forced. If indeed, who died is somebody you deeply love,
for real. I think that in this experience, that comes to the fore. It's a sense of love so intense
that it feels like pain. Well, Professor, I have so many questions on
algebraic varieties and L-functions and automorphic sheaves, but this was an unexpected turn, and
I hope to speak with you again. I appreciate you spending so much time with me.
That's my pleasure. Well, we talk, I just want to comment on this, that
we talk about what interest us, right? Yeah. Well, speaking of not architecting prior to engaging,
like the Jungian conception of what true art is versus constructing the sea and tower,
beforehand, the other option is you just like watch the diffusion of an ink drop,
and Bohm would call that the unfoldment, and you just go where it flows.
Yeah, that's what it felt. And it's good that we can do it, because I think that
most interesting things in some sense are the surprises, which are not pretty preset or kind of
premeditated, but the things which arise spontaneously, kind of. And so that is,
that's why I really enjoyed the tool. I had a question from Richard Bortridge to you.
Okay. Yeah, his question was, what role do function fields play in higher dimensional
algebraic varieties in the Languines program? So we may as well just touch on a couple math
questions. Oh, yeah, sure. So, well, Richard Bortridge was my colleague at UC Berkeley.
He's a very brilliant mathematician. He won the Fields Medal, but also, apart from that,
he did some groundbreaking, really, really amazing work. He was the first one to formalize
the concept of a vertex algebra, which has actually been a staple in my research.
And he proved the moonshine conjecture and so on. And he's a very, very nice human being as well.
So I'm kind of pleased to have a question from him. What he's asking about is the following.
So we just talked a little bit about the Languines program. So the Languines program,
a regional formulation is for number fields, for numbers, of course, numerical systems like
Reels, complex and so on. That's right. But on the other side of it is human surfaces,
which are like sphere or surface of a donut and so on. And so under a way, in his Rosetta stone
that we discussed, he found a bridge between the two, which is very similar. On one side,
you have this vertical systems. On the other side, you have this geometry of surfaces. And the bridge
that he found is the following. You should look at, instead of looking at the surface itself,
you look at functions on it. And these functions are, they're going to be called
Miramorphic functions or Rational functions. So they have zeros and poles that sometimes,
at some points, are not defined to go to infinity. And this gives you what's called a function field
of the human surface, from which you can basically recover it. And that field is very much like
number field, like Rational numbers. But what stands in between is when you take a,
so a human surface as a curve from the point of view of algebraic geometry,
it's a curve over complex numbers. But you can also, so it's defined by some equations with
complex coefficients. Renormal equations with complex coefficients in the field of complex
numbers. But you can also write such equations with coefficients in other numerical systems,
for example, in finite fields. So modulo prime, modulo prime, like a clock arithmetic modulo
prime numbers. And then it really becomes, that the function field of that is really very much
like, like Rational numbers or a field of Rational numbers. And so this way you found a bridge
between the two. So that's what is referred to as a function field case. But in the Langland's
program, it's about curves. So it's one dimensional geometric objects. And what Richard is asking,
what about it's two dimensional? Now a Riemann surface ostensibly is two dimensional
from the point of view as a real manifold, right? So a sphere has, has a longitude and
altitude, no, longitude and latitude, right? Two coordinates. So it has dimension,
it's real dimension is two, but it's complex dimension, because remember complex numbers
are two dimensional over the real numbers, because there is square root of negative one,
there is an independent element. So complex numbers are two dimensional over from the
perspective of real numbers. Therefore, a two dimensional sort of real thing is one dimensional
from the perspective of complex numbers. So as a, as a complex geometric shape, it's one dimensional.
So the question is, can you extend the ideas of the Langland's program to two dimensional
objects or three dimensional and so on. And unfortunately today, with the very few, there
is very little information about this, very scant. So there's a few examples where some
analog exists, but by and large, we don't have a picture. So the answer is in the negative right
now. But the, but the hope is that eventually we will be just much more complex, I guess.
You know, you had a chapter in your book called a delicate dance. I think it's chapter 16.
Doesn't matter. The point is that in it, you had a film script. You spoke about you and
Drinfeld. Yes, right. Yeah. Why did you choose to frame it like that?
Well, because I have been a cinema aficionado, you know, a film lover for many years. I also
co-directed and starred in a short film, which gave me a lot of trouble.
Yeah, co-directed and starred. Co-directed, co-rolled and starred in it. It's called
Rites of Love and Math, writes like R-I-T-E-S. And also I wrote a script, I actually wrote
a script for a feature film with my friend and mentor Thomas Farber, who's a writer and
teaches literature, creative writing at UC Berkeley. So we wrote a script called the
Two-Body Problem about a writer and a mathematician who meet in the South of France.
And they talk about their love affairs, how it's broken and so on, and how to be better humans.
So I, for instance, I had a software, I had a script writing software, really. And I thought that
it's always good to put it in a kind of artistic framework. Since my job was to shake
people's understanding of what mathematics is like. So for instance, there are these boring
people talking to each other about some boring stuff. So I want to make it come more alive.
So I was suggesting, imagine it as a movie, as a Netflix series. Which, by the way,
you know, this thought came to me because I watched on your channel, on your podcast,
you had a conversation, a debate between two very brilliant people, Sabine Haasenfelder.
Sabine Haasenfelder. Haasenfelder. And Bernardo Castro. I've never met Sabine in person, but I've
followed her a little bit. And Bernardo, I have actually met. And they argued about super-determinism.
And to me, I watched it like a great Netflix series, episode of a Netflix series. It was like
the impact. In terms of like, there's so many subtleties there. There's so many layers. And there's
such, we could do a whole conversation of me like turning to unpack that. But I'm just trying to say
I am lucky to have the expertise to follow the discussion and to actually have my own opinions
and so on. But also to absorb the psychology. So to me, it was a case study in what we discussed
earlier, how much our preferences, like psychological, metaphysical, philosophical,
how much they are, how intertwined they are with our theories, supposedly abstract theories of
supposedly objective reality. How much we are driven and passionate about certain ideas.
It was a case study for both of them, actually. And because they were so sincere about it.
Interesting. You felt both were staunch in their opinion. Sorry, for the people who are watching,
the link to that will be in the description and it's the debate between Bernardo Castro and Sabine
Hossenfeld. They're called the new theory or new super determinism, something like that.
It'll be in the description. It's fascinating because, you know,
I don't know, I just want to say it's such an, it's actually brought me to read some stuff about it.
And I find it's very, so in this case, the way I see it is that Sabine is very adamant about
the particular idea that is local determinism, that she wants to preserve it. And where does
it come from? So of course, she probably would deny that this is really her preference, but
that's what comes across from it. I have no, I have no horse in this race. Okay. I'm just looking as a,
as an observer. And it's very clear that she is sometimes a little too emotional about it.
Like, for instance, she basically says this, people who don't understand it are idiots,
not quite paraphrasing. By the way, she was incredibly, you know, gracious. She was very calm
and so on. But I also read some other stuff she wrote about it and so do you. And sometimes she
goes a little overboard. But also, like, I see how, so the way she wants to sacrifice this
was called statistical independence. And Bernardo was arguing that then science is over.
I think that he's exaggerating too a little bit. So for him, obviously,
the statistical independence is dear and local determinism is not. You see, but I,
but then neither of them would actually come out and say, look, this is what I hold dear to me.
And that's why I build a theory around it. Yes, they wouldn't say that they would say,
but of course, you can't do that because then science would be finished or something,
both of them kind of because this is where I feel this is where we can make one more step
as a community where we really would advance as as scientists and human beings is when we will
admit to ourselves to what extent we are motivated by dearly held principles. Like,
why does Sabine care about local determinism so much? I'm asking for a friend, you know,
like maybe if she finds out, if she finds out, maybe she'll learn something about herself.
I can tell you why I don't care about it, for instance, because I think the world is inherently
indeterministic. In my experience, it's not. But also for me, actually, this is not so essential.
But this Bell's experiment, the entanglement is not a big deal. What is a big deal in quantum
mechanics is non-commitativity, that the observables, familiar observables, like coordinate momentum,
and so on, which in classical physics, they commute with each other. They're like numbers
or functions. They become non-commutative. That's why they have to be realized as accurate
representing on a Hilbert's case. And this non-commitativity is an absolutely essential
phenomenon. Now, mind you, the commutator between say, momentum operator and coordinate operator
is very small. It's proportional to the Planck constant. So classical physics, therefore,
can be thought of as a limit of quantum when the Planck constant goes to zero.
Likewise, Newtonian mechanics can be thought of as a limit of Einstein's special relativity
when the speed of light goes to infinity.
And likewise, in general relativity, we have curved spacetime. And our traditional view was
that we live in the Euclidean space, which has no curvature. So there are three parameters,
non-zero parameters that were introduced in the 20th century, the Planck constant, which makes
the world non-commutative. And to me, I feel that it is a very essential thing, and it is fundamental.
And if you accept that, I don't think superdeterminism can save you. I have not really
studied this. Even if you drop statistical independence and so on, there will be phenomena
which will not, in principle, you cannot describe by classical physics, because classical physics
is commutative. So you're trying to fit non-commutative world into commutative world.
I don't think it's possible, but I'm not 100% sure. To me, it's a feature, not a bug. Likewise,
the fact that the speed of light is finite, and it's the same to all observers,
which is the feature of special relativity, is a special thing. It's not something you fight.
My question would be, how much do we want to sacrifice of the scientific things we have
discovered in the 20th century to accommodate our belief systems? For instance, let's suppose I am
interested in local preservation of local determinism. So then I'm willing to postulate
that my experimental apparatus somehow magically behaves and we're stressed. Now, Bernardo says,
okay, it's weird, it's impossible. That's, I disagree. Quantum guys is weird, too.
You know, Nils Bohr famously said to somebody, your theory is undoubtedly crazy. The question
is whether it's crazy enough to read. So the fact that it's weird to me doesn't mean it's wrong. So
I keep open mind. It may well be that super determinism will become prevalent scientific
theory in the next few years. Who knows? I would not be surprised to argue that it's impossible
because it's weird. It's disingenuous. You know, it's disingenuous. For me, the point is not that.
The point is that let's admit why this is put as a forefront of a theory is because of a preference.
You know, there is this Samuelson, the great economist, had this theory called revealed
preference in economics that sometimes absorbing agents behavior, you can actually find out what
their preferences are. Let's call the revealed preference. To me, it's a revealed preference.
So then my question is, okay, so suppose you have a preference for preservation of
local determinism, and you're willing to sacrifice this, this, and this. Okay, suppose you have a
preference for classical Newtonian mechanics. How much you willing to sacrifice to pretend
that Einstein's Realistic can be accommodated by experimental apparatus? So for instance,
we know that what happens, one of the predictions of special relativity is
that as you move faster, time goes slows down and distances shrink, right?
How much you willing to ascribe it to some kind of conspiracy between
detectors that you use in your experimental apparatus? I don't think anybody asks super
determinist this question, like, would you be willing also to do that? And if not, why not?
Also, Einstein's generativity says there's curvature, curvature of spacetime is
is the signature of gravity. Suppose you are an adherent of Euclidean geometry,
and you don't believe it's true, because when I look outside of my window, I don't see any
curvature. Well, except curvature of the Earth, but we're talking about the curvature of spacetime.
How far are you willing to go to preserve zero curvature in your theory?
By ascribing different observed phenomena, for instance, Eddington discovered that,
you know, famously in 1919, Arthur Eddington's expedition discovered that the ray of light
bends around the massive star. Let's suppose you, so, and that is considered as an experimental
verification of Einstein's relativity, the fact that spacetime is curved around massive
bodies emitting gravitational force. Let's suppose that you like Euclidean geometry,
and you are adamant that the world is Euclidean, no curvature.
Are you willing to then say that your experiment is playing away all this
experimental data by saying that we should look deeper into how this measuring devices are set
up? Maybe there is some weird communication between them, which we are not aware of,
which creates this illusion. Now, I think we have to be consistent. So, if you say, yes,
in principle, you could do that, you could do that, and it's kind of, we are kind of like in the same
game here, because for us, super determinists, it's very essential to believe that there is
local determinism. We are willing to sacrifice other aspects of our theory to accommodate this.
Then it's an interesting, it's a different story. But ask these questions to also see maybe to what
extent you are investing yourself and your preferences into your theory. Something you
may actually accuse others, for example, for example, she has been extremely, Sabin,
a Hosenfelder, extremely helpful in unraveling sort of this
fallacy of the string theory and the fact that practitioners of string theory
still not willing to admit the failure of their enterprise. Sabin has been extremely
positive in my opinion in this. She wrote a whole book called Lost in Maths saying that
we are led astray by our preferences for what we consider beauty and so on. But can we also be
led astray by our preferences for certain philosophy or metaphysics? And it's always nice,
easy to see it with other people. Can we see it in ourselves that we're actually doing something
very similar? Now, then the next question is, do I see it in me too? Because I'm now
saying, I'm not criticizing actually, I'm trying to explain why to me it was like an amazing
Netflix movie. Unfortunately, you need to have some background to understand. But if you do,
it is an incredible case study in how we are being human. And it's normal. But it shows to me also,
it helps me, it's almost, I want to say thank you so much for showing this to me so clearly.
It's informative about yourself. Yes, because I'm also, and by the way, it extends beyond science.
How often do I find myself in my life, in my personal life, adhering to certain ideas,
knowing full well that there is no proof for them. But it's just like how I want it to be.
And then suffering as a result. And to see in a microcosm, this process,
how we fool ourselves, how easy it is for us to fool ourselves.
You know, also, for instance, she goes like, I really want to work on this because I am
alarmed by the fact that the collapse of the wave function happens faster the speed of light.
But excuse me, quantum mechanics contradicts special relativity. Everybody knows this.
That's the whole point. That's why we have the next level theory, which is called quantum field
theory. I have not yet seen any super determinism addressing local determinism
in the framework of quantum field theory. They tried to do it in quantum mechanics,
and then they... Okay, so this has been a bit too harsh on Sabine. So to be fair,
now, what would you say about Bernardo? No, he was a bit harsh on her. That's what I would say.
But I'm just saying, like, Schrodinger equation is non relativistic.
It has a first-time derivative, second-order, first-order time derivative, second-order
coordinate space derivative. So it is not relativistic. So therefore, to say that
the collapse of the wave function is somehow alarming to us, but how about Schrodinger equation?
It's also non relativistic. You see what I'm saying? But it's such a subtle point that it
is lost because, like, most people don't really pay attention to this. I'm trying to say, I feel
it. I am like this, too. I'm not trying to criticize. You know Richard Hamming? Yeah, yeah.
He said something which jives completely with what you're saying, something I wrote down,
but I'm going to paraphrase. It's that we tend to think that we arrive at our interpretations
of quantum mechanics. But he said, you start with God, even as a secular person, and then you
see which interpretation is most consistent with that. I think, look, the beautiful thing,
to me, my approach is it's all beautiful. It's all beautiful. I loved seeing both of them,
and I wouldn't change a thing, and I don't want them to change except for one little thing.
Each of us asks ourselves, what is driving us really here? And is it really just scientific
principles or there is some preference in it? And it's a very small thing. It's no shame in
having a preference. There's no shame in it. Of course, I do. I do. Just be aware of it.
Because that's what leads us astray, I think, is not being aware. That's all. But I think
the idea is very interesting. It is worth exploring. It is not fair to say that you shouldn't
explore because it sounds crazy or whatever. You know, like, it's weird. Quantum mechanics is
weird. So also, Bernardo said something, he's like, so basically, you're saying that the moon
depends what you see in the moon and depends on how you set up your apparatus, your detector. But
we know that in quantum mechanics, the result depends on how you set up your apparatus. If you
do a double slit experiment without detectors, you will see the interference pattern. If you do it
with a detector, you will see particles behavior. So it's not an argument either. You see what I mean?
We are all in a jungle. You know, we are in a jungle. We're trying to find our way.
Let's cooperate. Let's cooperate and let's understand that we all want the same thing.
We want the best theory, the most beautiful theory, the most interesting theory,
the one which fits with experiment. On this path, on this journey, we are informed by many things
which are personal. And nothing wrong with it. Just accept it. And this will give us maybe new
insights. Over email, you mentioned you wanted to speak about string theory or the Hans beta
onset. So string theory is a good example of where people have gone astray. And Sabina has
been one of the people that called them on this correctly, in my opinion. And was this the example
you were thinking of earlier when you said, you can recapitulate it, not me?
Yeah. So the theory of everything, you know, it's like this idea that
I was recently invited to a conference, a string theory conference. And it was a very
interesting experience for me to not just look at abstract, but to actually interact with people
who are considered themselves string theorists. And I saw that
it's not very healthy kind of situation where it's still not been acknowledged by...
A bit too much hubris?
Not hubris. I think it's more like unwillingness to accept responsibility.
Which is again, totally human, you know, like, it's hard. One was last time I accepted
responsibility. So maybe I will start with myself. I am not a string theorist. I've never been
a string theorist. But I have collaborated with Edward Whitten, who my great respect.
And yes, I found it over the years very useful to drop the names and say, I collaborate with
Whitten, you know, I know something about string theory, because when I talk to my non-science
friends. So also in love and math, I talk about string theory, but I'm kind of trying to be diplomatic
about it. That it's great for mathematics and physically it hasn't quite worked, but maybe.
The fact of the matter is that the original promise of string theory, which was described
this universe by using a theory which starts out in ten dimensions of space-time,
has not worked out. And nobody knows how in principle it could work. And it's already been
a situation for at least ten years. Yet, this is not acknowledged. And how can you move forward
and achieve greatness if you're still pretending that your original program is somehow...
If you're not acknowledging that your original program failed, it's just kind of like a simple
question at the human level, not even scientific level. I did not see that. And I saw young people
very brilliant, but confused, because their elders are not giving them proper guidance.
That's my impression. I may be wrong. I may be completely off base here.
But I sensed that they're already not doing string theory proper. So very few talks were about
string theory actually proper. And the kind of stuff people work on that I discussed. It's quantum
field theory more generally, or maybe study of black holes and stuff like that. But it's not...
The original promise was we will find the Kalabiyav Manifold on which six-dimensional,
which we'll do away with the six dimensions. And then we will get the physics of this four-dimensional
universe. It has not worked out and nobody knows how to do it. Apart from some ideas of
what's called landscape, this multiverse, and so on, which I think a lot of people find problematic.
So this to me is an example of how, again, our personal interferes with the project,
which is of science, unwillingness to accept reality. It doesn't mean that the people should be...
Nobody needs to be punished. Don't need to be punished.
I understand. So what is a string theorist to do when you say acknowledge? What is the goal?
Is it Ed Whitton writes an article? Is it he goes on a podium? Is it he sends an email out?
And then what happens afterward? What does a string theorist do after one spends four decades,
five decades studying it and then says this wasn't fruitful? But then are they going to
continue studying it for the next decade? I'll tell you what not to do, okay? How about this?
Let me start with that simple thing. So this I'm actually supposed that not even wrong
blog by Peter White. Peter White was one of the one of the early critics.
He's coming on the podcast in a couple of weeks, actually. Yeah, yeah.
No, it's great. Yeah, he's great. And he was very brave because I do remember what happened.
He was one of the lone voices. He and the least small one at the time were basically the only
voices. Also, they were ostracized. They were ostracized. They were criticized like they were
stupid. They didn't understand, you know. And for instance, how about in the poll,
how about an apology or at least acknowledgement? Okay, so maybe he was not so stupid after all,
Peter White or Lee Small and maybe actually they were saying something which was meaningful.
How about that? But also like I'm looking here. So in August of 19, there was a video
discussion about supergravity and so on. And there's a quote here. So I haven't actually watched
the video, but I trust that Peter White transcribed it correctly. And the Strominger, who is a Harvard
professor and one of the leaders of string theory, I mean, I great respect, of course,
is a great scientist. Here's what he said. I think that the idea that people were excited
about back in 1985 was really a small thing. That's the idea of describing the physics of
this universe from string theory. So he says, it was really a small thing.
You know, to kind of complete a table that you put down at the beginning of the spectrum of
particles. Who cares about that, right? So except how much resources were taken to fulfill,
to fulfill this promise, right? That was a big promise. And that was the idea on the
because of which string theories used to say it's the only game in town.
If you want to do theoretical physics, you better come to us
because nobody else is doing anything interesting. So now in 2019, we hear from one of the leaders
I think that this idea was actually a really small thing. Okay, we didn't do that. We didn't
predict new things that were going to be measured at the large Adron Collider.
But what has happened is so much more exciting than our original vision. We are getting little
hints of a radical new view of the nature of space and time in which it really just is an
approximate concept emerging from something deeper. That is really, really more exciting.
So in other words, so first of all, correct, the beautiful ideas came out of string theory.
But that was not the original promise of string theory. The original promise was to describe the
physics of this universe, unify all forces of nature with three forces, electromagnetic,
strong and weak described by the standard model and quantum theory of gravity. This has not happened.
And now we hear that actually it was not such a big deal. That's actually such a big thing.
We've learned so much more. It's like, you know, I tried to think of a good analogy.
It's like, remember Moses? You took Israelites out of Egypt. And he told them that he will
lead them to the Promised Land. So imagine Moses after 40 years of wandering in the desert.
You would say, you know, guys, this idea of a Promised Land is not such a big thing.
Look how much we've learned. We've learned about the desert. We've learned so much about the sand.
That's a great analogy.
Who cares about the Promised Land? What do you think would people say to him?
And yet here we are. It's a, you know, this is what this is called.
By the way, people call you mentioned this expression, moving the goalposts.
This is not moving goalposts. This is going to a different stadium.
It's starting to play a different game. Like you used to play soccer at one stadium.
Then you go to another stadium, you start playing baseball and you say, no, we are playing soccer.
We're still playing soccer.
Yes, yes, yes, stating that your original goal is not meaningful.
It did not work out. It did not work out. How about just starting with that?
It did not work out unequivocally, not by saying in the next 10 years, you know, I,
I saw a great video. I don't know if you know this channel.
She's called, it's Angela Collier. You know, she, she has a very nice
YouTube channel and she did a video about strength theory and I really enjoyed it.
She kind of, and one of the things that she kept saying, like, she traced the evolution,
90s, the 2000s and so on. And each time she's like, just wait another 10 years,
just wait another 10 years. That's the attitude even today. I am sorry to say,
you know, what, how do, if a young person who is in the subject, it's still called strength
theory. Okay. You have go to conferences in strength theory and maybe 20% of talks are
about strength theory. The rest is about other things. People are already doing other things.
It's like, you know, in the Soviet Union, when I was growing up, before Gorbachev,
like 80s, early 80s, everybody already did not believe in the ideology. They did their own thing,
but people were still trapped because the official ideology, official party line is this.
So you have to somehow accommodate it. You know, so for instance, if you work in
history or social science, you always start a preface every article you write with the great
comrade Lenin said this, you know, things like that. What a liberation it is when you don't
have to do it anymore. What a wait, so in this analogy, what would be the equivalent of praising
Lenin or Marx? Because when you go to a string conference, not like you're saying, hey, string
theory is great. Now here's my talk. The strength theory somehow is still true. It's still trying
to search, to still trying to describe this universe. It's not because, well, there are some
people trying, but there's so many, at least say that it did not work out the way we expected.
Okay. People thought, and I also understand to be carried away as a human being, it's
natural. The theory is beautiful. And it's, I have to say also a very strongly that has
impacted mathematics in incredibly powerful ways. For instance, what Strongman talks about is real,
is real, the idea of emergence of space time. And the different space times can appear at
different limits of the same theory, like mirror symmetry, stuff like that, incredibly powerful.
Okay. But yes, this came up. But what about your original promise? What about your original promise?
The idea was that you find what the string theory is only defined super string theory in 10 dimensions
of space time. You have to find six dimensions, which the extra, because what we observe is four
dimensions of space time. So the idea was, we will find the right manifold, the right shape on
which to compactify. Reasonable. Reasonable. What turned out, what turned out is that there are
too many choices. But there is more. Actually, there's one about, there's one question I said,
you cannot pin it down. It's worse because actually dynamically, it doesn't stay static.
It changes also the Calabi-Yau, because our modular space of Calabi-Yau, it's not rigid.
Many of them are not. So it's moving and it becomes singular and nobody knows what to do with this.
So in other words, the magnitude of the problem, yes, it's possible that somebody can solve it.
And I'm not saying they should not work on it. Of course, work on it.
Uh-huh. But they shouldn't deride other attempts.
But they were extremely heavy handed. There's no question, like in the same blog
of Peter Voigt, I suggest people to read a testimony from David E. Kaplan. He gave an
interview, this is a post from October 22. It's a devastating, devastating testimony of someone
who was not a string theorist in the heyday of string theory and what he felt about it.
How many others felt the same way? Not to acknowledge it, not to admit that this would happen.
And there is no promise, did not pan out. It's something that holds people back. In my opinion,
they have to be free. They have to liberate it from this weight. And the only people who can do it
are the leaders of the theory. And it doesn't take much. It just opens the door a little bit
for the possibility that our original project did not work out.
Let's see what we can make out of what we have.
How do you think Ed Whitton would respond if he heard what you said? You've collaborated with him.
You know you're part of that community or adjacent to that community?
I'm adjacent and I have been paying lip service to this community. I have to admit. So in the
interest of following my own admonition of what is Edwards and meaning Edward Frankl,
not Edward Whitton. What is Edward Frankl's involvement? I was never a string theorist,
but I paid lip service because it was convenient to me. It was nice for me to feel that I am
collaborating with such great physicists. That I would write in love and math that,
yeah, who knows, maybe they will find this collab. Yeah, when I knew full well that it seems way
more... I didn't know that. I didn't say it in putting these words, but I was kind of giving the
in principle kind of paying lip service to it. Okay, so maybe not yet, but as this woman who has
Angela said, you wait in the next 10 years. So I was kind of giving lip service to it.
You see, that's my contribution and which I see now was unhelpful. And I am grateful that there
were people like Peter Boyd and Lee Smollin and Sabin Hosenfelder as well, who were principled
about it. Eric Weinstein as well. Eric Weinstein, yes, yes, absolutely. Eric Weinstein,
who said this for many years, they had a principled approach to it. And you know,
it's always like this because you don't want to say it because you don't want to offend anybody.
I understand. But at some point, you ask what is the interest of the community as opposed to the
interest of a single human being or a few single, a few individuals. Yeah, how do you think the
leaders would react to what you just said? Let's find out. Forward this to Ed. Look, I, look, I
respect, I want to say I respect all the people. I just want to say I respect and I think they're
brilliant. There's no question, brilliant, absolutely brilliant. And I am honored that I,
I'm honored to have collaborated with them. No, no doubt about it. We're talking here about,
not so much about science involved, but about a human element somehow became the theme of our
conversation. So I kind of felt that this would be appropriate, appropriate, because also it's
one theory which perpetrated, which sold itself as a theory of everything, you know. And so now,
40 years later, after 40 years wandering in the desert, we hear that actually this promised land
is not a big deal. That's not how you deal with this. That's not, we've seen that happen in history.
It is detrimental. It puts a burden on young people who are trapped in this narrative,
even if, even if they're already doing stuff, which is outside of the purview of string theory.
But it would be much more helpful, healthy, in my opinion, in my opinion, only
in my opinion, having interacted.
This is a recent opinion of yours now because you've given this talk at the strings conference.
I have not spoken about this publicly, other than I tweeted a little bit about it.
I was at the conference. I was invited to give a challenge talk
about the development method. And I put a lot of effort into it. I put a lot of effort into it.
I was very sincere. And I went there with an open mind.
What I saw and experienced during this week, five days at this conference
was what led me to reconsider my position and led me to speak about it now,
say what I have just said. Because on the one hand, I saw brilliant young minds.
Yes. And on the other hand, I saw the leaders and no hint from the leaders that somehow maybe we
need to rebrand or pivot or evolve, you know, other than appreciation.
They didn't say that. Then I looked, I started researching what other, so these are the quotes I
found. I find it not very convincing. Does this strike a nerve with you? Because you also see a
parallel with what happened to you when you were 16, which is this older generation leading a stray,
the younger one. No, or no, that's too lose of an analogy.
I don't know how you make this connection. No, of course it is, of course, but because I put
myself in the position of these young people. So, you know, I mean, so yes, of course, but this
only proves I'm not saying that makes it irrelevant or that impacts the power. But see, I am aware.
I am aware that my sensitivity of this, that I care, you know, like other people maybe wouldn't
care. So, okay, you invite to some conference, you go and speak and okay, you feel some of that
energy, so to speak, you know, but okay, it's not your job. So just go and do your thing. Yet,
I somehow feel compelled to say this, right? Why? I know why. I'm sensitive to this thing.
And so you're also able to observe it. Much like people who advocate for breast
cancer research, maybe someone who was close to them was affected. It doesn't mean
breast cancer. You shouldn't invest in it just because you have a personal motivation. No,
no, I'm able to see it. I'm able to feel it. And now before we go, something else that you
mentioned on the Lex program, and you didn't say that it was a large problem in math, but the problem
of sometimes not giving credit where credit is due. You've seen this happen a couple times.
And you mentioned that in other fields, there's some unset ethical rules, but in math, there isn't
maybe in physics. Do you mind expounding on that? Well, it's again, integrity and like, you know,
but it's a human community. So this is the thing, which I think is at the root of it is
we like to think that we are the impartial arbiters of pure science and the driven by purely by the
interest of science. And I have, I have no doubt that we are, we, we would like to aspire to be
like that. To what extent we actually can. It's not clear to me by observing myself, first of all,
and so my suggestion is that
it's like, you know, Aldous Huxley talked about the idea about power, that we have to have restrictions
on power. And we gave an interview to CBS. It's a beautiful video. And the interviewer,
Mike Wallace is a great journalist. It's really fantastic. Like he's smoking a cigarette, you
know, it's like in the 50s. And he says, why, why do we have to put this is because the whole point
is that power is dangerous is because people can succumb to the temptation of power. That's why
you have to restrict it. That's the whole point. Because the idea that somehow unrestricted power
can be good for anyone has been repudiated and disproved by centuries and millennia of human
history. And it's the same, it's the same, I think, with the idea of, you know, that somehow
my personal preferences are not involved in what I do in science. Today we have discussed several
examples of which seem to suggest that this is not so or it's not so simple. It's much more subtle
somehow than that, you see. And so I think that we will not get to the next level of our evolution.
Because also people say, okay, who cares? Think theory, how many people involved? Hundreds,
maybe a few thousand. But it's like canary. It's a canary in a coal mine, in my opinion. We are the
vanguard. We scientists, we are the vanguard. First of all, because you think it bleeds out into
the public? Yes. Because people unconsciously, they feel it. And actually, Angela Collier,
she makes this point. She actually says people got felt that they were lied to with string theory,
and now they are fed up with physics. They don't want, they said you lied to us. And I think,
okay, I think it's maybe a little hard, too harsh, but she definitely has a point. So for instance,
then people will not be so interested in the developments of theoretical physics maybe for
the next decade or something. Because they got burned, they feel that they were lied.
A lot of these things, people feel it, even if they don't know how to verbalize it, they feel it.
You see, so if we don't get our house in order, and I say my outhouse, I don't mean string theory,
I mean science in general. We also, the other side of flip side of it is these people,
so-called AI practitioners, who are feeding lies to people, telling them that AI is already here,
and you should pray to our AI overlords that they will not destroy you, stuff like that.
In each of these instances, what I think will help us to go to the next level,
and to do the job that we're supposed to do, which is, is to realize how much our personal
psychology, our personal aesthetic, metaphysical, philosophical preferences,
how much they are intertwined with what we do as scientists. Just acknowledge that,
and then use it as a starting point for self-inquiry and self- to raise your self-awareness.
The same goes with the attributions and papers and so on, and sometimes much lesser issue in my
opinion. For instance, if you have a subject where the leaders of the subject still cannot
acknowledge that mistakes were made, you know, mistakes were made, lessons were learned,
let's move on with this understanding. Then, okay, so then the questions of attributions and so on
is kind of a lesser point, but the source, I think, is the same, is self-awareness,
or lack of, and taking responsibility, obviously.
Before we close, for me to take responsibility for a lack of attribution on my part, unintentional,
but it was still a lack of attribution, I did this video on quantum gravity, the controversial history
of quantum gravity's connection to anti-gravity. I didn't credit Eric Weinstein in the video itself
because I didn't use him as a source directly. I used other people like David Kaiser and a few
others as sources, and I didn't know that some of the people that I had used as sources,
used Eric as sources and didn't credit him. And so I just feel bad about that. And so Eric,
if you're watching like, unfortunately, YouTube doesn't allow you to extend a video, but I can
change it. You couldn't put a comment. You couldn't put a comment. Yeah, I did put a comment tonight,
and I'm leaving this and I apologize. And so see, that's what I'm talking about. This is what I'm
talking about. I admire you for this, for accepting this possible. It's much easier to,
you know, the alternative is to find excuses. Yeah, but yes, he was involved, but somehow
this other people did not quote him. So it's not my fault. You see, this is a difference.
And you're not going down that road. And thank you for that. Because, you know,
that's how we change it because we change our own.
Well, thank you because you inspired me, honestly, in many ways, not only through this
conversation, but others that I've seen of you, like on Lex's and also in this book.
Thank you, Kurt. Thank you. I appreciate it.
Me overcoming my embarrassment of, like I find myself being begrudging, if I'm being honest,
because there are some other podcasters who have large names who have helped them and
they're tweeting about them, and I don't have any of that.
We can all take, we can all exhale, right? Because something is weighing on us when there is
something which is not true. It's weighing on us. And when that simple thing of just acknowledging
it's such a breath of fresh air that we can all take a breath, exhale and move on. That's all.
Yeah. Well, again, man, oh man, what a conversation.
Thank you. Thank you. Okay. I think this is the second time one hour apart that I said,
all right, let's end it. That just shows you what an engrossing, well, how grossing the
topics are and how fun this was. Thank you.
A lot of interesting stuff. So thank you for the great, I really enjoyed it.
All right. Well, I hope you enjoyed that podcast. It's almost three hours over three hour podcast.
Thank you for sticking all the way to the end. I hope you enjoyed it. I think you have,
because you're still here. I want to recommend a couple videos, a couple podcasts from theories
of everything. If you liked this podcast, you'll like the ones that I'm about to recommend.
But I'd also like to acknowledge a comment. Every episode from now on, or at least every other
episode, I'm going to highlight one of your comments. The reason is that I don't know if
you're like me, but I love talking about these subjects. I love dealing with these subjects,
but it's not like we have, at least for me, many people in my personal life to speak to about it.
So in a sense, it's just relegated to speaking to the screen or conversing with people over text.
And many people take the time to write detailed comments, which I love because I read almost
every single comment. And I would like to encourage this comment comes from user Biju,
with the pseudonym, a Cronon Master. And it's on the Carlo Revelli clip called,
There's No Way Function of the Universe. That will be linked in the description.
Biju says, one way of viewing quantum mechanics is as a measurement theory.
To measure the universe, you really have to be outside the universe. So yes,
in that sense, you could have a way function of the universe, but it would do you no good.
By definition, if you're external and conducting measurements, you'd be interacting with the
system. So you'd not be truly separate from the system. You'd be at least coupled to it by whatever
means you have for making the measurement. So in that sense, there could not literally be a
the universe, quote unquote. I do like aspects of relational quantum mechanics. The trouble is,
RQM is like the mother of all bootstraps, something in brackets, Revelli's God. And I know he
considers himself atheistic, which is not a scientific stance. So whatever has to be absolute
for everything else to gauge off of, so to speak. Okay, you can read the rest of the comment by
going to that video. You'll see, and I didn't plan this, that there's even a reference to the
interpretations of quantum mechanics having to do with our conception of God or even the lack of God
and reasoning backward from these prejudicial axioms, rather than what we think of, which is,
Hey, I'm this rational being, I'm going to reason forward to my interpretation or to my conclusions.
Now, if you liked this episode, then you'll enjoy the Bernardo Castro solo episode,
that's somewhere on screen here, and it'll also be in the description, as well as the Sabina
Haßenfelder interview with Bernardo Castro, where they talk about super determinism,
clip that was just mentioned with Carlo Revelli will also be in the description,
and the clip with Neil deGrasse Tyson, that was alluded to about philosophies, quote unquote,
useless, or that philosophy is little to contribute to modern day physics and mathematics.
Also, because Richard Borchard's asked a question, you may not know this, but Richard
Borchard's was interviewed twice on theories of everything. Part one and part two are linked in
the description as well. Thank you so much for your viewership. And I'm glad, or at least I hope
that you enjoy this episode. The podcast is now concluded. Thank you for watching. If you haven't
subscribed or clicked that like button, now would be a great time to do so, as each subscribe and
like helps you to push this content to more people. You should also know that there's a
remarkably active discord and subreddit for theories of everything where people explicate toes,
disagree respectfully about theories and build as a community our own toes links to both are in the
description. Also, I recently found out that external links count plenty toward the algorithm,
which means that when you share on Twitter, on Facebook, on Reddit, etc, it shows YouTube that
people are talking about this outside of YouTube, which in turn greatly aids the distribution on
YouTube as well. Last but not least, you should know that this podcast is on iTunes, it's on Spotify,
it's on every one of the audio platforms, just type in theories of everything and you'll find it.
Often I gain from re-watching lectures and podcasts and I read that in the comments, hey,
Toe listeners also gain from replaying, so how about instead re-listening on those platforms,
iTunes, Spotify, Google Podcast, whichever podcast catcher you use. If you'd like to support more
conversations like this then do consider visiting patreon.com slash Kurt Jaimungal and donating
with whatever you like. Again, it's support from the sponsors and you that allow me to work on Toe
full-time, you get early access to ad-free audio episodes there as well. For instance,
this episode was released a few days earlier. Every dollar helps far more than you think,
either way, your viewership is generosity enough.
