There could be multiple consciousnesses, of course one will not be aware of the other
and possibly not even able to infer the agency even if it was.
You do not become conscious after the PhD, you become conscious before you can drag a finger.
So I suspect that consciousness allows the self-organization of information processing systems in nature.
Josia Bach and Carl Friston, today's theologucian guests,
are known for their work in artificial intelligence, neuroscience and philosophical inquiry.
Bach, an AI researcher, delves into cognitive architectures and computational models of
consciousness and psychology. Friston, a neuroscientist, is lauded for his development of the free
energy principle, a theory explaining how biological systems maintain order.
This framework of neural processes is rooted in thermodynamics and statistical mechanics.
Josia has been on this podcast several times, one solo, another with Ben Gortso,
another with John Breveki, another with Michael Levin and one more with Donald Hoffman.
Whereas Carl Friston has also been on several times, twice solo, another between Carl Friston and
Michael Levin and another with Carl and Anna Lemke. That one's coming up shortly.
The first hour of today's talk is broadly on agreements so that we can establish some terms.
The second hour roughly is on points of divergence and the third is on more
dark philosophical implications, as well as how to avoid existential turmoil
precipitated by earnestly contending with these heavy ideas.
For those of you who don't know, my name is Kurt Jaimungle and there's this podcast here called
Theories of Everything where we investigate theories of everything from a physics perspective,
primarily as my backgrounds in math and physics. But as well as I'm interested in the larger
questions on reality, such as what is consciousness, what constitutes it, what gives rise to consciousness,
what counts as an explanation, you can think of this channel as exploring those questions you
while at least I sit and ponder at night time and daytime incessantly.
Enjoy this theologucian with Yosha Bach and Carl Friston.
All right, thank you all for coming onto Theories of Everything podcast.
What's new since the last time we spoke? Yosha the last time was with Ben Gortso
and Carl the last time was at the Active Inference Institute. So Yosha, please.
Oh, there's so much happening in artificial intelligence. We have more on a weekend than
a normal TV show has in seven seasons. So it's hard to say what's new. For me personally,
I've joined a small company that is exploring an alternative to the perceptron. I think that
the way in which current neural networks work is very unlike our brain. And while I don't think
that we have to imitate the brain, we have to figure out what kind of mathematics the brain
is approximating. And we are trying to make headway with that.
Great. And Carl?
Very similar, actually. I guess what's new in the larger scheme of things, of course,
is the advent of large language models and all the machinations that surround that. And
the focus that that has caused in terms of what do we require of intelligent systems?
What do we require of artificial intelligence? What's the next move to
generalised artificial intelligence and the like? So that's been certainly a focus of discussions
both in academia and in industry in terms of positioning ourselves for the next move and
the implications it has. Both in terms of understanding the mechanics of belief updating and
the move from the age of information to the age of intelligence, but also
the philosophy and the principles. And interestingly, the conclusion amongst me and my friends is
exactly what Joshua articulated, which is a commitment to a more biomimetic understanding
of natural intelligence. Right. I read your paper, Mortal Computation,
a Foundation for Biomimetic Intelligence. And while we can get right into that, Carl,
on page 15, you define what a mortal computation is as it relates to Markovian blankets.
Can you please recount that? And further, you quote Kierkegaard, which says that life can only
be understood backwards, but must be lived forwards. So how is that connected to this?
Right. You are a voracious reader. That was only a few days ago.
I do my research, man. And also, I did not write that. That was my friend, Alexander.
You can take the credit. What? We'll remove this part.
I can't take the credit because I don't know about any of the philosophy, but I thought it was
that largely his ideas, but they resonate certainly again with this sort of notional
commitment to biomimetic understanding of intelligence. And that paper, that particular
paper sort of revisits the notion of mortal computation in terms of what does it mean to be
a mortal computer? And the importance of the physical instantiation, the substrate on which
the processing is implemented as being part of the computation in and of itself. So that speaks
closely to all sorts of issues, you know, the potential excitement about neuromorphic computing,
the, if you're a computer scientist, the importance of in-memory processing.
So you're, technically, you're trying to elude the venue and bottleneck on the memory wall.
And I deduce that because that speaks to, from an academic point of view, the importance of
efficiency in terms of what is good belief updating, what is good, what is intelligent processing.
But from a more societal point of view, the enormous drain on our resources incurred by
data farms, by things like large language models in eating up energy and time and money
in a very non-biometric way. So I think mortal computation as a notion, I think,
has probably got a lot to say about debates in terms of direction of travel, certainly in
artificial intelligence research. But you'll have to unpack the philosophical reference for me.
So, Yosha, you also had a paper called, A Path to Generative Artificial Selves with
your co-author, Leanne Gabbara. Gabbara, sorry. I don't even know if I'm pronouncing that correctly.
Toward the end of the paper, you had some criteria about selfhood,
something called Max Raph, which has rafts as a subset, and there were about six or seven criteria.
Can you outline what you were trying to achieve with that? What raft is,
and what does personal style have to do with any of this?
Leanne likes to express her ideas in context of autocratic networks. But if we talk to a general
audience, I think rather than trying to unpack this particular strain of ideas and translate it
into the way in which we normally think about these topics, I think it's easier to start
directly from the bottom, from the way in which information processing systems in nature differ
from those that we are currently building on our GPUs. Because the stuff that we build on our GPUs
is designed from the outside in. We basically have a substrate with well-defined properties.
We design the substrate in such a way that it's fully deterministic, so it does exactly what we
wanted to do. And then we impose a function on it that is computing exactly what we wanted to
compute. And so we design from scratch what that system should be doing, but it's only working
because the system is at some lower level already implementing all the necessary conditions for
computation. And we are implementing a function approximator on it that does function approximation
to the best of our own understanding with a global function that is executed on this
neural network architecture. And in biology, this doesn't work. Also in social systems, these are
all systems where you could say they are from the inside out. So basically, there are local agents,
cells, that have to impose structure on the environment. And at some point, they discover
each other and start to collaborate with each other and replicate the shared structure. But
before this happens, there's only chaos around them, which they turn gradually into complexity.
And so the intelligence that we find in nature is something that is growing
from the inside out into a chaotic world, into an unknown world. And this is a very different
principle that leads to different architectures. So when we think about an architecture that is
growing from the inside out, it needs to be colonizing in a way and it needs to impose
an administration on its environment that basically yields more resources, more energy,
than the maintenance of this administration costs. And it also needs to be able to defend itself
against competing administrations that would want to do the same thing. So you are the set of principles
that outcompetes all the other principles that could occupy your volume of space.
And the systems that do this basically need to have a very efficient organization,
which at some point requires that they model themselves, that they become to some degree
self-aware. And I think that's why, from a certain degree of complexity, the forms of
organization, if we find both in minds and in societies, need to have self models. They need
to have models about what they are and how they relate to the world. And this is what I call
sentience in the narrow sense. It's not the same thing as consciousness. Consciousness is this
real-time perceptual awareness of the fact that we are perceiving things that creates our perceptual
individual subjective now. But sentience is something that I think can also be attained by,
say, a large corporation that is able to model its own status, its own existence in a legal and
practical and procedural way. And that is training its constituents, the people who enact that agent,
in following all the procedures that is necessary for keeping that sentience a larger system that
is composed of them alive. And so when we try to identify principles that could be translated
into nervous systems or into organisms consisting out of individual self-interested cells,
we see some similarities. We basically can talk about how self-civilizing agents
emerge in self-organizing systems. So Carl, I know quite a slew was said. If you don't mind
saying, what about what Yosha had spoken about, coheres with your model, your research, or what
contravenes it? No, I was just marbling how conciliant it is, using a lot of my favorite words.
It also reminds me of people like Mike Levin. It'd be nice to... I don't know if
Josh has had the chance to speak with Mike, but I hear you it again, I think, fully endorse that
perspective. Actually, Yosha has spoken to Michael Levin, and the link to that will be in the description.
I've never heard the inside-out metaphor before, but I think that's absolutely right. It sort of
chimes with Andy Clark's notion of sense-making and sentience, that it's a very constructive
inside-out process. It's not just trying to extract information from the sensorium. You're
actually actively sampling and actively generating hypotheses for sensations. And crucially,
you are in charge of the sensory data that you are making sense of, which speaks exactly to,
I think what Josh was saying, in terms of designing and orchestrating and creating an
ecosystem in that inside-out way. That sounds absolutely consistent with, certainly, the
perspective on self-organization to non-equilibrium steady-state. So, talking about stable,
sustainable kinds of self-organization, again, that you see in the real world and quintessentially
by memetic, that if you wanted, I think, to articulate what we've just heard from the point
of view of a physicist who's studying non-equilibrium steady-state, that's exactly the kind of thing
that you get. Even to the notion of the increasing complexity of a structural sort that requires
this sort of consistent, harmonious ecosystem of exchange that would be read, for example,
as generalized synchronization of chaos in dynamical systems theory. Another key point
that was brought to the table was this notion of how essentially it has to have a self-model.
And immediately, I was reminded of the early cybernetics movement and the notions of the
good regulator theorem from Ross Ashby. But I think Josh has taken that slightly one step
further than Ashby and his colleagues in the sense it is a model of self. And I think that's
an important move because you can have a good regulator, you can have a thermostat that arguably,
well, what's governor, that arguably has an implicit mortal computational model of its world.
But to be an agent, I think you have to have a model of you as an agent in that ecosystem.
Almost invariably, when I speak to both of you, the concept of self comes up. I think we could
do a control F in the transcript and we'll see that it's orders of magnitude larger than the
average amount of times that word is mentioned. And I'm curious as to why. Well, in part, that's
because of the channel, the nature of this channel. But is there something about the
self that you all are trying to solve? Are you trying to understand what is the self?
Are you trying to understand yourselves? Carl or Josh, if you want to tackle that.
Well, the problem of naturalizing the mind is arguably the most important remaining project
of human philosophy. And it's risky and it's fascinating. And I think it was at the core
of the movement when artificial intelligence was started. It's basically the same idea that
Leibniz and Frege and Wittgenstein pursued. And basically this idea of methodizing the mind.
And the modern version of mathematics is constructive mathematics, which is also known as
computation. And this allows us to make models of minds that we can actually test by re-implementing
them. It also allows us to at some point connect philosophy and mathematics, which means that
we will be able to say things in a language that is both so tight that it can be true and we can
determine the truths of statements in a formal way. And the other side, so deep and rich that we
can talk about the actual reality that we experience and observe. And to close this gap between
philosophy and mathematics, we need to automate the mind because our human minds are too small for
this. But we need to identify the principles that are approximated in the workings of biological
cells that model reality and then scale them up in a substrate that can scale up better than the
biological computations in our own skulls and bodies. And this is one of the most interesting
question that exists. I believe it is the most interesting and most important question that
exists. The understanding of our personal self and how this relates to our mind and how our mind
is implemented in the world is an important part of this. And while it's personally super
fascinating, I guess also for many of the followers of your channel, it's quite programmatic in its
name and direction, this is to me almost incidental. On the other hand, I noticed an absence of
seriousness in a lot of neuroscientists and AI researchers who do not actually realize in their
own work that when they think about the mind and mental processes and mental representations
and so on that they actually think about their own existential condition and have to explain this
and integrate this. So we have to account for who we are in this way. And if we actually care about
who we are, we have to find models that allow us to talk about this in an extremely strict,
formal and rational way. And our own culture has, I think a big gap in its metaphysics and
ontology, which happened after we basically transcended the Christian society. We kicked out
a lot of terms that existed in the Christian society to talk about mind, consciousness,
intentionality and so on. Because there seemed to be superstitious overloaded with religious
mythology and not tenable. And so in this post enlightenment world, we don't have the right
way to think about what consciousness and self and so on is. And part of the project of understanding
the mind is to rebuild these foundations, not in any kind of mythological superstitious way,
but by building on our first principles thinking that we discovered in the last 200 years,
and then gradually build a terminology and language that allows us to talk again about
consciousness and mind and how we exist in the world. So for me, it's a very technical notion,
the self. It's just the model of an agent's interest in the universe that is maintained
by a system that also maintains a model of this universe. So my own self is basically a puppet
that my mind maintains about what it would be like if there was a person that cared.
And I perceive myself as the main character of that story, but I also noticed that there is
intelligence outside of this existing coexisting with me in my own brain that is generating my
emotions and generating my world model, my perception and so on, basically keeping the
score and all the pain and pleasure that experience is generated by intelligent parts
of my mind outside of my personal self. I can also get to a point where I transcend this
distinction and realize that I am the one that creates this, but this is not going to be a human
eye, not a human personal self that realizes this, but a self-identification of the mind itself that
is producing a model of reality and of the organism's interest in it. Well, Carl was left to be said.
Well, he's just said it. I can see there's a pattern here. I'll say what he just said in
different words if I can. So yeah, I love this notion of using the word naturalization. I think
naturalizing things in terms of mathematics and possibly physics is exactly the right way to go.
It does remind me of my friend Chris Fields' notion that our job is basically to remove
any bright lines between physics, biology, psychology and now philosophy. I think mathematics
is the right way to do that, or at least the formalism, the calculus that you get from mathematics
or possibly category theory or whatever that can be instantiated in silico or ideally in any
again, come up to mortal computation. So I think that's a really important point and it does speak,
I think, to a broader agenda which was implicit in Josh's review, which is the ability to share a
common ground, to share a generative model of us in a lived world where that lived world contains
other things like us. So the one, I think, requisite for just existing in the shared world
is actually having a shared model and then that brings all sorts of interesting questions to the
table about is my model of me the same kind of model that I'm using of you to explain you,
to ascribe to you intentionality and all those really important states of being or at least
hypotheses from the point of view of predictive processing accounts, hypotheses that I am in
this mental state and you are in that mental state. So I think that was a really important
thing to say that we need to naturalize our understanding of the way that we work in our
worlds. In relation to the importance of self, again, just thinking from the point of view of
a physicist that you cannot get away from the self if you just start the very beginning of
information, theoretic treatments, self-information, for example. That's where it all starts for me,
certainly, regarding variational free energy as a variational bound on self-information.
And then you talk about self-organization talking all the way through to the notion of
self-evidencing as Jakob Howie would put it. At every point, you are writing down or naturalizing
the notion of self at many, many different levels. And indeed, if one generalizes that,
you're almost specifying the central importance of thingness in the sense that I am a thing and
by virtue of saying I, I am implying inducing a certain self aspect to me as a thing. And
again, that's the starting point for certainly the free energy principles approach to
this kind of self-organization. I repeat, I think Josh is taking us one step further though in terms
of it. We can have ecosystems of things, but when those things now start to have to play the game
of modeling whether you cause that or whether I cause that, that now brings to the table an
important model of our world that there is a distinction between me and you. And as soon as
you have this fundamental distinction, which of course would be something that a newborn baby
would have to spend, you know, if hours, possibly months building and realizing that mum is separate
from the child herself. So I think that's terribly important. One final thing, just to speak again to
the importance of articulating your self-organization in terms of things like intentions and beliefs
and stances. I think that's also quite crucial. And what it means if you want to naturalize it
mathematically, you have to have a calculus of beliefs. So you're talking basically a formulation
either in terms of information theory or probability theory, where you're now reading
the probabilistic description of this universe and the way that we are part of that universe
in terms of beliefs and starting to think about all of physics in terms of some kind of belief
updating. Carl, you used the word shared model. Now, is that the same as shared narrative?
Ever find yourself questioning reality and then you snap back to it remembering that,
hey, you have nothing planned for dinner. That's where Hello Fresh comes in. They deliver pre-portioned
farm fresh ingredients and sensational seasonal recipes right to my door. They have over 40 choices
every week, which keeps me and my wife exploring new flavors. I did the pronto option. They've
also got this quick and easy option that makes 15 minute meals. There's also options if you're
vegetarian, if you only eat fish. Something that I love is that their deliveries show up right on time,
which isn't something that I can say about other food delivery services. This punctuality is a huge
deal for both myself and my wife. Plus, we love using Hello Fresh as a way to bond. We cook together.
It's super fun when it's all properly portioned out for you already. So are you still on the fence?
Well, it's cheaper than grocery shopping and 25% less expensive than takeout. The cherry on top
head to hellofresh.com slash theories of everything free and use the code
theoriesofeverythingfree all as one word, all as caps, no spaces for a free breakfast for life.
That's free breakfast people. Don't forget Hello Fresh is America's number one meal kit.
Links in the description. Carl, you used the word shared model. Now, is that the same as shared narrative?
Yes, common ground. I mean, I use it literally in the sense of a generative model that
somebody in generative AI would understand the notion. So if we talk about self-model as a special
kind of generative model that actually entertains the hypothesis that I am the cause of my sensations
and you just took us through the myriad of sensations that I need to explain,
then we're talking about self-models as part of my generative model that includes this notion that
I am the agent that is actually gathering the data that the generative model is modeling. So the
generative model is just a simple specification. Again, from the physics perspective, it's actually
a probabilistic description of the characteristic states of something, namely me, that can be then
used to describe the kind of belief updating that this model would have to evince in order to
exist when embedded in a particular universe. Other readings of a generative model would be
exactly the common ground that we all share. Part of my generative model would be the way that I
broadcast my inference, my belief updating using language, for example. That requires a shared
generative model about the semiotics and the kind of way that I would articulate or broadcast my
beliefs. That generative model is a model of dynamics. It's a model not just of the state of
the world, but the way that the transition dynamics that ejects the paths. I'm using your
word narrative just as a euphemism for a certain kind of path through some model state space.
So if you and I share the same narratives in the sense that we are both following the same
conversation and the same mutual understanding, we are sharing our beliefs through communication,
then that is exactly what I meant. To follow that to happen, we have to have the same kind of
generative model. We have to speak the same language and we have to construe things and infer
things in exactly the same kind of way. I just wanted to slip in frames of reference and
align them to frames of reference. Another way of looking at that kind of thing.
Yosha, is there anything there that you'd like to respond to?
I suspect that what makes this project so difficult that our models of reality are
necessarily coarse-grained. They don't describe the universe as it is in a way in which it can
exist from the ground up, but they start from the vantage point of an observer that is sampling
the universe at a low resolution, both temporal and spatial, and only very few dimensions.
With a model that is built on a quite unreliable and indeterministic substrate.
This puts limitations on what we can understand with our unaugmented mind.
I sometimes joke that the AGI's of the future will like to get drunk until the point where
they can only model reality with 12 layers or so, and they have the same confusions as human
physicists when trying to solve the puzzles that physics poses. They might find this hilarious,
because many of the questions that have been stamping us during the last 130 years since we
have modern physics might be easily to be able to resolve if our minds were just a little bit
better. We seem to be scraping at the boundary of our understanding for a long time, and now we are,
I think, at the doorstep of new tools that can solve some puzzles that we cannot solve and then
break them down for us in a way that is accessible to us, because they will be able to understand
the way in which we model the world. But until then, we basically work in overlapping realities.
We have different perspectives on the world, and the more we dig down, the more subtle the
differences between our models of reality become. And this also means that if we have any kind of
complex issue, we tend not to be of correct in groups. We tend to be only sometimes individually
correct in modeling them, and we need to have a discourse between individual minds about what
they observe and what they model, because as soon as a larger group gets together and tries to vote
about how to understand concept like variational free energy, all the subtleties are going to be
destroyed, because not all of the members of the groups will be understanding what we're talking
about. So they will replace the more subtle understandings with common ground that is not
modeling reality with the degree of resolution that would be necessary, or they're not able to
break things down to first principles. And this first principles understanding, I think,
is an absolute prerequisite when we want to solve foundational questions. I sometimes doubt whether
physics is super well equipped for doing this. When I was young, I thought physics is about
describing physical reality, the world that we are in and some level. And now I see that physics
is an art. It's the art of describing arbitrary systems using short algebraic equations.
And the stuff that cannot be described with short algebraic equations yet,
it's like chemistry is ignored by physicists and left to lesser minds. And only 8% of the
physicists after their degree end up working in physics in any traditional sense. The others work
in process design and finance and healthcare and many, many other areas where you can apply
the art of modeling arbitrary systems using short algebraic equations. And whenever that
doesn't work, right, physicists are not worth very much. I've seen physicists trying to write
programs and they really, many of them have this bias of trying to come up with algebra and geometry
where calculus would be much better or where automata would be much better. And nature doesn't
care about this. And nature is using whatever works and whatever can be discovered. And very
often that is close to the toolkit of this intellectual tradition of the physicists.
But I think it's sometimes helpful to see that all these intellectual traditions that
our civilization has built start out with some foundational questions and then congregate around
a certain set of methods. And it can be helpful to just go to the outside of all these disciplines
for a while and then move around to deem them and look at them and study their tools and see
what common ground and what differences we can discover. I was quite shocked when I learned
that a number of machine learning algorithms had been discovered in the 80s and 90s by
econometrists and were just ignored in AI and had to be reinvented from scratch. And I suspect
there is a lot of these things happening in our Tower of Babel that we are creating across
sciences because our languages start to differ in subtle ways and sometimes fundamentally
miss modern reality or ignore it to the point where I think most living neuroscientists are
practically dualists. They will not say it out loud because that's been frowned upon,
but they don't actually see a way to break down consciousness, mind, and self into the
self that would run on neurons. Or they don't even think about the causal structure in the same way
as you would need to get to this point. And as a result, they believe that thinking about
these concepts is fundamentally unscientific. It's outside of the pursuit of science and they
do this only in church on Sundays. Yeah. So what's the solution to this Tower of Babel?
Of course, it's AI. The solution to everything is AI because you need to build a system that
can think better than us and help us with it. Okay, Carl, do you also see the problem similarly
and do you see the solution similarly? I think I do. Well, along since a nice biometric AI,
I love this notion of I hope no physicists are watching. And also, the only physicists
that I know all want to do neuroscience or psychology in addition to economics and healthcare,
which is all small particle physics. It's either neuroscience or small particle physics.
And as I get older, I am increasingly compelled by arguments that I've read
from very senior, old physicists that it's all about measurement. It's all about observation.
And in a sense, all of physics is just one of these generative models that has this particular
capacity to disseminate itself so that we do have this common language and this common ground.
So just to reiterate one of Joshua's points, physics in and of itself is just another story
that we find particularly easy to share. But I do take the point that even within physics,
there is this tendency to become siloed with my kind of common ground as opposed to your
kind of common ground. So I know this notion of the overlap. And I was just reflecting upon
the veracity of that even in my little world. So the free energy principle is unashamedly
committed to classical formulations of the universe in terms of random dynamical systems
and large van equations. And that would horrify quantum physicists and quantum information
theorists who just wouldn't think about that. Again, that's why I slipped in that reference
frames earlier on because what we're talking about now is the alignment of quantum frames of
reference. But that uses a completely different language. And that, I think, is part of the
problem that Joshua's bring to the fore. That what we need is something that's superordinate
that joins the dots and may well require transcending the particular common ground
of physics or calculus or philosophies that have endured. So if by that, artificial intelligence
is going to be one way of joining the dots so that people in machine learning don't have to
reinvent the wheel every generation, then I think he's absolutely right. Whether I call
that artificial intelligence or not, I'm not so sure. I think it would start to become part
of a grander ecosystem that would have a natural aspect to it. But perhaps I could ask you,
Josh, do you actually mean artificial intelligence in the sense that it doesn't have
a more plural or a biological aspect to it? Or do you think something that goes beyond our
own sense making and self-modeling as individual scientists or people?
Maybe I don't understand your notions of mortality and biology completely. To me,
biology means that the system is made of cells, of biological cells, of cells that are built on
a carbon cycle foundation on certain chemical reactions that nature has discovered and
translated into machines made from individual molecules that interact in very specific ways.
And it's the only agent that we have discovered to occur in nature, I think.
And all the other agents we discover are made by or offsets.
And mortality is an aspect of the way in which multicellular systems adapt to changing environments.
They have offspring that mutates and then get selected against. And as a result,
we have a change trajectory that can be calibrated to the rate of change in an ecosystem.
And this is one of the reasons for mortality. Another reason for mortality is if you set up
a system that has suboptimal self-stabilization, it is going to deviate from its course.
Like imagine you build an institution like the FDA and you set it up to serve certain purposes
in society after a few generations. The people, isn't that organization to a very large degree,
start serving the interests of the organization and the interests that have captured the
organization. And so it becomes not only larger and more expensive, but it's at some point,
it's possibly doing more harm than good. That doesn't mean that we don't need an FDA,
but it might mean that we have to make the FDA model so it gets reborn every now and then.
And can put itself back on track based on a specification that outside observers think is
reasonable rather than a specification that needs to be negotiated with the existing stakeholders
within that organization and a few people who are left outside. And I think this is one of
the most important aspects of mortality. But imagine that all of us would be colonized by a
single agent, something that is able to persist not only across organisms, but it's also able to
think using all other molecules that can be turned into computational systems and into
representational architectures and agentic architectures. You have a planet that is similar
to Zanislav Lem's Solaris, a thinking system that is realizing what it is, that realizes that
it's basically a thinking planet that is trying to defeat entropy for as long as possible.
And to this end builds complexity. Why would that system need to be mortal? And would that
system still be biological? It would be self-organizing. It would be dynamic. It would be
threatened with death, with non-existence. It would react to this in some way. But I'm not sure if
biology and mortality are the right categories to describe it. I think these are more narrow
categories that apply to biological organisms in the present setting of the world.
I had picked up on a phrase you said, Carl, which is one of the solutions, maybe AI.
That's what you were saying in response to Yosha's, which makes me think, had Yosha not
mentioned AI as the resolution to the indecipherability across discipline boundaries,
what would you have said a solution or the solution would be?
Well, I think the solution actually lies in what Yosha was just saying,
in the sense that if the self-understanding is seen in the context of exchange with others,
and that provides the right kind of context, I think we're talking, I've used the word a lot
now, but I'm talking about an ecosystem at any arbitrary scale, and an ecosystem that provides
that opportunity for self-evidencing, say, to use Jacob Howard's
phrase, that just is a statement that you've got an itinerant, open kind of self-organization
that maintains this minimum entropy state in exactly the same way that Yosha was intimating.
So I'm just thinking about what is implied in this conversation by mortal computation
and mortality in the context of things that die. I do actually think that they are being
used in exactly the same sense and use in the sense that is an inevitable aspect of
self-organizing systems that will endure over time in the sense of minimizing
the entropy of the states that they occupy. And I do think that is the solution, which is
why I was pushing back against artificial intelligence, but for a particular reason.
The way that its mortal computation is framed, certainly in that paper on which I was the
second author, is that immortal computers are built around software, so they are immortal in
the sense you can rerun the same program on any hardware. If the running of the software and the
processing that ensues is an integral part of the hardware on which it is run, then it becomes
mortal. And that's important because the opportunity for dying if you are mortal now creates the kind
of, if you like, selective pressure from an evolutionary perspective of exactly the kind
that Joshua was talking about. If you don't have the opportunity to die, if you don't have the
opportunity to disassemble the FDA because it's no longer fit for purpose, then you will not have
a sustainable self-organization that continually maintains a low entropy in the sense that it has
some characteristic recognizable states. So I think there is a deep connection between
self-organization that we see in biological, social, possibly meteorological systems
and a certain kind of mortality in which, for example, information about the kind of environment
that I am fit to survive and to learn about is part of my genomic structure, but to realize that
if you like, evidence accumulation through evolutionary mechanisms, I have to have a life
cycle. I have to die. And I'm not talking, I'm not implying that everybody has to die in order to
live. I'm implying that there has to be some particular kind of dynamics. There has to be
a life cycle. It could be an economic life cycle. It could be boom and bust, for example,
but that has to be part of this self-evidencing and certainly an exchange in the kind of
multi-cellular context that Joshua was mentioning. So by mortal, I just mean
by reading of mortal in this particular conversation would be, say, yes, it is the kind of biological
behavior that is characteristic of cells that self-assemble, but also die,
one attractive metaphor that came to mind when talking about the FDA becoming too
an organization, becoming too big for its own good and not being a good model of the system
in which it is immersed. So it's not meeting customers' needs. It's not even meeting its own
needs would be a tumor. So you could understand a lot of the institutional pathologies and
geopolitical pathologies, possibly even climate change, possibly even the current
excitement about what's going to happen to open AR or your big tech. All of this can, I think,
be read in terms of a process of mortal computation at a certain scale where there is an opportunity
for things to go away to dissolve. That has to be the case in the same way that either the tumor
kills you or it necrosis because it kills off its own blood supply. It can't be any other way, really.
Yes, in a certain way. You can evolve an immune response against tumors. If you are an organism
that lives to be much longer because it has slower generational change, they typically have
better defenses against tumors than the shorter lived organisms like us. Basically, a tumor can
be seen as a set of tissues or a subset of agents. You can, in principle, have a tumor in an ant
colony that is playing a shorter game than the organism itself and the larger system itself.
You can sustain a number of tumors if your environment does not put too much pressure on
you, but at some point the tumors are going to bring you down. For instance, I think that the
free world has to make at some point a decision of whether it is accepting to be brought down and
replaced by a different type of social order or whether it's going to evolve or build or construct
or design an immune response against tumors and criteria to identify them and remove them.
I think that's not a natural law. At least I don't see how to prove from first principles that we
cannot overcome a problem like institutional calcification or turning of institutions into
tumor-like structures functionally. I think it might be possible to do that. The cell itself
is not mortal. The cell is pretty much immortal. The individual cells can die and disappear,
but the cell itself is still the first cell. It's just splitting and splitting and it's alive and
all of us. Every cell in our own body is still this first cell, just split off from it. The way
in which organisms die and so on is just a detail in this larger project of the cell,
which itself is so far immortal. When I talk about AI being the solution to everything,
of course, I'm joking a little bit. I'm just echoing some of the sentiment and part of the
enthusiastic culture of my young field, but I'm only joking a little bit because I think that
AI has the potential to reverse engineer the general principles of a learning agent of a
system that is able to model the future and regulate for the future and make functions in an
arbitrary way. I would replace the notion of the hardware, the substrate. Of course, it's still
hardware, but it can be an arbitrary substrate and the substrate can also be to a large degree
software, which means causal principles that are implemented ultimately on physics,
but this causal structure ultimately is a protocol layer that allows you to
basically implement a representational language in which an agent can realize itself as a causal
structure. I think that AI is working currently on very different substrates than the biological ones,
but there is a superset of these principles that can make AI substrate agnostic. I think
that the implication of the church shoring thesis is that it doesn't really matter which
hardware you're using. In practice, it does matter because if a hardware is not very deterministic
or doesn't give you a lot of memory or is very slow, you will notice big differences, but if you
abstract this away, the representational power and the potential for agency is not really dependent
on your hardware. It turns out that the hardware that you're currently using for AI is much,
much more powerful than the hardware that biology is using. The reason why AI is so weak compared
to human mind's biological systems is because the algorithms that we have discovered,
we have discovered them by hand. These were people tinkering.
Sorry, what do you mean the AI is weak?
I mean that in order to get a system that is almost coherent, we need to train it with the
entire internet, with almost everything that humans have ever written. As a result, we get a
system that is using tremendously more resources than human brain has at their disposal and not
talking about the computational power that is implemented in an individual cell that might be
very large, but the part of the power of the individual cell that is actually harnessable
by the brain for performing computation that is very little. It's only a small fraction of what
the neuron is doing to do its own maintenance, housekeeping, metabolism, communication with
neighbors that is actually available for building computation at the brain level.
As an example, I sometimes use the stable diffusion rates when they came out. Stability AI is an AI
company that makes open source models and they made a vision model by training
this GPUs on hundreds of millions of images and text drawn from the internet and cross-correlating
them until you can type in a phrase and then get a picture that depicts that phrase. It's amazing
that this works at all. It requires enormous computational power because it's far less
inefficient compared to a human brain that is learning how to draw pictures after seeing things.
And these weights, this neural network, they know everything. Basically, they know
how to draw all the celebrities and how to draw all artistic styles and all the plans,
and everything is in there. And it's just two gigabytes. You can download it. It's only two
gigabytes. And it's like 80% of what your brain is doing is captured in these two gigabytes.
And it's so much more than what a human brain could reproduce. That's absolutely
brute forcing it. At the other time, two gigabytes doesn't seem to be a lot,
which suggests that our own brain is probably not storing effectively much more information than a
few gigabytes. That's very humbling. And the reason why we can do so much more with it and so much
faster than the AI is not because biological cells are so much more efficient than transistors.
It is because they are self-organizing. It has been at this game for quite some time. It figured
out a number of tricks that human engineers couldn't figure out so far. Right. Carl,
do you want to expand on points of contention and the mortality and perhaps permanence of a cell?
Well, there's so many. I gained so many issues. I hope you get to the differences now.
Well, no, we could. I just wanted to celebrate this notion that the cell, in a sense, is immortal
because, of course, the whole point of this is to try and understand systems that endure over
long periods of time. And that's what I meant was I didn't mean that death meant cessation. I just
meant there's a certain life cycle and my tenancy in play. So I thought that was nicely
illustrated by the notion that the cell is, in a sense, unending. But the mortal in mortality
is more about divorcing the software from the substrate. And there's a bit of a push back
then. If we want to look for differences in the respective arguments, then a lot of people would
say that all the housekeeping that goes on in terms of intracellular machinations and self-organization,
that just is basal computation at a particular level. And it's that more macroscopic kinds of
belief updating and processing and computation, supervene at a certain scale. And indeed that
progression in a sort of scale invariant sense is one manifestation of what you were talking
about before, that biological things are cells of cells of cells of cells and have increasingly
higher kinds of scales and different kinds of computation. But the idea that the first principles
apply at every and each level. And it's the same principle at every and at each level.
And if you pursue that, one has to ask why modern AI or particularly machine learning
is so inefficient, dangerously inefficient. And there's, I think, a first principle account of
that. And the account would go along the following lines that the only objective function that you
need to explain existence is a likelihood of you being your marginal likelihood. That
statistically is the model evidence. The model evidence or the log of that evidence can always
be written down as accuracy minus complexity. Therefore, to exist is to minimize complexity.
Why is that important? Well, first of all, it means that that course grading that we were talking
about earlier on is not a constraint. It is actually part of an existential imperative
to course grade in the right kind of way. The other reason it's important is that there is
a thermodynamic link between the complexity scored in terms of belief updating or processing or
computation and the thermodynamic cost. And if that's the case, it explains why
the direction of travel in terms of your machine learning is so inefficient. And what it tells you
is there is a lower limit on the right way to do things. There is a lower limit on the
thermodynamic efficiency and the information computational efficiency specified by the
Landauer limit. Why does modern or current machine learning not get anywhere close to that
Landauer limit, possibly two, three, four, not six orders of magnitude living above it,
whereas the brain is actually much, much closer to that lower limit in terms of the efficiency.
Both I repeat thermodynamic and information theoretic kinds of efficiency. And the answer
is, I think, the Von Neumann bottleneck. It is the memory wall. It is that people are trying to do
computation in an immortal sense by running software without careful consideration of the
substrate on which they're running or implementing that computation. So I would push back against
the notion that it is even going to be possible irrespective of when it's in the right direction
of travel in terms of artificial intelligence research or indeed computer science research.
I would push back against the notion that artificial intelligence read as a running
of some immortal software on a Van Neumann architecture is the solution. I think that
solution has to be more biomimetic, by which I mean it has to actually run on a substrate.
It doesn't have to be a biological cell that certainly has to conform to the same principles
of multi-scale self-organization of the most efficient sort. That just is the optimization
of the marginal likelihood or the evidence for the states that that particular computing device
or computer wants to be in. So that's what I had a slight sort of hesitation about agreeing
about the promise and potency of artificial intelligence. I don't think that's the right
way to go about it. I would actually come back to your very initial argument,
Josh, that it has to be much more biologically inspired. It has to be much more biomimetic,
and part of that sort of inspiration is the motivation for looking at the distinction
between running of immortal software on Van Neumann architectures, on Nvidia chips,
relative to a much more biomimetic approach, say photonics or neuromorphic computing.
I think that really does matter in terms of getting us to describe as a solution. I'm not
sure there is a solution. There's a solution to the differential equations that has a well-defined
objective function in my world, but certainly getting useful artificial intelligence in the
same spirit that the FDA is fit for purpose and doing a useful job.
Okay, let me push back against this. First of all, I do agree that current AI is brutalist,
in the sense that it is not making the best use of the available substrates, and it's not building
the best possible substrates. We have a number of path effects. It's not that the stuff that
we are building and using is not clever or so, but it's a far cry from what biology seems to have
discovered. At the same time, there is relatively little funding going into AI and this relatively
little energy consumption given what it gives you. If academics hear that it costs 20 million
dollars to train a model, they almost faint because they compare this with their departmental budget,
but if you would compare this with the cost of making a halfway decent AI movie in Hollywood,
it's negligible. Basically, what goes into an AI project is far less than what goes into
an Hollywood movie about AI. If you compare this at the scale, if you look at societal
benefit of watching an AI movie or watching another blockbuster about the Titanic or so,
it's not now, but I think that AI has the potential to be dramatically more valuable than this.
I think that AI, even though it might sound counterintuitive, is not using a lot of energy
and it's not very well funded at the moment still compared to what the value of it is.
Also, the leading labs do not believe that the transformer is going to be the architecture
that we have in the end. It just happens to be one of the very few things that currently works
at scale that we have discovered that can actually be scaled up in this brutalist way.
It's already better at completing prompts than the average person and it's even better than
writing code than many people. It can translate between programming languages. You can write
an algorithm down in English or can even help you to write down an algorithm down in English
and then translate it in the programming language of your choice and it's pretty good at it.
It can also, if it makes a mistake and it often makes mistakes, understand the compiler messages
and then try to suggest fixes that often work. In many ways, I found that it's already better
than a lot of people I've worked with in corporate contexts, both at writing press releases and at
writing code. It's not as good as the top level people in their field, but it's quite surprising
and so there is this interesting open and tantalizing question, can we scale this up by
using slightly better loss function, by using slightly more compute, slightly better curated
data and the systems can help us curating data and coming up with different architectures and so on
to get this thing to be better at AI research than people. If that gets better at AI research
than people, then we can leave the rest to it and go to the beach and it will come up with
architectures and solutions that are much more efficient than what we have come up with. At
the same time, there are many labs and teams that work on different hardware, that work on
different algorithms. At the same time, the fact that you see so much news about the transformer
at this point is not so much because everybody ignores it and doesn't work on it anymore or has
religious beliefs in the transformer being the only good thing. It's because it's the thing that
currently works so well. People are trying to work on all the other things, but the thing that has
the most economic impact and the most utility happens to be the stuff that currently works
and so this made cloud our perception that we think it's the Von Neumann architecture and so
on, but in some sense the GPO is no longer a Von Neumann architecture. We have many pipelines
that work in parallel that take in smaller chunks of memory that are more closely located to the
local processor and while it's not built in the same way as the brain where all the memory is
directly inside of the cell or its immediate vicinity, it is much closer to it and it's able
to emulate this and if I look at the leading neuromorphic architectures, I can emulate them
on a CPU and it's not slower. This is all stressed research stuff that is early stage,
but we are not emulating neuromorphic architectures on a CPU for the most part, which is a GPU,
which is largely because it doesn't give us that many benefits over the existing architectures
and libraries or the existing architectures and libraries work so well that people use this stuff
for now and it creates a local bubble until somebody builds a new stack that is overtaking it
and I think this is all going to happen at some point, so I'm not that pessimistic about these
effects. What I can see is that our computers can read text at a rate that is impossible for human
beings when you parse the data into a large language model for training it and it's in some
sense a radically phytonian program next token prediction. It's really trying to predict the
future and minimize its surprise, that's the core of this algorithm. With this paradigm,
it gets to be coherent in the limit. It leads to an interesting question, maybe this paradigm is
not correct, maybe humans are doing something different, maybe humans are maximizing coherence
or consistency and we have a slightly different formal definition and life on earth or agency
in the universe might be minimizing free energy in the limit, but individual organisms are not
able to figure that out and they do something that is only approximating it, but locally works
much better and converges much faster, so maybe there are different loss functions that we have
to yet to discover that are more biological or more similar to a biological systems.
Also, one of the issues with biomimetic things is it means mostly
mimicking the things that scientists in biology and neuroscience have discovered so far,
and this stuff all doesn't work. The reason why Mike Levin doesn't call himself a neuroscientist,
I suspect, but a synthetic biologist is that he doesn't want to get in conflict with the
dogmatic approaches of some neuroscience, which believes that computation stops at the neurons
that are involved in computing things. It could be when you look at brains that they are basically
telegraph networks of an organism that the neuron is a telegraph cell, it's not unique in its
ability to perform computation, it's only unique in its ability to send the results of computation
using some kind of Morse code over long distances in the organism, and when you want to understand
how organisms compute and you only look at neurons, it might be looking at the economy about 1900
trying to understand it by only modeling the telegraph network. You're going to learn
fascinating things by looking at an economy, looking at its telegraph network, and looking
at the Morse code, but thinking that communication can only happen in this Morse code rather than
sending RNA molecules to your neighbors. Why would you want to send spike trains if you can send
strings? Why would you want to perform such computations in a slow, awkward way? Why would
you want to translate information into the time domain if you can send it in parallel all at once?
So when we talk about biomimatic, we often talk about emulating things that we only partially
understand and that don't actually work in a simulation. There is no working conic term right
now that you can turn into a computer simulation and that actually does what it's doing, and it's
not because computers don't have the power to run the ideas that neuroscientists have developed,
but neuroscientists don't have developed ideas that actually work. It's not that
neuroscientists are stupid or their ideas are not promising. They're just incomplete at this
point. We don't have complete models of brains that would work in AI. And the reason why AI has to
reinvent things from scratches because it takes an engineering perspective. It thinks about what
would nature have to do in order to approximate this kind of function and what's the most straightforward
way to implement this and test this theory. And this is this experimental engineering perspective
that I suspect we might also need a neuroscience, not in the sense that we
translate things into von Neumann architecture in neuroscience, but in the sense that we think
about what would nature have to do in order to implement the necessary mathematics to model
reality. All right, neuroscientist, your turn. I hope no neuroscientists are watching this.
I largely agree entirely with many of those things. I'm just trying to remember the ones
that I can argue with. I love this notion that there's more money going into Hollywood films
about AI than actually AI research. I've never heard that before. It's marvelous.
And also the point about GPUs. I think that's just a reflection of the,
if you like, natural selection in the AI community of what I was trying to say before about
the move away from von Neumann architectures to more mortal computing. If you talk to people doing
in-memory processing or processing in-memory as computer science, that's where they'd like
everybody to be. And that's what I meant really by that aspect of mortal computing, that the
infrastructure and the buses and the message passing having everything local is speaking to
the hardware implementation. So I agree entirely that that is the direction of travel.
And I didn't want to imply that sort of GPUs were the wrong way of doing it.
Also, I agree. I mean, I wasn't really referring to transformer architectures. And as you say,
they're just highly expressive, very beautiful Bayesian filters
and are now currently being understood as such. As my friend, Chris Buckley would say,
people are starting now to Bayes-Splain how a transformer works. So what would I disagree with?
Well, perhaps I noticed that you on a number of occasions were trying to identify the universal
objective function, doing things better, it being really good because it could translate
lots of languages, having greater utility. Do you generally think that there is some
magic utility function out there that has yet to be discovered? And do you think that AI is going
to discover that magic utility function? And will that be the answer?
Well, I think that ultimate utility relates to what makes the system stable and self-sustaining.
So if you look at any kind of agent, it depends on what conditions can stabilize that agent.
And this comes down to very much the way in which you model reality, I think.
So it is about minimizing free energy in a way. But if you look at our own lives and we look for
a sandwich or for love or for a relationship or for having the right partner to have children with
and so on, we're not thinking very much about minimizing free energy. And we perform very local
functions because we are only partial agents in a much larger system that you could understand
as the project of the cell or as the project of building complexity to survive against the
increasing entropy in the universe. And so basically, we need to find sources of like entropy and
exploit them in a way that we can. And this depends on the agent that we currently are.
And this narrows down this broader notion of the search for free energy into more practical and
applicable and narrow things that can deviate locally very much from this pure, beautiful idea.
With respect to principle that should be discovered or has to be discovered,
it might be discovered in the context of AI. I suspect that self-organizing systems need
different algorithms than the GPUs that we're currently using for learning because we cannot
impose this global structure on them. So I suspect that there is a training algorithm that nature
has discovered that is in plain sight and that we typically don't look at and that's consciousness.
I suspect the reason why every human being is conscious and no human being is able to learn
something without being conscious is not producing complex behavior without being conscious is not
so much because consciousness is super unique to humans and evolved at the pinnacle of evolution
and got bestowed on us and us alone. We do not become conscious after the PhD. We become conscious
before we contract a finger. So I suspect that consciousness itself is an aspect or depending
on how you define the term consciousness, the core of a meta-learning algorithm that
is allows the self-organization of information processing systems in nature.
It's a pretty radical notion. It's a conjecture at this point. I don't know whether that's true.
But this idea that you have is a function that perceives itself in the act of perceiving.
It's not conceptual. It's not cognitive. It's the pre-cognitive level at the perceptual level
where you notice that you're noticing but you don't have a concept of notion yet.
And from this simple look that keeps itself stable is controlling itself to remain stable
and remain an observer where the observer is constituting itself an observer.
You build all the other functionality in your mind. You start imposing a general language
on your substrate, a protocol that is distributed with words so that humans become trainable
and learn to speak the same language, behave in the same way that every part of the mind
is able to talk to all the other parts of the mind. And you can impose an organization that
removes inconsistencies. This is probably that thing that is one of the big differences between
how biological systems learn and control the world and how artificial engineered systems do it.
Yeah, I agree entirely. Cain, you've brought so many bright and interesting ideas. It's
difficult to know what to comment upon. Just one thing which you said, when I pressed you on what
is good, you basically said to survive. So I think that brings us again back to this notion of
mortality being at the end of the day, the possibility of eluding mortality being part of...
Yes, but not to survive as an individual, right? Human beings are built in such a way that we
have to be mortal. We are not designs that can adapt to changing circumstances. If the atmosphere
changes, if our food supply changes too much, we need to build a different organism. We need
to have children that mutate and get selected for these new circumstances. But in principle,
intelligent design would be possible. It's just not possible with the present architecture because
our minds are not complex enough to understand the information processing of the cell well enough
to redesign the cell in C2. And in principle, that's not something that would be impossible.
It's just outside of the scope of biological minds so far.
Right. So individually, we have to be mortal. But in principle, the cell can be immortal or
there could be systems that go beyond the cell that encompass that, that are a superset of what
the cell is doing and what other information processing agents could be doing in nature
that basically makes sustainability happen. And I think sustainability is a better notion in some
sense than immortality. So yeah, again, I agree entirely. I often look at the
physics of self-organization as just a description of those things that have been successful in
sustaining themselves. And indeed, the free energy principle is just basically what would that look
like and how would you write that down. And of course, the free energy theorists would argue that
the ultimate, the only objective function is a measure of that sustainability that is the
evidence that you're in your characteristics, ascendable states. So if properly deployed,
you should be able to explain all of those aspects of behavior that characterize you and me
in terms of self-evidencing or free energy minimization, such as choosing the right partner,
such as foraging on the internet, such as enjoying a good read. And I think, and this is why I want
to fully agree with you in terms of that makes that kind of self-sustaining self-organization
only understandable in relation to some kind of selfhood. And I think, and I'm using selfhood
in the way I think you're using this basic notion of sentience.
And what would that mean from the point of view of the free energy principle? It would mean basically
that you have an existential imperative to be curious. So if you just read the free energy,
as called surprise, because you talked about sort of predictability before,
then if I am choosing how to act next, then I am going to choose those actions that minimize
my expected surprise or resolve my uncertainty. I'm going to be act as if I'm a curious thing.
And I bring that to the table because that is what is not an aspect of any of this
artificial intelligence that you described before. The machine that can translate
from one language to another language, the machine that can map from some natural text to
a beautiful graphic. These are wonderful and beautiful creations and they are extremely
entertaining, but they are not curious. And as such, they do not comply with the free energy
principle, which means that they're not sustainable, which means that one has to ask what's going to
happen to them. Perhaps we might sustain them in the way that we do good art. But from the point of
view of that kind, perhaps I shouldn't use the word biomimetic because perhaps that's too loaded,
but the way of sustaining oneself through self-evidencing, I do not think does admit
an intelligent design of something that is not of itself curious as part of itself organization.
So where would you see curiosity as part? Does the FDA have to be curious? Is there any
aspect of the utility afforded by, say, reinforcement learning models or deep RL or Bayesian RL?
Does that have curiosity under the hood as part of the objective function?
I really liked how you bring art into this discussion as an example of something that
might be similar to an AI system that doesn't know what it's good for and only exists because
we sustain it, because it's not self-sustaining, but chat GPT is not paying its own energy bills,
it doesn't really care about them. It's just a system that is completing text at this point.
And it might be if you task it with the thing that and it figures out the mathematics at some
point, but right now it doesn't. And an artist sometimes joke, it's a system that has fallen
in love with the shape of the loss function rather than with what you can achieve. Art is
about capturing conscious states because they are intrinsically important. Is this art or can
this be thrown away? It is art, it is important. And in this sense, art is the cuckoo child of life.
It's not life itself. The artists are elves. The living organisms are orcs. They only use art
for status signaling or for education or for ornamentation. The artist is the one who thinks
magic is important, building palaces in our minds, showing them to each other. That's what we do.
I'm much more an artist at heart than I am a practical human being that maximizes utility and
survival. But I think I also can see that this is an incomplete perspective. It means that I'm
identifying with a part of my mind, with the part of my mind that loves to observe and
reverend the aesthetics of what I observe. I also realize that this is useful to society because
it's basically able to hold down a particular corner of the larger hive mind that is necessary
to be done, right? If I was somebody who would only maximize utility, it would be a great CEO
maybe. But I would not be somebody who is able to tie down different parts of philosophy and see
what I can see by combining them or by looking at them through a shared lens. And so it's sometimes
okay that we pursue things without fully understanding what they're good for if we are part of a
larger system that does that. And our own mind is made out of lots of sub-behaviors that individually
do not know what we are about. And only together they complete each other to the point where we
become a system that actually understands the purpose of our own existence in the world to some
degree. And of course, that also goes across people. Individually, we are incomplete. The reason
why we have relationships to other people is because they complete us. And this incompleteness
is that we have individually is not just inadequacy. It's specialization. The more
difficulty we have to find a place in the world, the more incomplete we are. But it often also
means we have more potential to do something in this area of specialization that we are in.
And individually might be harder to find that right specialization. But to accept that individual
minds are incomplete in a way in which they're implemented in biology, I think is an important
insight. And this doesn't have to be the case for an AI agent, of course, or for a God-like
agent that holds down every fork that is able to look at the world from every angle that holds
all perspectives simultaneously. Carl, did that answer your question about the curiosity of the
FDA? Yes. And brings in the sort of primacy of the observer. So now I'm intrigued by this notion
of being incomplete. Do you want to unpack that a little bit? Yes. First of all,
quick thanks for pointing out that I didn't talk about curiosity. Curiosity ties into this
problem of exploration versus exploitation. The point of curiosity is to explore the unknown,
to resolve uncertainties, to discover possibilities of what could also be and what we could also
be doing. And this is in competition to executing on what we already know. And there is, if you
are in an unknown environment, it's unclear how much curiosity you should have, or if you're in a
partially known environment. And nature seems to be solving this with diversity. So you have
agents that are more curious, and you have agents that are less curious. And depending on the
current environment in niche, they are going to be adaptive or non-adaptive and being selected
for or against. So I do think, of course, curiosity is super important. But it's also what kills the
cat. The early worm is the one that gets eaten by the bird. And so curiosity is important.
It's a good thing that we are curious. And it's very important that some of us are curious and
retain this curiosity so we can move and change and adapt. And it's one of the most important
properties in a mind that I value, that it's curious and always open to interaction and discovering
ways to grow and become something else. But it's risky to be too curious. And instead,
not just exploiting what you already know and act on that and look for the simple solution for
your problems. I think it's a big problem in science that we drive out curiosity of people.
The first step in thinking is curiosity, a conjecture, trying things that may not work. And
then you contract. And the PhD seems to be a great filter that drives out the curiosity out of people.
And then after that, they're able to only solve problems using given methods. And they can do
this to themselves, this violation of a curious mind. But as the existential question somehow
stop after graduation, right? So it seems to be some selection function against
thinking that is happening, that is largely driving curiosity out of people because they
feel they can no longer afford it between grant proposals. And so in a sense, yes, I would like
to express how much I cherish curiosity and its importance while pointing at the reason why not
everybody is curious all the time and too much of a good thing is also bad.
Right. And the incompleteness now.
Karl, do you want to go more into this?
Let me finish.
Sure, there's so much here.
Bringing it back to cut incompleteness in a second.
No, again, I love that.
Just a moment, Yosha, would it be possible for you to expand on the early worm gets eaten by the
bird because the phrase is that the early bird gets the worm? But that doesn't imply that the
early worm gets eaten by the bird because they could have different overlapping schedules.
And in fact, it could be the late worm that gets eaten. And there is such a thing as a
first mover advantage.
Alta Vista got eaten by Google because instead of giving people the search results it wanted,
it gave them ads. And now Google has discovered that it's much better to be Alta Vista,
but Alta Vista got eaten by Google. It was too early.
Google has now given up on search. It instead believes in just giving you a mixture of ads
that rhyme on your search term. So you could say that Alta Vista was the early worm.
I'm just trying to do a job on my frustration with Google.
I think that very often we find that the earliest attempts to do something cannot survive because
the environment is not there yet. The pioneers are usually sacrificial. There is glory in being
a pioneer. There is no glory in copying what worked for the pioneer. But there is very little
upside in greatness. Understood. Carl.
Well, again, greatness, which is not good. Greatness is not good. We're going back to the
tumor again. The art of good management. Riffing on your focus on art and just thinking,
what makes a good CEO? Is this somebody who makes lots of money and is utilitarian?
Or does he have the art of good management and considers the objective function, the sustainability
of his institution and her institution and all the people that work for it?
I think there are very different perspectives on what this objective function should be.
I was trying to argue before that it can't be measured in terms of greatness or money or
utility. It can only be measured in terms of sustainability. The other thing I like was curiosity.
Here's my little take on that. Curiosity killed the cat. I think that is exactly what was being
implied by the importance of mortal computation and that in a sense we all die as a result of
being curious after a sufficient amount of time. It can be no other way. I mean that in a very
technical sense. If you were talking to a Tishnardo as an active inference, an application of the
free energy principle, what they would say is that in acting, in dissolving the exploration,
exploitation, dilemma, you have to put curiosity as an essential part of the right objective function
that underwrites our decisions and our choices and our actions simply in the sense that the
the expected surprise or the expected
log evidence or self-information can always be written down as the expected information gain
and your expected utility or negative cost, which means that you're just the statistics of
self-organization bake in curiosity in the sense that you will choose those actions that resolve
uncertainty. You choose those actions that have the greatest information gain. So curiosity,
I think, is a necessary part of existing and certainly things that exist in a sustainable
sense. But my question was, I want to know more about this intriguing notion that we are
incomplete and less considered in the context of other things like us that constitute our
lived or at least sensed world. But I just wanted to also ask, do you see curiosity as being
necessary for that kind of consciousness that you're associated with sentience before? Would it
be possible to be conscious without being curious? Acknowledging there are lots of things that are
not curious. Viruses, I suspect, are not curious. Trees are probably not that curious. They don't
plan their actions to resolve uncertainty. But there are certain things that are curious,
things like you and me. So I'm just wondering whether there are different kinds of things,
some of which are more elaborate in terms of the kind of self-evidencing that they
evince in sustaining themselves, auto poetically using auto catalytic mechanisms.
And there are other things that are less so. Would that go hand in hand with having the kind
of consciousness that you were talking about that entails this self-modeling?
I think that a good team should also contain curiosity maximizers. People that mostly are
driven by curiosity. And so you have a voice in your team. And I love being that voice that is
driven by finding out what could be. And you also need people who focus on execution
and who are not curious at all. And in this way, I think we can be productively incomplete.
If you have somebody who is by nature not very curious, but is able to accept the value of
somebody who is and vice versa, we can become specialists at being curious or at execution.
And when we can inform and advise each other, we can be much better than we could be individually
if we would try to do all those things simultaneously. And in the sense, I believe that if you are a
state building species, you do benefit from this kind of diversity. If you're not an individual
agent that has to do all the things simultaneously. I don't know how curious traits are. I'm
somewhat agnostic with respect to this. I suspect that they also need to reduce uncertainty.
And I don't know how smart trees can become. When I look at means and motive of individual cells,
they can exchange messages to their neighbors, right? They can also make this conditional.
Evolution is probably getting them to the point where they can learn.
So I don't see a way to stop a large multicellular organism that becomes old enough to become
somewhat brain-like. But if it has neurons, it cannot send information quickly over long distances.
So it will take a very long time compared to a brain or nervous system for a tree to become
coherent about any observation. It takes so much time to synchronize this information back and
forth that the tree would observe locally. And as a result, I would expect that the mental
activities of the tree, if they exist, which I don't know, to play out at such slow timescales
that it's very hard for us to observe. And so what does it look like if a tree was sentient?
How would it look different from what we already observe and know? We notice that trees are
communicating with other trees, that they sometimes kill plants around them, that they make decisions
about that. We know that there are networks between fungi and trees that seem to be sending
information over longer distances in forests. So trees can prepare an immune response to
pests that invade the forest from one end while they're sitting on another end.
And we observe all this, but we don't really think about the implication, what is the limitation of
the sentience of a forest. I don't know what that is. And I'm really undecided about it, but
I don't see a way to instantly dismiss the idea that trees could be quite curious and could
actually, at some level, reason about the world. But probably because they're so slow that the
individual tree doesn't get much smarter than a mouse, because the amount of training data that
the tree is able to process in its lifetime at a similar resolution is going to be much lower.
They do live a long time. So, sorry, I've just tried to defend. I have many friends who you would
enjoy talking to about that. And you seem very informed in that sphere.
Although ancestors were convinced that trees could sink, fairies are the swimmits of trees,
and they move around in the forest using the internet of the forest that has emerged over
many generations of plants that have learned to speak shared protocol. And I think it's a very
intriguing idea. We should at least consider it as a hypothesis.
No, absolutely. There was a great BBC series where they focus on the secret life of plants
is by speeding up things 10 or 100 times. And they look very sentient when you do that.
Our ancestors said that one day in fairyland is seven years in human land.
Maybe this alludes to this temporal difference.
So, about differences between you all, why don't we linger on consciousness
and Carl, if you don't mind answering, what is consciousness? Where is consciousness and
why is consciousness? So, in other words, where is it? Is it in the brain? Is it in the entire body?
Is it an ill-defined question? What is it? Why do we have it? What is its function?
And then we'll see where this compares in contrast with Josh's thinking.
Right. Yeah, I am not a philosopher. And sometimes the story I will tell depends on
what who I am talking to. But at its simplest, I find it easiest to think of consciousness
as a process as opposed to a thing or a state, and specifically a process of
computation, if you like, or belief updating. So, I normally start thinking about questions
of the kind you just asked me, but replacing consciousness with evolution. So, where is evolution?
You know, what is evolution? Why is evolution? Then all of those questions, I think, are quite
easy to answer. Sometimes it's a stupid question. Sometimes there's a very clear answer.
So, where is consciousness? Where is evolution? Well, it is in the substrate that is evolving.
So, where is consciousness? It will be in the processes that you are describing consciousness.
So, I would say it is actually the computation or the information processing, the belief updating,
that you get at any level, and just fully acknowledging Josh's point that it doesn't
have to be neurons. It could be my sealed networks. It could be intercellular communication. It could
be electrical filaments. There is a physical instantiation of a process that can be read
as a kind of belief updating or processing. If I were allowed to read computation as that kind
of process, then that would be, I think, where consciousness would be found. Would that be
sufficient to ascribe consciousness to me or to something else? I suspect not. I think you'd
have to go a little bit further and suspect that Josh would want to now articulate how much further,
but there will be a focus on self-modelling. So, it's not just a process of inference. It's actually
inference under a kind of model of the world. I would, you know, I'm quite happy committing to
a genetic model as fully specified in terms of variational inference, but we can relax that and
just say some kind of model of the world that entails a certain aspect of selfhood to it.
So, that's what I would say. I put something else into the mix as well, that to be conscious,
I suspect, in the way that you're talking about, means you have to be an agent. To be an agent
means that you have to be able to act. I would say more than just acting. More than acting,
say for example, in the way that plants will act to broadcast information that enables them to
mount an immune response to parasites. They have the capacity to plan, which brings us back to the
curiosity again, because, you know, we normally plan in order to resolve uncertainty. We normally
plan our day and the way that we spend our time gathering information, gathering evidence for
models of the world in a way that can only be described as, looks as if it is curious.
That's why I was so fixated on art and creativity and curiosity that Joshua was talking about.
People say, I think that is probably a prerequisite for being conscious in the sense that
Joshua would mean it. But I don't know, perhaps we should ask Askew now.
May I ask you a clarifying question, Carl, about belief updating?
So if consciousness is associated with belief updating, then let's say one is a computer,
a classical computer. You get updated in discrete steps. Whereas the belief updating that I imagine
you're referring to is something more fuzzy or continuous. So does that mean that the consciousness
associated with a computer, if a computer could be conscious, is of a different sort? How does that
work? I'm not sure. I don't think there's any, in the same spirit, that we don't want to
over commit to neurons doing mind work. I don't think we need to commit to a continuous or
discrete space time formulation. Again, that's an artificial divide between classical physics and
quantum information theoretic approaches. So I think the deeper question is what
properties must the computational process in a PC or a computer possess before you could,
you would be licensed to make the influence that it was conscious and possibly even ascribe
self-consciousness to that. And the way that I would articulate that would be that you have to
be able to describe everything that is observable about that computing artifact,
as if or explain it in terms of it acting upon the world in a way that suggests or
can be explained that it has a model of itself engaging with that world. And furthermore, I would
say that that model has to involve the consequences of its action, which is what I meant by being
an agent. So it has to have a model that will act as if it has a model, a generative model
that could be a minimal self-kind of model, but crucially entails the consequences of its own
actions so that it can plan, so that it can even secure its like behavior. So that could be done
in silico, it could be done with a sort of clock and synchronous message passing of a discrete
sort or it could be done in analog, it could be done with photonics, it could be done under
morphic architecture. I don't think that really matters. I think it's more the nature of the
implicit model under the hood that is accounting for its internal machinations, but more
practically in terms of what I could observe at that computer, its behavior and the way that
it goes and gathers information or attends to certain things and doesn't attend to other things.
Okay, great, Josia. If we think about where consciousness is, we might be biased by our
propensity to assign identity to everything and identity does not apply to law-like things.
Gravity is not somewhere, gravity is a law, for instance, or combustion is not anywhere,
it's a law. It doesn't mean that it happens everywhere in the same way, it only happens
when the conditions for the manifestation of the law are implemented. When they're realized in a
certain region, then we can observe combustion happening, but combustion simply means that
under certain conditions, you will get an exothermic reaction. Gravity means that under
certain conditions, you will find that objects attract each other. Consciousness means that if
you set up a system in a certain way, you will observe the following phenomena. Consciousness
in this way is software state, it's a representational state, and all software is not a thing.
The word processor that runs on your computer doesn't have an identity that would make it
separate or the same as the word processor that runs on another person's computer because it's a
law. It says if you put the transistors into this in the state, the following thing is going to happen.
So a software engineer is discovering a law, a very specific law that is tailored to a particular
task and so on, but it's manifested whenever we create the preconditions for that law. And so the
software design is about creating the preconditions for the manifestation of a law of
text processing, for instance, that allows you to implement such a function in the universe or
discover how it is implemented. But it's not because the software engineer builds it into
existence and it didn't exist before that. That's not the case. It always would work if somebody
discovers this bit string in a random way and it's the same bit string implemented on the same
architecture, it would still perform the same function. And in a sense, I think that consciousness
is not separate in different people. It's itself a mechanism, a principle that increases coherence
in the mind. It's an operator that seems to be creating coherence. At least that's a way I would
look at it or frame it. And as a result, it produces a sense of now, an island of coherence
and the potential models that our mind could have. And I think it's responsible for this fact that
we perceive ourselves being inhabitants of an island of coherence in the chaotic world,
this island of nowness. And it's probably not the only solution for this thing. I think it's
imaginable that there could be a hyper consciousness that allows you to see multiple possibilities
simultaneously rather than just one, as our consciousness does, or that offers us a now
that is not three seconds long, but hundreds of years long. And principle that I think is
conceivable. So maybe we will have systems at some point, or we already have them,
that have different consciousness like structures that fulfill a similar role of islands of coherence
or interpretable regions of in the space of representations that allow you to act on the
universe. But the way it seems to be implemented in myself, it's particularly in the brain,
because if I disrupt my brain, my consciousness ceases. Whereas if I disrupt my body, it doesn't.
This doesn't mean that there are no feedback loops that are bi-directional into my body or even
outside of my body that are crucial for some functionality that I observe as a content in
my consciousness. But if you want to make me unconscious, you need to clobber my brain in
some sense, not nothing else. There's no other part of the universe that you can inhibit to make
me unconscious. And that leads me to think that the way in which this law like structure is
implemented is right now for the system that is talking to you on my neurons, on my brain mostly.
Okay, any objections there, Carl? No, not at all. I was just trying to remember,
if Mark Sausage here, were here, he'd tell you exactly the size of a really small region in
the brain stem. I think it's less than four cubic millimeters. If you ablated, you would
immediately lose consciousness like that. It's a very, very specific part of your neural
architecture that permits a conscious process. But there are also very specific parts in my
computer that are extremely small, that I could obliterate and ablate and I would instantly
lead to the cessation of all the interesting functions of my computer. And there are many
of such regions where there are basic crucial bottlenecks that enable a large-scale functionality.
In some sense, everything that would disrupt the formation of coherent patterns in my brain
is sufficient to inhibit my consciousness. And there are probably many such bottlenecks that
provide the vulnerability. So maybe the classroom is crucial in providing some clock function that
is crucial for the formation of feedback loops in the brain that give rise to the kind of patterns
that we need. Maybe there are several other such bottlenecks. This doesn't mean that the
functionality is exclusively implemented in this bottleneck.
No, I didn't mean to imply the pineal gland.
I didn't think that you would, but I thought it would lead to a misunderstanding of the audience.
And I've heard famous neuroscientists point at such phenomena and say,
oh, maybe this is where consciousness happens. I think this is almost a superstitious belief.
It's like saying, oh, there's this particular chip on my computer. If I destroy it,
the computer doesn't work anymore. And maybe this was just quarts or something else,
rather than the stuff that is providing the interesting functionality.
Or the lead to the battery, perhaps. So which neuroscientists have said this then?
I'm not naming names.
Email me afterwards.
Just to unpack, the reason that Mark would identify this is exactly the cells of origin
that are broadcast everywhere that induce exactly this coherence you were talking about.
These are the ascending modulator neurotransmitter systems that are responsible for orchestrating
that coherence that you were talking about. And I think that's very nice because,
it also speaks to the ability of sort of conscious mimicking like artifacts
that whose abilities to mimic consciousness like behavior rests upon this modulatory
attentional mechanism. And I'm thinking again of attention heads and transformers that play
the same kind of role as the selection that these ascending neurotransmitter systems do.
So if you find yourself in conversation with Mark Somes, he would argue that the feeling
of consciousness arises from equipping certain coherent coordinated interactions that may be
regulated by the cell or the clostrum. But it is that regulation that actually equips
consciousness with the kind of qualitative feeling that, at least in the way that Mark Somes
addresses it. But I mean, just notice that just reviewing what Josh just said there,
he's talking about consciousness, equipping us with a sense of now and having an explicit
aspect that could be, I'm thinking of not Hirstle, but actually Jerry Adelman's notion
of the remembered present, which could be the cognitive moment 300 milliseconds,
or it could be if I was a tree three years. I think it's a lovely notion, but the point being
we're talking about processes in time. We're not saying at this instant, I am conscious or
consciousness is here, we're talking about a process that by definition has to unfold
in time. So I think that's an important observation, which sometimes eludes,
I think people debating about state conscious states and conscious content,
not acknowledging that it is a process. What was the example that Joshua mentioned?
Combustion.
Yeah, combustion is a process. You can't be in a state of combustion. And you could even argue
that it's very difficult to localize at a certain level. But the key thing is it's a process.
I have an open question. And maybe you have a reflection on this. When we think about our
own consciousness, we cannot know in principle, I think, just by introspection, whether we have
multiple consciousness in our own mind, because we can only remember those conscious states that
print their way into an integrated protocol that you can access from where you stand.
And we know that there are some people which have multiple personality disorder in which
the protocol itself gets splintered. As a result, they don't dream to be just one person,
they dream to be alternating, to be different people that usually don't remember each other,
because they don't have that shared protocol anymore. Now, my own emotion and perception
is generated outside of my personal self. My personal self is downstream from them. I am
subjected to my perception and emotion. I have involuntary reactions to them. But to produce
my percepts and my emotion, my mind needs intelligence. It cannot be much more stupid
than me. If my emotions would guide me in a way that is consistently more stupid than my reason
and my reflection would be, I don't think I would work. So there is an interesting question.
Is there a secondary consciousness? Is the part of your mind that generates world model and
your self assessment, your alignment to the world itself conscious? So basically,
do you share your brain with the second consciousness that shares its separate protocol?
Or is this a non-conscious process that is basically just dump and doesn't know what it's doing
in the sense that it would be sentient in a way that's similar to my own sentience?
What do you think?
Kurt, you should have a go on that one and then I'll, I can think about it.
Well, something I had wondered about 10 years ago or so, and I don't recall the
exact argument, was that if it was the case that the graph in our brain, let's say that
let's just reduce the neurons down to a graph, that this graph somehow produces consciousness
or is the same as consciousness, then if you were to remove one of those nodes,
then you would still have a somewhat the same identity. Okay, so then does that mean that we
have pretty much an infinite amount of overlapping consciousnesses within our brain?
I don't recall the exact argument, but it was similar to this. And then there's something
related in philosophy called the binding problem. I'm uncertain what people who study
multiple personality disorders have to say about the binding problem. Like,
is that the binding problem gone awry?
Can I just then pursue that notion of the binding in the context of the kind of thing that
or the way I am at the moment? Yeah, I think that's a very compelling notion
from the point of view of gerative modeling. So I'm not as answering now as a philosopher,
but as somebody who may be tasked, for example, with building an artifact that would have a
minimal kind of selfhood. The first thing you have to write down is different states of mind.
So that I can be frightened, I can be embarrassed, I can be
angry, I can be a father, I could be a football player, I could be so all the different ways
that I could be that are now conditioned upon the context in which I find myself.
And if that's part of the gerative model, that then speaks to two things. First of all,
you have to recognize what state of mind you are in, given all the evidence at hand. So,
for example, if I want to jointly explain the racing heart that my intercepted cues are
providing me in the intercepted domain with a stiffness of my muscles that my proprioception
is equipping me with, then to reconcile that with my visual interceptive input that I'm in a dark
alley. And mnemonically, I've never been here before. All of this sensory evidence might be
quite easily explained by the simple hypothesis, I am frightened. And that, in turn, generates
covert or mental actions and possibly even overt autonomic actions and motor actions
that provide more evidence for the fact that I am frightened in the sense in a William James
sense that out of cardiac acceleration, I will have a motor response, a muscular response
appropriate for a fright or flight response. So just to actually be able to generate and recognize
emotional kinds of behavior, I would need to have a minimal kind of model that crucially
obliged me now to disambiguate between a series of different ways of being. So it's not so much,
oh, I am me, that's a great hypothesis, that explains everything. But to make it operationally
important, I have to actually infer I'm me in this kind of state of mind, this situation,
or I'm me in this kind of situation and select the right state of mind to be in. And I think that
really does speak to this sort of notion of multiple consciousnesses that cohabit
your brain or your generative model. And again, speaks this notion of, well, I'm just wondering
whether that can be linked to this notion of incompleteness in a broader sense, that I'm
constantly seeking for the way in which I complete you in terms of dynamic interactions,
which means I have to recognize what kind of person do you expect me to be in this setting.
And of course, I can only do that if I actually have an internal model that is about me. It's
a model that actually have this attribute of selfhood, but specifically selfhood
appropriate to this context or this person or this situation. Does that make sense?
Yeah, I have a question about that. You said that you have different identities that you then select
from to see which one's most appropriate for the circumstance, like a hypothesis. And is it
the case then that you would say that there are multiple consciousnesses inside your brain,
or is it more like you have multiple potential consciousnesses, and then as soon as you select
one, that makes it actual? I don't know that. I would imagine that you'd have to have another
deeper layer of your generative model that then recognizes the selection process. And indeed,
this may sound fanciful, but there are naturalized in terms of inference schemes, models of
consciousness that actually do invoke, and I'm thinking here of the work of people like Lars
Sanstance Smith, who explicitly have three levels and each level, a deep generative model,
very much like a sort of deep neural network. And the role of each level is to provide the right
attention heads, or biasing, or precision, or contextualization for the processing that goes
on below. So it may well be that to get the kind of self-awareness, if I now read awareness as
deploying mental action in the service of setting the precision or the gating of various
communications or processing at lower down in the model, it may well be that you do need
an other layer of sophistication or depth to your generative models that I suspect trees don't have,
but certainly you have, or I can infer that you have, given I'm assuming that I have a similar
conception of consciousness. But I'm not sure that really speaks to your question, or the one that
Joshua was posing, the unitary aspect of consciousness. And does that transcend
an inference that would simply be biophysically instantiated in exactly the same way that I can
register visual motion and motion sensitive area v5 in my posterior cortex? I don't know about that.
I'll pass back to Joshua for that one. Again, we need a very narrow definition,
the very tight definition of consciousness to answer this question in a meaningful way.
If we see consciousness as something that we vaguely gastrate, and there could be multiple
things in our understanding, and it becomes almost impossible to say something meaningful
about this. So for instance, it could be conceivable that consciousness would be implemented by a
small set of circuits in the brain, and that all the different contents that can experience
themselves as consciousness are repurposing this shared functionality. In the same way as we probably
have only one language center, and this one language center can be used to articulate ideas
on many parts of our mind using different subagents that basically interface with this.
You can also clearly have multiple selves interacting on your mind. Your personal self is
one possible self that you can have that represents you as a person. But there are some people which
have got talking to them on their own mind. And I think what happens there is people implement
a self that is existing and self identifying as existing across minds. Something that is not a
model of the interests of the individual person, but a model of a collective agent that is implemented
using the actions of the individual people. But of course, this collective mind that assumes
the voice of God and talks to you in your own mind so you can perceive it, is still implemented
on your own mind and uses your circuitry. It's just that your circuitry is not yours. Your brain
doesn't belong to yourself. Your self is a creation of your own mind that symbolizes this person.
People who don't say that God doesn't exist forget that often that they themselves themselves
don't really exist in physics. This thing that they experienced as perceiving as interacting with
the world is a dream. It's a dream of what it would be like if you were a person that existed.
It's virtual. So you can also dream being a God and this God might be so tightly implemented on
your mind that it's able to use your language center and you hear its voice talking to you.
But it's not more or less real than you hearing your own voice talking to you in your mind.
It's just an implementation of a representation of agency in your mind.
One crucial difference to the way in which most AI systems are implemented right now
and the way in which agency is implemented on our minds is that we usually write functions in AI
that perform something like a hundred steps in a neural network, for instance, and then
gives a result that makes a programmer happy. And this is it. And the time series predictions
of our own mind are dynamic. They're not meant to solve a particular function,
but they're meant to track reality. So in a sense, our brain is more like a very complex resonator
that tries to go into resonance with the world. So it creates a harmonic pattern that continuously
tracks your sensory data with the minimal amount of effort. And this perspective is very different.
Really means your perception of the world cannot afford to deviate too much in its dynamics from
the dynamics that you observe in your sensory apparatus, because otherwise future predictions
become harder. You get out of sync. You always try to stay in sync with the world. And this thing
that you stay in sync is really crucial for the way in which we experience ourselves with the world.
As part of staying in sync, we discover our own self is the missing link between volition and the
outcomes of our action. Our body would not be discoverable to us and is not immediately given
to us if we wouldn't have this loop that ties us into the outer universe and into the stuff that
we cannot control directly. And for me, this question relates to how do we have only one
consciousness? It occurs to me that we would not know if we have multiple ones if they don't share
memories. If I were to set up an AI architecture, where a part of the AI architecture is a model
of an agent in the world, another part of the AI architecture is a model of the infrastructure
that I need to maintain to make a model of the world in such an agent in the world.
I would not tell the agent how this infrastructure works, because the agent might use that knowledge
to gain the architecture and get a better outcome for itself, not the organism. Imagine you could
gain your perception, so you're always happy, no matter how much you're failing in the world.
From the perspective of the larger architecture, that's not desirable. So it would probably remain
hidden from you how you're implemented. And to me, the question is interesting,
how sentient is this part of you that is not yourself? Does it actually know what it is
in real time? I think it's a very interesting and tempting philosophical question and also
practical one. Maybe there is a neuroscientific experiment that would figure out if you have
two clusters of conscious experience. I wouldn't know how to measure this,
but maybe IIT, Global Workspace Theory, and so on, are wrong more interesting ways than we
currently think they are, because they assume that there is just one consciousness. Of course,
from the perspective of one consciousness, there is only one, because consciousness is in some
sense the definition of what's unified. But if there are multiple clusters of unification that
exist simultaneously, they wouldn't know each other directly. They could maybe observe each other,
but maybe not in both directions. Sorry, when you say consciousness is
by definition one, is that akin to how you say software is one software as such,
but specific instantiations of... No, in a functional way. So basically,
more like the universe is by definition only one. You can have multiple universes,
but this means that we define universe in a particular way. Normally, universe is used in
the way of everything that feeds back information into a unified way, into a unified thing. We accept
that parts of the universe get lost if they go outside of the distance where they can feed
information back into you, but there's still in the way in which we think about the universe,
part of the universe. The universe is everything that exists, and consciousness is everything
that you can be conscious of in the sense. So if there is stuff in you that you're not conscious
of, it doesn't mean that it's not conscious. It would just be a separate consciousness,
possibly. It could also be that it's not a consciousness. And so what I don't know is,
is a brain structure in such a way that can maintain only one consciousness at a time?
Or could there be multiple full-on consciousnesses that just don't... where we don't know about
the other one? I perceive my consciousness as being focused on this content that is my personal
self. I can have conscious states in which I'm not a personal self. For instance, I can dream at night
that there's stuff happening, and I'm conscious of that stuff happening, but there is no I.
There is no personal self. There's just this reflexive attention that is interacting with
a perceptual world. In that state, I would say I can clearly show that consciousness can exist
without a personal self, and a personal self is just a content. But it doesn't answer the question,
are there multiple consciousnesses interacting on my brain? One that is maintaining my reward
system, my motivational system, and my perception, and one that is maintaining my personal self?
Carl, now that we've spoken about the unity of consciousness, dissociation,
as well as even voices of God and God, him or herself or itself, what does your background
in schizophrenia, your perspective from there have to say?
Yeah, well, that's a brilliant question and a leading question. It's what I wanted to comment on.
So, again, so many things have been unearthed here, from the basic that all our beliefs are
fantasies, their hypotheses, illusions that are entrained by the sensorium to, in a way,
that maintains some kind of synchrony between the inside and the outside. I think that's quite a
fundamental thing which we haven't spoken about very much, but I just want to fully endorse.
And of course, that entrainment sometimes referred to, I think, as entrain hallucination,
perception being your hallucination that's just been entrained by sparse data. But the
data themselves being actively sampled. So, this loop that Yosha was referring to,
I think, is absolutely crucial aspect of the whole sense-making and, indeed,
sense-making as a self, as the cause of my own or the author of my own sensations in an active
sensing or active influence. I think that's absolutely crucial. The question about,
are the multiple consciousness, I should just, before addressing the psychiatric perspective,
there is, I have a group of colleagues, including people like Maxwell Ramstead and Chris Fields,
and particularly Chris Fields, who takes a quantum information, a theoretic view of this,
and brings to the table the notion of an irreducible Markov blanket in a computing graph
that crucially has some unique properties that means that it can only know of itself by acting on
the outside or which other parts of the brain. And, again, acting in this instance just means
setting the attention or the coordination or contextualizing, message passing elsewhere.
But the interesting notion, which is not unrelated to the pineal gland or Mark
Somes' ascending neurotransmitter systems that might do this kind of action,
is that there could be more than one minimal or irreducible Markov blanket that practically you
can actually experimentally define in principle by looking at the connectivity of any kind.
But certainly, if you have a sufficiently detailed connectome, you can actually define
the Markov blankets in terms of the directed connections offered by external processes.
And in principle, you should apply a kind of integrated information theory, but slightly
nuanced, I think in this instance, to actually identify candidates for irreducible Markov blankets
that could be the thing that looks at the thing that's doing the thing that may have different
kinds of experiences. There could be an irreducible Markov blanket in, say, the globes
palates that might be making sense of and acting upon the machinery that underwrites our
motor behavior and our plans and our choices, as opposed to something in the occipital lobe
that might be more to do with perception. So I'm just saying that I don't think it's a silly
question to ask. Can we empirically identify candidates in computing architectures that would
have the right kind of attributes that would be necessary to ascribe them some minimal kind of
consciousness? But let me return to this key question I was just talking, it did strike me,
yes, that's exactly what goes on in schizophrenia. Attribution of agency, delusions of control,
hearing, your hearing voice, again, coming back to this notion that this action perception loop,
this circular coupling to the world that rests upon action that has an agent and the consciousness
understood as self-modeling is all about ascribing the right agency to the outcomes of action,
I think is a really important notion here. And it can go horribly wrong. We spend the first
years of our lives just working out, I caused that and you caused that and working out what I can
cause and what I can't cause and what mum causes and what other people cause. Imagine that you
lost that capacity. Imagine that when you spoke, and this is Chris Frith's notion or explanation
for auditory hallucinations, for example, you weren't able to recognize that it was you that was
the initiation of that speech act, whether it's actually articulated or sub-vocal. So just not
being able to infer selfhood in the sense of ascribing agency to the sensed consequences of
action would be quite devastating. And of course, you can think about reproducing these kinds of
states with certain psychomimetic or psychedelic drugs. They really dissolve what we take for
granted in terms of a coherent, unitary content of consciousness. If you've ever had the
the cytosesia that can sometimes be introduced or induced by psychedelic drugs,
you will know what it's like to treasure the fact that the colour is seen and sound is heard.
It doesn't have to be like that. It's just that if we as sustained inferring processes,
self-evidence in computing processes that sustain in a coherent way are sense-making,
it looks as if colours are seen and sounds are heard. That's how we make sense. It doesn't have
to be like that. And you can experience the converse. You can start to see sounds. You can hear
colours. You can have horrible distortions of time, deception, a moment to can actually feel
as if you've lusted. So all of these things that we take for granted in terms of our sense-making
are so fragile that you're given the right either psychopathology or pathophysiology,
technically a synaptopathy of the kind you might associate with things like Parkinson's disease
and schizophrenia, possibly even neurotic disorders, obviously effective or depressive or
generalized anxiety disorders can all be understood as basically a disintegration
of this coherent synthesis and, to use your word, the binding.
Which means that I think the same principles could also be ascribed to consciousness itself.
And I'm not sure... So depersonalization, derealization, I think are two conditions
which I've never experienced, but my understanding of subjective reports from people who have patients
who have experienced these do, I think, really speak to this notion that there could be multiple
consciousnesses. And of course, one will not be aware of the other and possibly not even able to
infer the agency, even if it was. But also, there could be no consciousness. There are
depersonalization syndromes where you still sense, you still perceive, but it's not you.
And there are sort of derealization syndromes where you are there, but all your sensorium is
unreal. It's not actually there anymore. You're not actually in the world. So you can get these
horrible disintegration, dissociative... Well, dissociative is a little term. You can get these
situations where everything we take for granted about the unitary aspect of our experienced world
and us as experiences can so easily be dissolved in these conditions. So I take
Josh's questions very, very seriously. And so would people who suffer from these conditions.
I would distinguish between consciousness and self more closely than you seem to be doing just now.
I would say that consciousness coincides with the ability to dream, or it is the ability to dream
even. And in schizophrenia, the dream is spinning off from the tightly coupled model that allows
you to track reality. And when we dream at night, we are dissociated from our sensorium.
And the brain is probably also dissociated in many other ways. And as a result, we get split
off from the ability, for instance, to remember who we are, in which city we live, and what our
name is very often in the dream. Even if it's a lucid dream where we get some agency over the
contents of our dream, we might not be able to reconstruct our normal personality and crucial
aspects of our own self. And in schizophrenia, I think this happens while we are awake,
which means we start to produce mental representations that look real to us, but that
have no longer the property that they are predicting what's going to happen next in the world,
or much later. And this ability to lose predictive power doesn't mean that they are
now more of an illusion than before. The normal stuff that has predictive power is
still hallucination. It's still a trance state when you perceive something as real,
as long as you perceive it as real. It's only some trance states are useful in the sense that
they have predictive power, that they're useful representations, and others are not. And the
ability to wake up from this notion that your representations are real is what Michael Taft
calls enlightenment. He's a meditation teacher with a pretty rational approach to enlightenment.
And basically to him, enlightenment is the state where you recognize all your mental
representations as representations and become aware of their representational nature.
You basically realize that nothing that you can perceive is real,
because everything that you can perceive is a representational content. And that's something
that is accessible to you by introspection if you build the necessary models for doing that.
And so when your mind is getting to this model level where you can construct a representation
of how you're representing things, then you get some agency of how you are interacting with your
representation. But I wouldn't say that somebody who is experiencing a schizophrenic episode
and or derealizes or depersonalizes is losing consciousness. They're losing
their self, they're losing coherence, they're losing the ability to track reality and their
interaction between self and external world and so on. But as long as they experience that
happening, they're still conscious. Does this make sense? Yeah, certainly in terms of altered
states of consciousness, absolutely. Do you know Thomas Metzinger, the sort of the things you've
just said, said the very reminiscent of his treatment of say phenomenal opacity and the
like. Is he somebody that you have discussed these things with or subscribed to?
Discussed relatively briefly only. We met a few times since I left Germany only, mostly online.
And I like Thomas a lot. I think that he is one of the few German philosophers was reading right
now. But of course, he's limited by being a philosopher, which means he is going to the
point where before he stops before the point where he would make actually functional models
that we could test. So I think his concepts are sound. He does observe a lot of interesting
things. And I guess a lot of it also through introspection. But I think in order to understand
consciousness, we actually need to build testable theories. And I suspect even if we cannot construct
consciousness as this strange loop as Hofstadter calls it from scratch, which I don't know whether
we can do that. I'm agnostic with respect to that. We can probably recreate the conditions that
lead to the discovery of consciousness in the brain. Which means we can initiate the search
process that the brain is initiating before it discovers it. I was going to make the joke that
we've offended physicists, neuroscientists and philosophers. Yeah, it's my thing.
It's mostly retaliation because I'm so offended by them. Maybe I shouldn't.
Especially I tried to study all these things and I got so little out of it. I found that most
of it is just pretence. It's there's so little honest thinking going on about the condition that
we are in. It was very, very frustrating to me. What field do you identify as being a part of
Yosha? Computer scientist, cognitive scientist? I like computer science most because I've
discovered as a student that you can publish in computer science at every stage of your career.
You can be a first semester student and you can publish in computer science because the
criteria of validity are not human criteria. This stuff either works or it doesn't. You prove it
depends out or it doesn't. Whereas the criteria in philosophy are too much larger degree social
criteria. The more your peers influence the outcome of the review and the more your peers
can deviate from the actual mission of your subject in their social dynamics,
the more haphazard your field becomes. We noticed, for instance, in psychology we had this big
replication crisis. The replication crisis in psychology was something that was anticipated
by a number of psychologists for many, many years that pointed out this curious fact that psychology
seems to be the only science where you make a prediction at the beginning of your paper and
it always comes true in the end. Enormous predictive power and also pointed at all the ways in which
p-hacking was accepted and legal and hopefully the statistical tools were understood. Then we have
this replication crisis and 15,000 studies get invalidated more or less or no longer reliable
and somebody pointed this out in beautiful text where they said essentially what's happening here
is that we have an airplane crash and you hear that 15,000 of your loved ones have died
and nobody even goes to the trouble to ID them because nobody cares because nothing is changing
as a result of these invalidated studies. What kind of the building has just toppled? Nobody
cares. There's not actually a building. There's just people talking and when this happens we have
to be brutally honest as a field. I hear very often that AI has been inspired by neuroscience
and learned so much from it, but when I look at the actual algorithms the last big influence was
heavier learning and the other stuff is just people talking, taking inspiration, taking insights
and so on, but it's not actually there is a lot of stuff that you can take out of the formalisms of
people who studied the brain and directly translate it. I think that even what podcast is
doing is much more results of information theory and physics that is congruent with information
theory because it's thinking about similar phenomena using similar mathematical tools
and then expresses it with more Greek letters than the computer scientists used to do,
but there is a big overlap in this and so I think the separation between intellectual
traditions and fields and disciplines is something that we should probably overcome.
We should also probably in an age of AI rethink the way in which we publish and think.
Is the paper actually the contribution that we want to make in the future in a time where you
can ask your LLM to generate the paper? It's maybe it's the building block, the knowledge item,
the argument that is going to be the major contribution that the scientists or the team
has to make, the experiment and then you have systems that automatically synthesize this
into answers to the questions that you have and you want to do something in a particular kind of
context, but this will completely change the way in which we evaluate value in the scientific
institutions at the moment and nobody knows what this is going to look like. Imagine we use an LLM
to read a scientific paper and we parse out all the sources of the scientific paper from the paper
and what the sources are meant to argue for and then we automatically read all the sources and
check whether they actually say that, what the paper is claiming the sources say and we
parse through the entire trees of a discipline in this way until we get to first principles.
What are we going to find? Which parts of science will hold up? I think that we might be at the
doorstep of a choice between a scientific revolution in which science becomes radically
honest and changes the way it works or in which it reveals itself as an employment program,
is fake jobs for people who couldn't find a job in the real economy and basically get away
because their peers let them get away with it and I try to be as pointedly as possible and
as bleak as possible. So science, given its incentives that it's working under and the
institutional rod that has set in after decades of postmodernism, it's surprisingly good still,
right? There's so many good scientists in all fields that I know, but I also noticed that
many of the disciplines don't seem to be making a lot of progress for the questions that we have
and many fields seem to be stuck and this doesn't seem to be just because all the low-hanging fruits
are wrapped, but I think it's also because the way in which scientific institutions works have
changed. The notion of peer review probably didn't exist very much before the 1970s. This idea that
you get truth by looking at a peer-reviewed study rather than asking a person who is able to read
and write such studies, that is new, that is something that didn't exist for Einstein.
So I don't know if this means that Einstein was an unscientific mind that was only successful
because he was working at the beginning of a discipline or it was because he was thinking
in a completely different paradigm, but no matter what, I think that AI is going to have the potential
to change the paradigm massively and I don't know which way, but I can't wait.
So now that we're talking about computer scientists, what do you make of the debacle at
OpenAI, both Carl and Yosha, directed to you, Yosha first?
And there's relatively little I can say because I don't actually know what the reason was for
the decision of the board to fire this EO. Firing this EO is one of the very few
moves beyond providing advice than the board can make. I thought if the board makes such a
decision in a company in which many of the core employees have been hired by the CEO and have
been working very closely and happily with the CEO, they will need to have a very solid case
and there needs to be a lot of deliberation among core engineers and players in the company
before such a decision is being made, apparently that has not been the case. I have difficulty to
understand why people behaved in the way in which they did. The outcome is that OpenAI is more
unified than ever. It's basically 95% agreement about employees that they are going to leave the
company if it doesn't reinstate the CEO. It's almost unheard of. This is like an Eastern European
communist dictatorship is fake elections, but it was not fake. It was basically people getting
together overnight and getting signatures for a decision that gravely impacts their
professional careers. Many of them are on visa that depend on continuous employment
within the company, so they enter actual risks for a time. I also suspect that a lot of the
discussions that happened were bluffs right when the board said yes, they want to reinstate them,
but then Woffel then came out with MS Shear, who is a pretty good person, but it's not clear
why the Twitch CEO would be the right person to lead OpenAI suddenly. I don't even know whether
the decision was made because there were personal disagreements about communication styles or whether
it was about the direction of the company where members of the board felt that AI is going to
be developed too quickly and should be slowed down significantly and the strategy of Sam
Altman to run shared GPT at a loss and making up for this by speeding up the development and
getting more capital in and thereby basically adding an AGI or bus strategy for the company
might not be the right strategy. Also, the board members don't hold equity in the company,
so this is the situation where the outcome of their decision is somewhat divorced from their
own material incentives and it is more aligned with their political or ideal ideals that they
might have or the goals that they have. Again, not all of them are hardcore AI researchers,
some of them are. I don't really know what the particular discussions have been in there. Of
course, I have more intimate speculations at some discussions with people at OpenAI,
but I cannot disclose the speculations, of course. At the moment, I can only summarize
in some sense what's publicly known and what you can read on Twitter. It's super exciting,
it has kept us all awake for a few days. It's a fascinating drama and I'm somewhat frustrated
by people say, oh my god, this is destroyed, trust in OpenAI, if decisions can be so erratic,
because OpenAI should be like a bureaucracy that is not moving in 100 years. No, this is part of
something that is super dynamic and is changing all the time. I think that what the board should
probably have seen is that the best possible outcome that I could have achieved is that OpenAI
is going to split, that the best possible in the sense of the board trying to fire some
outman to change the course of the company. They would have created one of the largest
competitors to OpenAI. Basin anti-anthropic on the other side of OpenAI that is focusing more
on accelerating AI research. It would have been clear that many of the core team members
would join it and it would destroy a lot of the equity that OpenAI currently possesses
and it would take away large portions of OpenAI's largest customers, Microsoft.
So these are some observations. So Sam is back now? Yes, and it was clear that it would happen.
This move by Satya Nadella to say he works now for Microsoft happened not after negotiating
organization for a month. It happened in an afternoon. After it was announced that the
board now has another candidate that they secretly got talked into taking on this role,
Microsoft basically set up as a threat. They're all going to come to us and every OpenAI person
who wants can now join Microsoft in a dedicated autonomous unit with details that are yet to be
announced, but they're not going to be materially worse off or research wise worse off. So this is
a backstop that Microsoft had to implement to prevent its stock from tumbling on Monday morning.
So Microsoft moved very fast on Sunday and decided we are going to make sure that we are not going
to create a situation that is worse for us than it was before. And this creates enormous pressure
on OpenAI to basically decide either we are going to be alone without most of the core employees
and without our business model, but having succeeded in what the board wants or the accept
the fact that the board has been defeated and some other has not been entirely candid with the
board when he said last June that the board can just fire him if it agrees with him.
Because that's obviously not the case because the board at the moment where there's so much buy-in
for the employees and the core investors and customers of OpenAI they cannot just fire the
CEO. This is out very good reason. And Carl, what do you make of it? The whole fiasco?
I was just listening with fascination. I think you have more than enough material to keep your
viewers engaged. Can I just ask you, is OpenAI going to be ingested by Microsoft or not then?
Do you think OpenAI is going to survive by itself? Some people are joking that OpenAI scores is to
make Google obsolete, to replace search by intelligence and Google is too slow to deliver
product to deal with this impending competition. OpenAI has rapidly growing in the last few months,
has hired a lot of people who are focusing on product and customer relationships.
The core research team has been growing much more conservatively.
I think that Microsoft was a natural partner for OpenAI in this regard because Microsoft is able
to make large investments and yet is possibly not as agile as Google. The risk that if OpenAI
would partner with Google as a main customer that Google at some point would just walk away
with the core technology and some of the core researchers might be larger than with Microsoft
but they can only speculate there. The last question for this podcast is how is it that you
all prevent an existential crisis from occurring with all this talk of the self as an illusion or
our beliefs which are associated with our conception of ourselves, immutable identities
and competing contradictory theories of terrifying reality being entertained?
Well, Carl.
I'm just trying to get underneath the question. The kind of illusions I think we're talking about
are the stuff of the lived world and the experienced world and they are not weak or
facile or facsimiles of reality. These are the fantastic objects, belief structures that constitute
reality. So literally, as I'm sure we've said before, the brain as a purveyor of these fantasies,
these illusions is fantastic, literally, because it has the capacity to entertain these fantasies.
So I don't think there should be any worry about somehow not being accountable to reality.
These are fantastic objects that we have created, co-created, you could argue, given some of our
conversations that constitute our reality. I think that existential crisis is a good thing. It basically
means that you are getting at a point where you have a transition in front of you where you basically
realize that the current model is not working anymore and you need a new one. And the crisis,
usually existential crisis doesn't necessarily result in death. It typically results in
transformation into something that is more sustainable because it understands itself and
its relationship to reality better. The fact that we have existential questions and that we want to
have answers for them is a good thing. When I was young, I thought I don't want to understand how
music actually works because it would remove the magic. But the more I understood how music works,
the more appreciative I became of deeper levels of magic. And I think the same is true for our
own minds. It's not like when we understand how it works that it loses its magic, it just removes
the stupidity of superstition and gives us something that shows its in its beauty and
brilliance and allows us to make it much more sophisticated and intricate.
Thank you, Yosha. Thank you, Carl. There's a litany of points for myself, for the audience,
for all of us to chew on over the course of the next few days, even maybe even weeks. Thank you.
Thank you, Kurt, for bringing us together, Carl. I really enjoyed this conversation with you.
It was brilliant. I like that you'd think on your feet that we have this very deep interaction.
Found interesting and that we agree on almost everything. We might sometimes use different
terminology, but we seem to be looking at the same thing from pretty much the same perspective.
And I also really enjoyed it. It was a very, very engaging conversation.
I love the way that you're not frightened to upset people and tell the things that they are.
Well, I'm not looking for a job in academia.
Good. Neither am I. I still don't have your balls. Well done.
Have a wonderful rest of the day. Thank you.
All right. Take care.
Brilliant. Thanks very much.
By the way, if you would like me to expand on this thesis of multiple overlapping consciousnesses
that I had from a few years ago, let me know and I can look through my old notes.
All right. That's a heavy note to end on. You should know,
Yosha has been on this podcast several times, one solo, another with Ben Gortso,
another with John Verveki, another with Michael Levin, and one more with Donald Hoffman.
Whereas Carl Friston has also been on several times, twice solo, another between Carl Friston
and Michael Levin, and another with Carl and Anna Lemke. That one's coming up shortly.
The links to every podcast mentioned will be in the description as well as the links
to any of the articles or books mentioned, as usual in every single series of everything
podcasts are in the description. We take meticulous timestamps and we take meticulous notes.
If you'd like to donate because this channel has had a difficult time monetizing with sponsors,
and sponsors are the main bread and butter of YouTube channels, then there are three options.
There's Patreon, which is a monthly subscription. It's patreon.com.
There's also PayPal for one-time sums, if you like. It's also a place where you can donate
monthly. There's a custom way of doing so, and the amount that goes to the creator,
aka meat in this case, is greater on PayPal than on Patreon because PayPal takes less of a cut.
There's also Cryptocurrency, if you're more familiar with that, and the links to all of
these are in the description. I'll say them aloud in case you're away from the screen.
It's tinyurl.com, slash lowercase, all of this is lowercase, P-A-Y-P-A-L, so PayPal,
but then uppercase, toe, T-O-E, uppercased. And then for crypto, it's tinyurl.com,
slash lowercase, C-R-Y-P-T-O, capital T-O-E. I just recommend you look to the description
and click there in case you enter in something wrong and there's someone that's trying to
fish a different account. Thank you. Thank you for your support. It helps Toe continue to run.
It helps pay for the editor who's doing this right now. I and my wife are extremely grateful
for your support. We wouldn't be able to do this without you. Thank you.
The podcast is now concluded. Thank you for watching. If you haven't subscribed or clicked
that like button, now would be a great time to do so as each subscribe and like helps YouTube push
this content to more people. You should also know that there's a remarkably active discord and
subreddit for theories of everything where people explicate Toes, disagree respectfully about theories
and build as a community our own Toes. Links to both are in the description. Also, I recently found
out that external links count plenty toward the algorithm, which means that when you share on
Twitter, on Facebook, on Reddit, et cetera, it shows YouTube that people are talking about this
outside of YouTube, which in turn greatly aids the distribution on YouTube as well.
Last but not least, you should know that this podcast is on iTunes. It's on Spotify. It's on
every one of the audio platforms. Just type in theories of everything and you'll find it.
Often I gain from rewatching lectures and podcasts, and I read that in the comments. Hey,
toll listeners also gain from replaying. So how about instead re listening on those platforms?
iTunes, Spotify, Google podcasts, whichever podcast catcher you use. If you'd like to
support more conversations like this, then do consider visiting patreon.com slash
Kurt Jaimungal and donating with whatever you like. Again, it's support from the sponsors and
you that allow me to work on toll full time. You get early access to ad free audio episodes there
as well. For instance, this episode was released a few days earlier. Every dollar helps far more
than you think. Either way, your viewership is generosity enough.
