This channel is about investigating theories of everything.
Now that includes string theory or M theory or some flavor of string theory,
E8, geometric unity, even Wolfram's model, in fact I'm speaking with Wolfram in about a week,
but also broadly speaking it encompasses Veltan Xiaowings, that is a philosophical,
comprehensive theory of everything, hence the following two guests, Bernardo Kastrup and John
Bernardo Kastrup holds a PhD in computer science and philosophy and is defending idealism,
that is the ontology that all that exists is the mental, in fact we're all part of one
mind, which he calls mind at large. John is an associate professor at the University of Toronto
near me in cognitive science, advocating for naturalism. My name is Kurt Jaimungal, I'm a
filmmaker and the host of this podcast with a background in math and physics. This is a
theologution, which is rather than critiquing and sparring, it's about constructing and building
and understanding the other's position, consonant with love, hopefully. Round one is linked below
in the description and it's imperative that you watch that first or at least look at the time
stamps and skip around a few times in order to gain a bird's eye view of their respective
philosophies and where they agree slash disagree. Today I welcome the podcast's first sponsors,
Algo is an end-to-end supply chain optimization software company with software that helps business
users optimize sales and operations, planning to avoid stockouts, reduce returns and inventory
write downs, while reducing inventory investment. It's a supply chain AI that drives smart ROI.
The second sponsor is Brilliant. Brilliant illuminates the soul of math, science and
engineering through bite-sized interactive learning experiences. Brilliant's courses explore the laws
that shape our world, elevating math and science from something to be feared to a delightful experience
of guided discovery. More on them later. If you'd like to see more conversations like this,
then please consider supporting at patreon.com slash kirchheimangel. I've also opened up
crypto donations, but we have PayPal as well. The plan is to have more conversations like this,
both theologutions and then the regular podcasts. For example, I have Yosha Bach and Donald Hoffman
coming up in a few weeks. There are also a few others planned that I can't announce just yet.
They're huge names. I'm working with them. And if you'd like to support to see the conversations,
then please do consider becoming a patron. Every single dollar helps. Thank you.
Thank you so much and enjoy the podcast. Welcome, John. Welcome, Bernardo.
Great pleasure to be here. Great pleasure to be here. Great to see you get Bernardo.
My pleasure, John. Okay, so let's start firstly with a recapitulation of last time. That is,
let's see if John, if you can state what you think Bernardo says in a way that's
consonant with what he meant and then vice versa. Maybe one to five minutes and we'll start with you,
John. Sure, I'll do my very best and I will reserve any kind of critical response to later.
I just want to make sure that I am understanding. First of all, I want to comment on the fact that
I thought Bernardo's presentation of his ideas was excellent and very clear.
So the main, I mean, there were many theses performed by Bernardo, but I think the central one
that it seems to me everything's hanging on is his claim for, you know, what's in the technical
lingo is called absolute idealism, a strict form of mononism in which ultimately all of
reality is some modification or state within a unified consciousness, a unified at least at
substantial level. And then Bernardo wants to deal with one of the crucial problems facing that,
which is, well, where does all this phenomenology, because we're in the realm of consciousness,
about an external world and material objects that seem to exist independent of our consciousness
come from. Bernardo made it very clear that he's not a solipsist and he's in that sense
not what you might call an individual Berkleyan idealist. Objects exist when we're not looking
at them and the deep past isn't a problem for him because the consciousness within which
reality is to be found, if that's the right way of putting it, is what he sometimes calls cosmic
mind or mind at large, which is a consciousness. So the main argument he makes, and I don't want
to say that's the exclusive argument, he made many arguments and they're all connected, but
the central argument is an argument in terms of parsimony. So he argues that the main problem
facing a naturalistic account, and I think just one small thing, I try to make clear that I think
the real competitor with his view is a kind of naturalism, that naturalism has difficulty
explaining the emergence and also the interact, the emergence of something like consciousness
understood as subjective qualitative experience, qualia, and how that qualia could possibly causally
interact with the material domains. So those are two perennial problems and he argues that
parsimony says the way to avoid those is just to posit that there's one underlying unified
substance and then he faces, as I said, the difficulty of explaining how we get externality
and materiality, and the way he explains that is that there is a dissociation process,
somewhat analogous to the empirical evidence we have for dissociative states within the consciousness
of human beings, and that something analogous to that is going on in cosmic mind, and that
psychological, I think that's right, dissociation helps to explain the phenomenological external
and the phenomenological materiality. I think that's the best I can do right now within one
of five minutes. It's pretty good. Bernardo? I think John's main message is not necessarily
metaphysics dependent. I think the import of what he has to say would still be there,
whatever metaphysics turns out to be true, whatever that argument goes. His main message,
as far as I understand, which is, of course, filtered by my own interests, has to do with
meaning. I think we in the West today are in a very peculiar historical situation and John
points that out very well in which we've lost our sources of meaning. We've lost contact
with the fundamental driver of life, the will to meaning, as opposed to Nietzsche's will to power
or Freud's will to pleasure. In that sense, John is in the line that in the 20th century maybe
he was most visibly defended by Viktor Frankl, that idea of the search for meaning.
Metaphysically, John is not prepared to give up on some reality behind the concept of matter,
but he's not an extreme reductionist in the sense that he is not saying that consciousness can be
completely accounted for purely by quantitative physical parameters. He appeals to some forms
of emergence, perhaps even to what Chalmers would call some form of strong emergence,
which basically means that the emergent phenomenon cannot be directly deduced from
complete knowledge of the underlying dynamics. In other words, something real with the reality of its
own arises from or in a way related to brain processing, and that's something that has
reality is our conscious lives. And if I understood him, if I correctly recall what he said,
he's even open to some forms of downward causation. He's open to some forms of the
gestalt of our conscious experience impinging downwards into brain processes. And of course,
there is some degree of empirical evidence for that. It's difficult for me now to proceed
and point out in a critical way points where I disagree with John's main message because,
well, I largely don't. I think the point where we don't see eye to eye is on the details of the
metaphysics. I don't think, however, that that is really relevant for the importance of what he has
to say. But I do think, and I'm trying to do my best to be critical about something, I think that
if we appeal to things that are unknown, such as some form of strong emergence,
I think the burden is on the one who appeals to it to try to close that somehow, to try to make
sense of that somehow. And I think that even has some degree of psychological bearing. And we did
talk briefly about it last time. I posed the question, you know, for people to really find
meaning in their lives, would they be satisfied with the notion that they make their own meaning?
Or do they really have to have at least the belief that there is inherent meaning out there,
that we are not making stuff up to sort of deceive ourselves? And that's the point where I think
John's message could benefit from a more explicit, well-defined metaphysical position.
I think it would strengthen his main message, the role, the main role he's playing in the culture
right now. That was excellent. Very fair. Very fair. Let's be recollective for a second.
As for the last conversation, I'm curious how you all think it went and what
point or point said by the other person nettles you ever since and may perhaps even rethink a
position of yours. Maybe not a vital pillar, but it gives you pause at least. So John, you first,
please. Well, first of all, the overall tenor. Again,
I think Bernardo succeeded in, I think one of, there's goals that are preliminary to the goals
of conviction of truth, but they're necessary goals. I think Bernardo succeeded admirably in,
and I think this is important, by the way. This is not meant to be dismissive. I think he succeeded
admirably in making his position intellectually respectable. Bernardo knows, as well as I do,
that there are many, many versions of absolute idealism out there that are absolutely drecky
and horrible and woo-woo, and they're equivalent to postulating that leprechauns cause things.
It became very clear to me, because this is the first time I really seriously interacted with
Bernardo, that that is not what is happening with him, and he made his position intellectually
respectable, and he did it in a responsive and congenial manner, and I greatly enjoyed the dialogue.
A couple, I mean, I have been thinking about it. I go for walks in the morning, and often I'm talking
to Bernardo in my head when I'm on the walk, which is not an unpleasant thing as well.
A couple of things for me came up. One was Matt Segal put out a commentary. I texted you,
the link, Kurt, about the discussion. Then I had a three-hour discussion with him yesterday,
two and a half hours, about Whitehead and his version of pan-experientialism and the notion of
prehension, and I found that I was coming a lot closer to that view, and then upon reflection,
I thought, well, when Bernardo was talking about consciousness, he said it's at this instinctive
level. It doesn't have intentionality. It doesn't have reflective rationality, reflective self-awareness.
I felt that the distance between us was growing smaller in the positions I was willing to consider
and take seriously, because I did mention last time that I take Whitehead's proposal very seriously.
I think Whitehead was one of the most significant philosophers who was contemporary with the
scientific revolution of the early 20th century, and I think he's an important response to that,
and so that happened for me. The thing that nettles me, I don't know if it nettles me,
is the same, and this goes towards perhaps my larger metaphysical view, which I briefly
talked about last time as being a naturalistic neoplatonism. I've been deeply influenced by
the neoplatonic ideas. In Plato, it's pretty much an emanation metaphysics with participation,
and then in Platonus, you have a two-way movement, there's emanation, and then there's return,
and that's because the neoplatonists realized that there were sort of two problems that needed to
be explained. How does the one become mini, and how does the mini become one? But Platonus still
gives emphasis. By the time you get to Eringina, it's completely dialectical. They're completely
equally symmetrical, and I remember a really good book written by Katz, quite a while ago,
called The Metaphysics of Meaning, where he basically said that the naturalist faces the
problem of getting up to unity and explaining how normativity emerges, and then he said that the
Platonus has the problem of how do we get the diversity and how do we get down into causation.
So it's basically how do causes become reasons and how do reasons become causes.
And I tend to see, Bernardo, he won't agree with this, but I do think it's movement towards
our positions being closer. I do see, I think, I see what Katz has claimed. I think there's a
symmetry issue. I acknowledge that, and I don't mean to imply that Bernardo isn't
acknowledging things, I'm just saying something straight out, that the problem of emergence is
a real problem, and that all we have are weak analogies that fail fundamentally at the point
where we need them to work. I see it, and again, I foresee that Bernardo won't agree, but I see it
that the problem of dissociation is an equally mysterious problem. All he has for it is a weak
analogy, the analogy to psychological dissociation, and it does, it fails at precisely the point
where we need it to work. All the empirical cases of psychological dissociation don't produce
material objects, don't produce independent external existence, etc. So that dissociation
doesn't actually supply the metaphysical move he makes. I see that symmetrical to the way emergence
relies on weak analogies. So if he'll allow me just at least a parallel in terminology,
I think he needs something like strong dissociation to produce the real differences
that we experience phenomenologically, because they're at least phenomenologically real,
he never denies that, he's not a solipsist. So I see them as symmetrical, and where that leads
to me more generally is, like I said, I think my metaphysics is very much about the idea that
there's a deep interpenetration of emergence and emanation, that's why I'm attracted to
Whitehead. And for me, that's consonant with the increasing number of non-dualities we are
discovering about reality, matter and energy, time and space, and waves and particles, etc.
And so my metaphysics is in that sense, more of a neoplatonic position. Now,
what many people on the other side of the fence, sort of the people who are much more perhaps
scientistic, rather than scientific, but oh, but neoplatonism is so anti-scientific, I argue
explicitly against that, we have very good historical argumentation, that neoplatonism has
been and continues to be a significant birthplace for scientific ideas. It comes to the fore during
scientific revolutions. John Spencer's book on the influence of neoplatonism in the scientific
revolution of the 20th century, I think is very good. The recent work by Berman on Platonism and
the objects of science, saying that science presupposes intelligibility, and then presupposes
something like, you know, platonic forms in order to do what it does as science, I think that's a
beautifully written and well argued book. And if you look at it, so for me, my starting place
is a little bit different from Bernardo's. And in that sense, perhaps it might be helpful if I just
briefly said what it was. They're not disconnected from each other, but I don't think they're
identical. So I start from intelligibility. So this is much more like ancient philosophy rather
than sort of a Cartesian approach, which is what what what has to be presupposed in your ontology
in order for knowledge to exist. So you take it as a fundamental presupposition, that you reject
absolute skepticism, absolute solar system. And then what does and then the idea is, well, the
universe has to be comprehensible, it has to be intelligible. And then what the neoplatonist
notes is there's this weird relations within intelligibility, you need information in order
to have knowledge information causes knowledge. But knowledge can't be reductively explained
in terms of information. And you need knowledge for wisdom, knowledge causes wisdom, but you
can't reductively explain knowledge in terms of wisdom. And so neoplatonism has seen within
intelligibility this causal emergence upward, and the normative constraining downward. And
it tries to unfold a metaphysics that I think best grounds are experience of intelligibility
that is presupposed by our science. And I want, and I think this is sincere, I want to see if this
is ultimately reconcilable with that, that at least smaller gap between Bernardo and I between
sort of the right heading and idea of prehension, because he tries to lay that in as the ground
both of causation, and of intelligibility, and what Bernardo was saying. So maybe there,
maybe there's something there, I don't know, and I'm happy to explore it. So that's my sort of
summation and initial response. Bernardo, what did John say in the previous round or even now that
like I said, either gives you pause or upends one of your pillars, or at least shakes it,
and has been corrupting you since? Only on the negative side, because your original question
was both the positive side and the negative side. I want to talk about the positive first,
it's okay. It's difficult to say that it's because of our last discussion, because I already knew
John's material. So I already sort of have my favorite thing amongst the many things he says,
and then he said it again, in our last debate. So that's the thing that is always with me. And
I think that's one of the most critical things in our culture today, which is to have a correct
understanding of what wisdom means. I think we've thumbled that idea so badly in the West,
that we've lost our guys. We just do not know who to look up to for orientation. And I like to call
the idolatry of nerds. And the word nerd is appropriate, because it means that somebody
has chosen one amongst many psychic skills to center his entire life and ignore all our other
psychic functions and organs, all the other things that are key constituents of wisdom.
And we take our cue now from nerds who have an axe to grind, as opposed to true wisdom.
And John takes this seriously. He just doesn't say, well, our definition of wisdom is wrong.
This is the right definition. He makes it a study area. He invites you to explore that question.
He doesn't whitewash it. He doesn't make it look simple. He gives it the depth that it fundamentally
has. And he doesn't give you a ready answer. But he shows us the way to sort of revise our
exploration of that question. I think this is pretty central. I don't want to get across
as too exaggerated, but it's honest to what I'm about to say. I think it's central to whether
we will make it as a civilization or not. It's central to whether we will survive. Look,
the planet will survive if we screw up badly, give it a million years, and the planet's a
garden again, just without us. Not even without us, because the Australian aboriginals, the Inuits,
the Bushmen in Africa, they have the skills to survive that. The question is whether our culture,
our way of life, our accumulated knowledge, our civilization, will survive. And I think
that question rests to a large degree on a better understanding of wisdom and a better choice about
who we take our directions from. So that, I think, is pretty central. Now, the thing that
made me upset, nothing made me upset, really. So I'd rather choose one of the things that John
said now. I'll take this as an opportunity to try to weave a defense. It's normal, by the way,
that I am on the defense, because I make of my work a metaphysics question. John doesn't.
So if the disagreement is on a metaphysics question, of course I am the one who will be on
the defense, because I am the one who is trying to make an explicit case. John's case doesn't
rest on metaphysics, so he doesn't need to be as explicit. So in a sense, it's natural that I have
a much bigger target painted on my forehead than he has. It's by construction. So he said now
that he sees that there is some symmetry between the analogy of dissociation,
doing what it needs to do to serve the purpose I want it to serve, and an appeal to emergence.
I will take the liberty to disagree. I don't think the symmetry is there, but I recognize the point
because I have heard this made many times before. And if the point is made very explicit, it goes
something like this. If I am a dissociated alter of universal consciousness in you too,
I happen to be here looking at you. I can shake your hand. I can talk to you. I see you around.
But the altars of a person with dissociative identity disorder don't see each other. They
don't shake hands. They are not inhabiting a common environment. So the analogy doesn't work
all the way. It doesn't do what I wanted to do. I think that's not true, because we are taking
the analogy at the wrong level. Remember, we as altars of universal consciousness, we are in a
shared mental environment by my hypothesis. If you take my hypothesis to be true for the sake of
argument, we share a mental environment. And so we see each other within that mental environment.
You cannot compare that to the altars in the mind of a person. You cannot expect those
altars to see each other in the external world, because there is no external world from the
point of view of a universal mind. Everything is within that mind. So if you want to make
a comparison correctly, you have to look at the world within the mind of a person with DID
and not expect that the altars will see each other in the external world. So the correct
analogy is to look at the dreams of a person with DID and compare that to this, a dream of
my universe that undergoes dissociation. Because in both cases, then it's within that
mental context. Then it's a correct comparison. So let's look at the dreams with people with DID.
It turns out research from Harvard indicates that 25%, one quarter of people with DID,
they have dreams in which multiple altars partake in the same dream. And they see each other in the
dream. They hear each other in the dream. They interact with each other in the dream. How do
they know that? Because when the person recalls the dream, afterwards, each altar recalls the
dream from a different point of view. And they identify the other altars as characters in the
dream. So if that's the correct comparison, I would say, well, 25% is a very statistically
significant number. I would say the analogy does what it's supposed to do. If you look at it at
the correct level for comparison. Now, I will acknowledge that we don't have a full and explicit
conceptual account of dissociation. It has to do with inferential isolation. It has to do with
pathways to memory access. We know that we have pieces of the puzzle, but we don't have a complete
puzzle assemble that tells us this is the conceptual account of what dissociation is and how it
happens. Well, mainly how it happens. We know what it is. But I would say, well, that is secondary.
It takes a second seat to the fact that it empirically happens. And now there is no question
about it from neuroimaging that it does happen. There is something dissociation looks like. It
can make you blind, literally. So the fact that we don't have a conceptual account for it is not
a detriment to one's ability to use dissociation in an explanatory framework, because whether we
conceptually understand it or not, it happens. It's all there in nature. Now, you can't say the
same thing about strong emergence, because how do you have an empirical account of strong emergence
that is independent of your theoretical assumptions? That's not possible, because all you can say,
well, this phenomenon exists. But to say that it is an empirical instance of strong emergence,
you have to say that there is something there that is physically real and which fundamentally
cannot be accounted for in terms of its constituent parts. Now, that's impossible today and probably
forever, because the fastest computers we have, if they were to run simulations of nature on the
basis of first principles, the laws and the standard model of particle physics, you could
simulate maybe 100 particles. A thousand would already be on the edge. You can't simulate a
protein molecule, a complex one, starting from first principles from the laws of quantum mechanics
and the standard model, because it's an explosion of complexity. So it is impossible to appeal to
an empirical fact about strong emergence, but it is entirely possible to do that for dissociation.
So that's how I would wrap up my defense. John, what do you think? Make sure from now on, we don't
say he, we don't say John, you say you, because you're speaking to Bernardo and Bernardo. I
am in the background. I am just an observer. I did say Bernardo most of the time I was talking
last night. I'll try to say you and Bernardo. I think you could strengthen your case by the
work that's also been done on lucid dreaming. This sounds, and maybe that's relevant to the
discussion we're going to have later about religion, this sounds very similar to sort of
identity ideas about Brahman and Brahman dreaming. And in the dream, that's how the world,
I mean, so the dream mechanism is ultimately the main mechanism by which the ontology unfolds.
And the problem that again arises for me is most of the empirical accounts of dreaming
presuppose a distinction between conscious and unconscious processing to explain
the phenomenology of the dream. So that, you know, I have a certain amount of consciousness,
but I'm not aware of all the unconscious processes that are then generating the alternatives. And
it seems to me then, if you're going to invoke dreaming, you're going to invoke the ontology
that we currently use empirically to explain it, which posits a very strong distinction between
conscious processes and unconscious processes, like in order to explain what dreams have the
content they do and why they have the features they do, etc. Like why is this coming up? Well,
because there's an unconscious process that's doing memory compression, it's removing parasitic
programs, and that's why these figures come up, etc, etc. And so I think to invoke dreaming is,
you know, perhaps problematic, because it ultimately invokes the existence of an unconscious,
which I ultimately, I don't think you can pause it yet for, you know, consciousness at large,
there can't be an unconsciousness for unconscious, for consciousness at large, because then you do
have at the substantial level of your fundamental metaphysics, you have a dualism, and I know you
reject ultimately such dualism. So that would be the issue I would have there about that.
If that makes any sense, it does, it does, we touched on it last time. And I appealed to the
difference between this phenomenally conscious and phenomenally unconscious divide. And my point
was, well, it's all phenomenally conscious, but there is still a divide. There is a divide between
the two sides of a dissociative boundary, and there is a divide between metacognitive consciousness
and non metacognitive consciousness processes that are conscious, you are experiencing,
but you don't know that you are experiencing them. So you can't even report them to yourself.
Things like blind sight, for instance, that seem to be going in that direction.
So I just wrote a book about Jung's metaphysics. So this stuff is still very fresh in my mind.
I don't have a problem with the idea of an unconscious as defined implicitly or explicitly
by Jung Freud and Johnny, because I think they are very clear repeatedly about it throughout
their corpus, corpuses, that what they are alluding to as the unconscious is psychic,
but non metacognitive. Jung goes beyond, Jung adds even more stuff to make the definition even more
specific. He says it has to be connected in a web of associative meanings. So you have to place it
into a context for it to be conscious. But the general idea is that they are not saying that
the unconscious is non phenomenal. They are just adding higher level mental functions to what is
psychic, which is phenomenal, I think, to differentiate what consciousness means. And even
dissociation, I think, could be appealed to you to account for the quote unconscious in the sense
that our ego is largely dissociated from the totality of our being. I mean, most of us, we
identify with their adaptive selves, not with our natural selves. That natural self we were
when we were five years old. And by the time we are seven, it begins to slip away. By the time
you go to college, it's gone. And then it's a struggle later in life to sort of reconnect with
your natural self. So I think that speaks volumes. I mean, there's a lot of clinical evidence about
this. And I think that speaks volumes to the idea that not only are we not metacognitive of the vast
majority of our phenomenal contents, our experiences, but even the part of us that we identify with
that subset of phenomenal consciousness that we identify with seems to be in the context of our
culture, very, very largely dissociated, whatever dissociation conceptually is, seems to be very
largely dissociated from the totality of what we are. That's a good answer. But I guess the reply,
and I don't know how much more we can go on this, because this is, well, maybe going in this direction
is also very, on its own, an interesting thing. So Cyril made this a similar argument. And then
he argued that the unconscious ultimately has to be accessible to consciousness. And he did that in
terms of, you know, anything that's cognitive is representational, representations are aspectual,
aspectual as dependent on a point of view. And Ergo, he said he was willing to count
it something like a Jungian, he said Freudian, but that doesn't matter. I think for the point
he's making unconscious. And he would therefore say that even the so-called unconscious processes
insofar as they become genuinely cognitive processes have to at least be accessible to
phenomenal consciousness. That's his argument. Now, the debate that swirled around that was,
he seemed to be denying what people have sort of called the Chomsky and unconscious,
which is an unconscious that is never accessible to us. For example, the processing that's
happening right now for you, whereby the sounds coming out of my face hole are becoming ideas in
your mind, you have no introspective, and there's nothing I can put you through psychoanalysis for
30 years, and you'll never access that. And so, I mean, it seems plausible to conclude that that's,
you know, the cognitive unconscious doesn't need to have access to phenomenal experience in order
to operate and process. And that's sort of the general view within a lot of cognitive psychology
that we, in fact, most of our explanations of human behavior require that Chomsky and unconscious.
Why can you only hold for chunks and working memory? You don't have any introspective access
to that limitation. It's functional. You deeply depend on it, but you can't bring that into,
you can't stand back and go, oh, that, now I'm experiencing why working memory is constrained.
And so, I guess since we're in here, what do you think of the proposal of, you'll allow me to call
it as, we'll call it what Jung and Freud did just for purposes of distinction, the psychodynamic
unconscious and what I'm talking about as the cognitive unconscious. And what I was proposing,
the connection was that I think a lot of dreaming, I'm not denying there isn't a psychodynamic
unconscious for dreams. That would be ridiculous. I'm not claiming that at all. What I'm claiming,
though, is that there's also the cognitive unconscious for dreams. And that seems to be
something that's operating without ever needing to have access to phenomenal, phenomenal experience.
Yeah, I think, look, I think what we call consciousness, which is better called meta
consciousness, and that this is metacognitive awareness, which entails not only representation,
but internal re-representation of mental contents. It's, evolutionarily speaking,
a recent acquisition, right? It came hand in hand with symbolic thinking and language.
So we are talking, what, 30, 50,000 years? I mean, to say that it's the blink of an eye in the three
and a half billion years of the existence of life on this planet is a major exaggeration.
It's much less than the blink of an eye. It popped up yesterday. Now, why should it
be comprehensive enough to encompass everything about the psyche? Why would evolution
favor that? Evolution will favor re-representation of things that would give us a survival advantage
to ponder about. But processes that need to have very quick reaction time or which
never need to be re-represented in order to be effective. Why would we develop the ability to
re-represent those? Why should the scope of meta consciousness be all-encompassing? There's no
reason for that. For Freud, I think the idea of a cognitive unconscious is much more palatable,
because for Freud, the unconscious is made of former contents of consciousness. So it is consciousness
that is the mother of the unconscious. The unconscious is just repressed, forgotten,
former contents of consciousness. So it's much more friendly to this idea that for something
to be psychic, it has to be at least in principle cognitively accessible. But for Jung,
it's totally different because for Jung, consciousness is a growth out of the unconscious.
The unconscious is creative. It's the matrix of being. And I would think that Jung's position
is more consistent with what we now know about the phylogenetics of the human psyche,
how we came from an anatomically human creature 200,000 years ago,
devoid of the ability to think symbolically, which of course preempts meta cognition,
because what is a re-representation but an internal symbol? And in only 30 or 50,000 years ago,
we've developed this ability to explicitly introspect into the contents of our psyche.
I think that's more in line with the Jungian hypothesis that the unconscious is the matrix.
And if that's the case, then I would say we have absolutely no reason to demand from evolution
a null, encompassing consciousness in the sense that the depth psychologists defined it. In other
words, meta consciousness. Why should meta consciousness be all-encompassing? There seems
to be no evolutionary advantage for that. On the contrary, even a disadvantage because pondering
entails delay. And some reactions need to be immediate and quick.
So I appreciate that answer. I wasn't trying to give an ontological priority or a causal history.
I was trying to say that our own consciousness in the argument about consciousness has an
epistemological priority. And it seems to me that you're saying that our meta cognitive or
introspective aspect of consciousness is actually fundamentally ontologically inaccurate. It doesn't
grasp it as it truly is. And then my problem is it's sort of a Kantian argument. Then the
consciousness you're talking about is kind of a thing in itself for which I don't have any
experiential evidence. And again, it seems to me that then epistemologically we're back to a
symmetrical argument again. I think you could say that whatever is meta conscious is perforce,
phenomenally conscious. In other words, it entails qualities, it entails experience,
and some experiencing of some form. So the jump from what is metacognitively conscious to what
is only phenomenally conscious, but not metacognitively so, is an extrapolation in degree
but not in kind. Because it is still phenomenal, it's still phenomenal conscious of the same kind
that you can become explicitly aware of when you introspect. And in addition to that, there are
things that I mean, most people I think who pay attention to introspection have had that experience,
you may become only later in life explicitly or metacognitively aware of something that
retroactively you know you were experiencing over long, you just didn't know that you were
experiencing those. So I don't deny that, I don't deny that we can retrospectively
have metacognitive access, but it seems to me that the way the I mean the phenomenality,
the phenomenality of my consciousness is of here and now localized consciousness.
The idea that is consciousness at large is not phenomenologically accessible to me.
And so I was trying to point out that my only instance, sorry I want to say this very correct,
not my only theoretical, my only phenomenal instance of consciousness is my own. I agree
with you that that doesn't license solipsism, but that seems to indicate to me that you are
like positing a kind of consciousness for which I have no phenomenological evidence.
And that's why in the discussion I wanted to say, well, I don't have phenomenological
introspective evidence for it, right, which then you're nodding, so thank you. And so I need some
independent argument from it at large that doesn't just presuppose consciousness at large
in order to make that move. But you always need to extrapolate somehow unless you're a solipsist,
then you say all that exists is my personal experience and everything else is a story I'm
making up. So you always need to extrapolate. We agree on that, we agree on that, so take
that as a given. Like I said, I'm at that level, I'm a neoplatonist and the intelligibility of the
we at least whatever, but we both call it the external world, we have different
reference for it, but I take that for granted. And I take that as something that I take,
I'm a realist about reason in that sense.
Can you not get to mind at large via experience from psychedelics or a deep meditative state,
Bernardo? If I follow John's argument line, you could say, well, in a sense, yes, but then that
already becomes your personal experience. So to say that that's not your personal experience becomes
your personal experience becomes a theoretical move based on what you identify yourself with,
what you believe is information you could have access to as a person. So you can make that
inference, but it's immediately a theoretical inference, which doesn't mean that it's invalid,
I think it's valid, but in John's argument line, he can maintain his argument despite this,
because he can say, well, yes, you can make that inference, but that inference is still
based on your personal experience, your personal experience of something impersonal or transpersonal.
However, in response to your current directive back when to you, Bernardo, when we did discuss
these experiences, and I've had them, like of the pre-consciousness event or, you know,
profound experiences of non-dual oneness, they gave me, and if I remember correctly, and I may
be remembering incorrectly, because memory isn't reconstructive. One of the things I was just
deluding to a few minutes ago when I don't know how or why that happens, I mean phenomenologically,
but it gave me something that at least sort of in a Kantian sense, I could give what Kant would
call an intuition, there was some empirical experience that I could use to give content
to the proposal you were making of cosmic mind. So although I agree with you, and thank you for
defending me, that was gracious on your part, that it doesn't get, I think, beyond the symmetry
issue, I do think that your acknowledgement about that that might be a better place to look
for making the extrapolation, I found that personally helpful. I found that helpful in
the discussion because I got a better sense of, and that brings me back to the point where now
maybe we can move, this is how we're apart, and I really do want to try and close the gap. I don't
think we'll close it all the way, but because when I'm in that state, I get a sense of what
perhaps Whitehead is meeting by prehension, because there aren't objects, there's this
oneness where everything is prehending everything else. Do you mind defining prehension for the
audience? Yeah, so for Whitehead, he's trying to get a word other than experience or feeling,
which he's also willing to use, and that would be, I know you're not a panpsychist, Bernardo,
but like I said, I am sincerely trying to do bridge building here, and I did talk about that
with Matt. So he came up with the term because he wanted to get away from the terms experience
and feeling because they were laden with our egocentric sense of these terms, and that would
make him guilty of kind of a lazy anthropomorphism, for example, and he was very worried about that,
I think legitimately so. And to be fair to him, the people, you've got Heisenberg and other people
talking about these connections that seem to be going on between consciousness and the emergence
of quantum particles and things like that, and I don't want to get into all the rule around that,
I'm just trying to give a bit of background for explanation, and I know Bernardo does not
rely on that rule, and so I'm not accusing anybody of anything here, I'm just trying to.
But so Jung was very interested in, and then, not Jung, Whitehead was very interested in,
and he was trying to get at, okay, again, if we take the root of ancient epistemology rather than
Cartesian epistemology, Gerson does a good job of it, right? The Cartesian project,
which I think is prototypical for modernity's understanding of epistemology, you start from
first person experience, and you try to build the world out from that, and that has become extremely
problematic. Ancient epistemology says no, assume that knowledge is real, and then what kind of
ontology must there be in order for there to be knowledge, and it works, it works outward in
rather than inward out, and I think Gerson makes a good case for we should go back and really look
at that as a serious alternative because of the deep binds epistemology is now in.
All the, I think all the attempts to build foundations have basically crumbled.
Okay, all of that said, Whitehead said, I'm going to presuppose that there's intelligibility,
and there's causation, and he's very well aware of the humane problem, you know, about causation,
and then he's very well aware of Kant, and he's trying to get beyond both of those.
So what he's saying is what we need to understand is how the past is real in the present,
right? So instead of thinking of the events as billiard balls that are isolated from each other
and somehow have some specious present content, what we have to see is how the past is realized,
and I'm using that in both senses in the present. So the idea is, his idea is, and if you think about
let me do a little bit of a thought experiment to help make this plausible. I'm just arguing for
its plausibility right now, right? So if I asked you, you know, what caused the sinking of the
Titanic, notice that your answer is dependent on the event you want to explain, like, well,
it hit an iceberg. But why did it sink in the North Atlantic? Oh, well, because they were competing
with the Americans. Why did it sink on April whatever? Well, because the iceberg broke off then.
Why is there ice there? Well, here's the previous period of glacial, and eventually what you get
is the entire previous history of the universe, which is the actual, and this is sort of a
Hegelian point, which is the actual explanation of any event. And then, and then Whitehead said,
well, that's, that's all of these events are somehow prehending each other in so far as they
come into this event. So things have things are prehending each other in so far as the past
comes into the present and also in so far as the present affords the future. And so if you can sort
of think, you can think of all of the universe coming into this event, but also that event over
there. And then all of these events are also being drawn together, all these new emergent events are
being drawn together into the new events that are happening. And so things have this prehensive
relationship to each other. They are, they are, they are realizing, and I'm really playing on
that word, they are realizing and being realized in each other. And then Whitehead said, and this
is also why he used the word prehension, because it's at the root of our word apprehension,
comprehension, a fundamental sort of intelligibility process. And his idea is that realization
within things, very similar to Platinus's idea that everything is contemplating, but it's not
like how we contemplate, right? It's, it's, it's of the same kind as the cognitive realizations
that we're having when we are comprehending or apprehending things. And so there's a deep continuity
between the way reality is realizing itself and the way we come to moments of realization of
reality. Did that work at all? Or was that really confusing? Ian McCoghurst is making this point now
recently. It's his latest. Excuse me. And so I, I mean, I had a conversation with Jonathan
Peugeot, who should definitely appear on this channel, by the way, Kurt. And I'm happy to come
on and have a, have a discussion with him at some point. There is a conversation between me and
Jonathan. No, no, no, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, that's what I meant. I mean, one of these,
and because I was, I was in debate, again, this kind of debate, sorry, Bernardo, I'm talking quite
a bit. It's okay, go ahead. It's very enjoyable and none, none. So I was having like, like one of
these, a fellowship debate, the logos with him about this. And he said to me, he said, well,
John, don't you think there's something like relevance realization going on in reality at
large? He was proposing, of course, the Platonic idea of the logos, he's a Christian politeness,
because he's, he's an Orthodox in the sense of Eastern Orthodox Christian. And I, and I said,
what do you mean? And he said, well, and we sort of had to tease it out, because it was, it was
sort of an unclear idea. But, but we worked it out together. And he was, and then I realized
he was proposing something like Whitehead, you know, here's all the possibilities that are
metaphysically available. And then there's something that constrains them, the possibilities
that constrains them to write to actual events. And he said, and then that affords and makes
possible, and it rules out certain things. And he says, isn't there something analogous? And then
I thought, hmm, that's a very interesting proposal that there's something analogous to
intelligence going on in the universe. And there's something analogous to how relevance
realization works. And that would help to metaphysically ground the intelligibility
of the universe, because there would be, you know, a participatory conformity, a shared
kind of identity between the way reality is realizing itself and the way cognition realizes
itself. And then for me, that came together in Nishitani's proposal, that religion is the real
self realization of reality. That's when you get to these states of pure consciousness enlightenment,
there's no deep difference between the realization, the relevance realization going on here. And if
you'll allow me the intelligibility realization going on out there. And that actually, because I
think without genuine participation, and I think this is where Bernardo and I perhaps agree, you
don't have a real response to absolute skepticism. There has to be some way in which the mind and
the world are fundamentally the same in order for knowledge to be possible between them. And so
I know this isn't your position, Bernardo, but I hope you could see how, you know,
in the last two weeks of reflection, I feel like it's closer to your position at least.
It's probably closer than you think. I mean, I wouldn't go as far as to give complete ontological
power to cognition or to the epistemic side of things. But there are many lines of evidence
indicating that how the world is cognized plays an enormous role in what the world can be said to be.
Yeah. There is a physicist from the Austrian Academy of Sciences, I quote him a lot recently,
Markus Miller. And he tries to develop a physics of first person perspective. So his idea is that
what we call the objective outside world is constructed by an inferential process that we
make. We ask ourselves questions like, what does the world need to be in order for me to
account for this observation? And he claims that if we construct our world inferentially like that,
then statistically, you can prove that your world will be consistent with mine and with
everybody else's. Even though it's not an objective world, it's constructed by our own
inferences. It emerges from a first person perspective. We also have evidence now, well,
evidence, there's mathematics sort of showing that. What is his name? It's a British neuroscientist.
Forgot his name. But he shows that unless perception would be largely inferential,
in other words, instead of mirroring the states of the world as it is in itself, we sort of
constructed by inference. Unless that is the case, we couldn't maintain our structural and
dynamic integrity. Carl Friston. Right, predictive processing. There's a lot of
work going on right now and if people are interested, there's a video I recently had with
Brett Anderson about the need to integrate predictive processing and relevance realization
models together. I won't go into the argument detail, but the main argument is, and Friston,
by the way, has moved and said, when he's using the word inference, he's using it
like not necessarily representationally. He's embodied inactive senses of that.
I'm not pinning into any kind of propositional tyranny. He has explicitly moved away from that
as has Andy Clark. When we say inference, they always do this now, which is fine. I'm happy
with that. I want to make clear that they're not falling into some sort of simplistic
Cartesian thing. The idea is you need something what's called precision waiting within predictive
processing. It's basically the attentional function. The main argument is what you can see
is the relevance realization machinery work and the precision waiting that's at the core
of predictive processing actually integrate really, really nicely together. I do think,
you know, Friston's idea that the brain is predicting itself
proximately. And as it gets really good at predicting itself proximately,
it distally ends up predicting the world quite well. And like I said, I'm a realist about this
because I think, and again, the evidence that most of our perception is accurate prediction
rather than accurate detection. I don't like when people say it's a hallucination because
hallucinations are by definition not true. What we have is accurate prediction. So it looks like
I'm seeing the whole wall over there is white. Actually, I'm sub tending a few pieces sampling
and I'm doing really, really good theorizing again in scare quotes that's giving me accurate
prediction. So again, for me, but I take it that there's something about the way the world is
such that that works, right? And that there's an intelligibility. So like, for example, what
epistemologies are am I rejecting just to be clear by contrast, I'm rejecting a very romantic
epistemology that says the blank the world out there is a blank cabinets on which I project.
And I and the construction is arbitrary and subjective on my part. And I'm also rejecting
the empiricist position. No, no, I'm just a blank slate that receives the truth from the world.
I think both of those are deeply undermined. And so agree with you. Both accounts. Yes. And so
that's why I've tried to coin this idea of transjectivity. The idea is that the world's
intelligibility and my relevance realization machinery together are co creating the knowledge.
You have to talk to you on my go first. I have I talked to him once we have a beautiful
conversation. We do want to talk again. It's just a matter of us. And what we agreed is
I would wait until his book on wisdom was done, which it now is. So I'm going to finish. He finished
his weekend. You're supposed to finish mid May. So I'm going to reach out to him and yeah, we'll
have another discussion with him. It was a wonderful discussion. So for me, and I don't
know if we want to segue now, I don't want to bully the conversation. But for me, that and
Bernardo's right. I mean, sort of the deepest ontology for me doesn't have to be resolved one
way or the other. Although I am, like I said, I'm trying to show that I take his work seriously,
and I'm trying to respond by moving my position. And because I think we should be the Socratic
ideal is we should be responsible to well presented arguments. So I'm not denying that, but this
notion of trans activity and the co determination co creation between intelligibility, this,
which I call a participatory knowing. For me, that's the ultimate grounding relationship for
meaning in life. And I think one of the reasons why I kept hesitating around the Cartesian proposal
is I think are and Bernardo, I think said something very constant with it, our reduction of our sense
of who we are as cognitive agents to proposers of propositions has disconnected us from procedural
respectable and ultimately this participatory kind of knowing that grounds and grounds in depth
are capacity for being connected to ourselves to each other in the world. And that for me is the
most significant contributor of the meaning crisis, not independent of all the historical
reasons, but I think the historical reasons ultimately bite into us existentially at that
deep kind of forgetting we are having. Now, we're not forgetting it functionally. And this is where
Bernardo's distinction between, you know, it being realized and it being met a cognitively
appreciated comes to the fore. Although we've lost our metacognitive access to all these kinds
of knowing, they're of course still operating in us, or else I wouldn't see this floor as walkable.
I'm not doing that, right? It's the world, this is Gibson's idea that the affordance emerges in
the co-shaping of the world and me together, etc. But that metacognitive loss, which I think
translates into a spiritual loss, I would say grounds out in an ontological issue.
Namely, the issue of what is it about the meaning making, what makes that possible,
what affords that. So, I'll say two sentences, hopefully or three, and then I'll turn it back
over to Bernardo. And it's sincere. I'm trying to move and get closer, because I think at least
the movement that I'm capable of making right now, maybe I'm still resistant, but I'm trying to be
responsible, right, helps to strengthen this account, this ancient epistemological account
of the deep participation between intelligence and intelligibility that makes meaning in life
possible for us. And that shouldn't be understood as the content, the semantic content of our
propositions. And I think even though he may go deeper than I do, we at least converge below
that propositional level of meaning making. At least it seems to me.
If the goal was for us to get closer to each other, I think we can high five right now.
We've met at a place where I'm entirely comfortable to be with you. I'm more and more
open to this idea of co-creation. Although I'll be honest with you, I started out as a
objective idealist. The world is really out there. It is whatever it is. And it happens to be mental
and it presents itself to my dashboard of perceptual instruments as what I call the physical world.
But more and more as I keep studying the work of people like Ian, Marcus Miller, yourself,
it's becoming clear to me that I think even at an ontological level, this participatory co-creation
is deeper than just at the story level. It's not just a nice story. There is ontological
teeth to this. And for me, what is important is that if we have empirical and rational reasons
to contemplate a theory of reality seriously that does give this participatory co-creation
ontological teeth, then we should leverage that because otherwise it becomes just psychology
and not real. And I think that's where the search for meaning can flounder because people like me
who are always critically questioning everything. If this story reinvests my life with meaning
and it intuitively resonates profoundly with me, but I don't have a coherent, explicit and
well-constructed conceptual theory of reality that gives it plausible ontological teeth,
then I run away from it driven by this need to not deceive myself, which for me is instinctual,
knowing it. I agree. And so I think it's fair and honest to say that I'm trying to do that
and part of that process is I have explicitly argued that I think in fact it should be
is a dialogical process. I'm aware of my side bias and confirmation bias and things like that.
And I'm also aware that the Neoplatonic tradition talked about both the dialectic within the
individual and between individuals and then between individuals in reality and coordinating those
three dialectics is something that I think is going to be needed for doing this. So I appreciate
what you said. I had understood that. How do I want to put this?
I didn't do enough. I'll be more self-critical. I didn't do enough about trying to bring together
what you might call the cognitive scientific machinery and what I'll call for my sake,
the Neoplatonic ontology. I talked about it, but I did not foreground that in Awakening for the
Meaning Crisis. I've been trying to do that more recently in conversations like with you,
like with Matt, like with Sam Adams, and like with Jonathan Peugeot. So that is very much and
this is not to, I mean, I think I'm pursuing them reliably and rigorously. I'm not claiming to be
anywhere near finished. That would just be ridiculous and hubristic. So I take your point
seriously is what I'm trying to say and I see myself as trying to address that lacuna in
previous work, which is one of the reasons why I want to be here and do this, what's happening right
now. I don't like versions of idealism and I made it clear that I'm not putting this on you,
Fernando. I don't like versions of idealism that afford spiritual bypassing, that afford not taking
seriously science. One of the things that continually impressed me is both your knowledge of and your
respect for empirical and theoretical science. You should know maybe you move in different
circles than I do. That's not the norm for the people that I interact with when I'm largely up
against people who propose cosmic consciousness and things like that. And so to the degree to which
that's being used to do spiritual bypassing, I will remain opposed to it because like you,
I think if we make it purely a psychological project, we're ultimately still being romantics.
We're ultimately still saying I'm making and I'm, even the favorite word of the romantics,
I'm expressing it. I'm expressing it onto the world. And so I'm deeply critical of that.
So I do think, and I think we agreed on this last time, but just to bring it foregrounded again,
I do think that there's an inescapable ontological dimension and a needed reconstruction of our
ontology in order to finally address the meaning crisis. Now, the one concern I have,
and this is not a philosophical concern between you and I, is the issue of how do we do that
without making it a requirement that everybody who wants to respond to the meaning crisis
engage in the education that's required to undertake this kind of ontological discussion.
So you understand what I'm trying to say? It definitely has epistemological
priority, but that we don't want to hijack the existential project by giving it existential
priority. Exactly. That's the key question. Yeah. What would be useful would be to get
your views on mind uploading, because I think this will further the distinction between you both.
So Bernardo, what are your thoughts on mind uploading? Is it possible? Is it ridiculous?
So could you be more specific, Kurt, because there's different, there's different,
I mean mind uploading is we're being uploaded into some universal simulation.
That's very different from, I could upload my mind into some computational device.
They carry all kinds of different ontological commitments. So about the second one where
the Ray Kurzweilian one. You want to ask me what I think about it? Bernardo.
Complete another nonsense. I agree. I agree. Not deserving of academic credibility.
Yeah, I agree. Totally. Because it's a it's a category confusion.
We are basically pre-assuming that a description of our minds is our minds,
because what you upload is a description. What you upload is a copy of states,
at least relative to one another, not even absolutely, because the substrate is different.
One is an organic substrate. The other one is a silicon substrate.
But even if you ignore this glaring, absolutely significant difference,
and you fall into the sea of abstraction that today is plaguing academia,
to the point that we have achieved lift off from the terra firma of reality,
and we now engage in endless pure abstraction, even if I concede, which I don't,
but even if I were to concede that the substrate has no significance,
which of course it has, but even then to upload a copy of the states from one substrate to another
doesn't necessarily mean that you've transferred the thing in itself, which is described.
We use this metaphor again. I use it all the time, but I don't want to overuse it,
but it brings it to life. I can simulate kidney function on my computer accurately,
down to the molecular detail, but that doesn't mean my computer will pee on my desk.
So mind uploading is something that you could see the same way.
You can upload a very accurate description of the states of my mind, the dynamisms of my mind,
into a silicon substrate, and replicate those dynamisms in that other substrate with complete
accuracy. That doesn't mean that my mind has moved to that silicon substrate,
or that the silicon substrate has a conscious copy of me to assume that it is,
entails so many assumptions about the nature of mind, the nature of metabolism, the nature of
silicon, the nature of information. I mean, it's a hidden pile of arbitrary unjustified
assumptions that one needs to overlook to take this idea even seriously to begin with.
So I think this is just an expression of the profound confusion that faces our culture today,
and which affects the most intelligent, intelligence defined in a very restricted,
old fashioned way, but it unfairly affects the most intelligent segments of our culture
more than people who are, quote, less intelligent between air quotes,
but are much more grounded in reality. Look, I am by original education, a computer engineer.
I emphasize the engineering over computer science, which I could also say I was,
but engineering is grounded in the sense that, you know, whatever theories are,
engineering is about what works. That's how I started. And we had, at least the people I was
involved with, we had physical intuition about what computation is. But today, I see computer
scientists out there, some of which you have interviewed, I found out a couple of days ago,
who are waving a PhD around and get a lot of airtime. But these guys don't have anything more
than a fake conceptual intuition about what real computing is. They operate on 20 levels
of abstraction, pre-assuming the existence of all kinds of tools, all kinds of APIs,
all kinds of things, and they live in that world of pure abstraction, so disconnected from reality
that some of them will tell you, well, I built a conscious machine the other day.
Really? Okay. So what do you think of Yosha Bach's idea of consciousness as a simulated
property of computation? It's totally nonsensical, spouted out by somebody who has no clue what he's
talking about. Okay. Do you mind telling the audience, because what I said was one sentence
description, do you mind giving them a better sense as to what Yosha's point of view is,
and then telling us why you think it's nonsense? And then, John, I imagine you agree,
but I imagine you agree perhaps for different reasons, so that at that point I'd like you to
come in. Yeah, I agree for those reasons and convergent reasons, but I'll be quiet. So, Bernardo,
explain Yosha Bach's point of view. Well, I'm not a specialist on his particular point of view.
I recall that I have had an interaction with him, but many years ago, he came to my website, and
ultimately, I think I had to block him, because he was how they call trolling me online at some
point. The beginning of our exchanges were objective, were based on argument, but it got
to a point where he just sort of went down the deep end. I don't know what motivated that change.
I'm not a specialist in his particular content. I have seen snapshots here and there. So I
rather speak more generally of this notion that consciousness is a simulation. This is one instance
of a trick that is very tempting to apply in our culture. It's a trick against your own self,
which is to explain what is fundamentally not explainable in terms of the assumptions we make
by redefining that which we want to explain. You see, for instance, we have no idea what
consciousness is. There is a hard problem of consciousness. So if we make reductionist
physicalist assumptions, and I'm using the word reductionist here to differentiate that from
John's position, if we start from reductionist physicalist assumptions, you have an impossible
problem to deduce the qualities of experience from physical parameters alone. That's called the
hard problem of consciousness. So consciousness becomes unexplainable. So what's the move that a
lot of people do? They define consciousness as opposed to explaining it. So some people will say,
well, I solved the hard problem. Consciousness is the electromagnetic field dynamic surrounding
your neocortex. That's not an explanation. That's a redefinition. I can do the same thing. I can
say consciousness is the involuntary wiggling of my left big toe. Hard problem solved. I have a friend
who calls it the Pinocchio theories of consciousness, which are explanations by redefinition. It's not
entirely arbitrary because they're usually leveraging some empirical correlations. There is
a correlation between electromagnetic field dynamics surrounding the neocortex and reported
experience. Or there is a correlation between electrochemical neuronal firings and reported
experience. So it leverages those correlations loosely and then explains by redefining the term.
Now, we only get away with this with the one profound mystery that seems inaccessible to our
reductionist physicalist assumptions, which is consciousness. For everything else,
it would be immediately perceived as a clown if you tried to do something like that to explain
anything else. But our intuitions of plausibility fail when it comes to consciousness. We sort
of become gullible, collectively gullible to all kinds of nonsense because it's such a mysterious
thing that you sort of give yourself freedom to entertain stupidity validated by the notion that
you needed to entertain something far out in order to sort of squeeze this into the parameters of
reductionist physicalism. There is no other way. Therefore, it becomes plausible by construction.
But that plausibility is an artifact of the assumptions you make. It has nothing to do with
reason and empirical evidence. So to say consciousness is just a simulation is as arbitrary as to say
consciousness is the wiggling of my left big toe. Are you explaining anything by saying this? No,
you're explaining nothing. You are just engaging into an orgy of conceptual fantasies and losing
ground with the concreteness of the world, with the concreteness of our own being as
organic beings, metabolizing beings. I find this approach to things no better than fantastical
fantasizing, just as stupid as fantastic fantasizing. John, your thoughts. Well, first of all, that
was beautiful. And I enjoyed being present for that. You know, I also object to, you know,
explaining woo with goo, which a lot of these things are, you know, like, you know, this is weird,
and this is weird. Oh, therefore, therefore. Yeah, exactly. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. So I agree with a lot
of what Bernardo said. I think it's a ridiculous proposal. And I think the fact that we're taking
it seriously, he flies in the face of good theoretical argument, like Bernardo just said,
and even are accumulating empirical evidence. I'll talk a bit about the second first, but I
put it because I want to give more emphasis to the theoretical points. I mean, what was giving
some initial plausibility was computer human interface. And initially, what's surprising
is two things. So for example, notice how this doesn't get as much press as the other. So,
you know, we're getting machines that can look, you know, do significant EEG and tell what you're
thinking. Tell if you're thinking of Apple or Pear, never anything abstract, by the way. Well,
it turns out that now we've realized that all of those experiments were bullshit. They all suffer
from failure of replication if you control for confounds within the data. So all goes away.
Right. So it's initially weight, right? Maybe, you know, finding one-to-one neural correlates
between our shared concepts and what's happening in our brains is, you know, not maybe that's
something we should challenge. Michael Anderson, for example, in his book, After Phrenology,
has said, we should be giving up the idea of, like, strictly localized functions, etc., in the
brain. So even that kind of reading idea that I can somehow do that, it is, it's, so I'm not,
I'm not saying it's been falsified. I'm saying the stuff that gave it empirical plausibility
has vanished. And so the historical inability to find the neural correlate of consciousness,
right, which everybody sort of grudgingly agrees to right now, points out that this is actually a
really, really hard problem, just at an empirical level. So the claims that, like, the idea that,
wow, given our current empirical success, I can plot this graph, and in 2040, that's bullshit.
That is just not paying attention. We are not having that kind of empirical success. Now,
that's not the more important argument, but I wanted to make that argument because that argument
undermines the graphs that seem to lend the air of predictability and science to this, okay.
There's no empirical extrapolation going on, because there's nothing right now to be expirically
extrapolated from. Okay, now notice what I'm going to say one more time. That wasn't an empirical
discomfort, you know, falsification, but it means don't take that seriously, because it's not
extrapolation. Okay, now the theoretical point, I agree with everything Bernardo said, and let me try
and say something that I think is convergent. So first of all, the work of my colleague,
Brian Cantwell-Smith, at the University of Toronto in the philosophy of computation shows
that the model of computation that's being presupposed by these people is very inadequate.
What is that model, by the way? And so that model, as far as I can tell when I look at it,
is the proposal, which was taken very seriously in first wave cognitive science,
I'm very familiar with it, that cognition is a formal system that we can capture that the mind
is very much like the game of chess. What do I mean by that? Well, chess is a formal system in
that it doesn't depend on the matter that it's made out of. I can play chess with pieces of wood,
I can play chess with pieces of stone, I can play chess with helicopters with flags on them,
a building top, right? And what's really interesting is I can start playing chess in wood,
move to metal, move to stone, move to helicopter, and it's all the same game. And so, and I can do
the same thing with computer files, see how I can move them around, because they're purely
formal systems. The problem you face with formal systems is there are knockdown arguments that
they cannot, they render qualitative experience causally inert, they have to. And also that they
cannot, formal systems are formal systems precisely because they are completely internally defined,
and therefore they cannot grasp the meaning relation. The problem of how to get the computer to find
its processing meaningful to the computer cannot be answered within formal systems.
Formal systems can't explain development. If your formal system, if your cognition is ultimately
a formal system, it is bound by a logic, a system of axioms and functions. You know what you can't
do? You can't compute to compute within a formal system and get to a stronger formal system. You
can't work within predicate logic. And if I just manipulate it fast enough, I'll get modal logic.
That can't happen. But human beings go through qualitative development. I am capable of cognition
now that I would never be capable no matter how much information you gave me that I was as a five
year old. So formal systems can't deal with the inherently developmental nature of cognition.
They can't deal with the inherently non propositional aspects of cognition, like procedural
knowing, perspectival knowing, participatory knowing. Also, and I think Bernardo made this
point, I want to reinforce it. I argue, and this is a, it's not consensus, but it is a prominent
and increasing position within 4e cognitive science, that cognition is deeply continuous with the
principles of life. So that cognition is like, not like chess, it's more like football.
The actual causal properties of the thing doing it are relevant to its functionality. So there is
no cognition without life, biologic, auto poetic life. And so I think everything I've said is
consistent with what Bernardo said. But I say, I think of all of these arguments converging with
the ones he said. And so that is not common sense plausibility. That's normative plausibility.
There's a lot of convergence of independent lines of argument and evidence. There's a
paucity of empirical evidence for it. So the position is radically implausible to my mind.
I think that that's very close to what Bernardo was saying when he thinks it's bullshit.
And I think that we're pinning our hopes on some kind of silicon rapture into simulated heaven.
I think is a ridiculous response to the meaning crisis. And just the idea, like,
what is the ontology of a simulation? You're ultimately relying on the idea that somehow
it's an illusion. What is having the illusion of consciousness? Where's the ontological basis of
that? Okay, Bernardo, what are your responses to this? And please do so with the same intensity
yelling at the camera. It was beautiful to sit here and watch John do this. I wish it had
gone on a little longer. I was not ready to have it finished yet. John's looking clean. I don't
know if that's the same person that he said clean in all caps. John's looking clean. I don't know
if that's the same person that said John is sexy from before. I'm clean shaven now. I had a beard
last time. Maybe that's what they're referring to. Okay. All right, Bernardo.
Look, I think this ties back to my favorite, favorite part of John's message, which is
who are we looking up to for wisdom? What do we consider wisdom? Is this the arbitrary,
implausible fantasizing of Joshua Bach? Is that what we call wisdom today? Or is it
just a fancy flight from reality, which we give us license to do because we are facing problems
that our assumptions do not allow us to solve, and which is quickly going towards a religious
direction. And John hinted on it, didn't elaborate on it. I was hoping he would continue on.
On that path. But singleitarianism, a la Ray Kurzweil, is a distorted expression
of the religious impulse in all of us. It's part of being human that you sort of, you aspire for
a greater power, a power that would be or is in control, a power that is aligned with yourself
in terms of shared values. So you sort of, you exert control by proxy, you do not have control
over nature, but that greater power, which does have control over nature shares your values.
So it's controlled by proxy in the psychology of the situation. And with a very restricted and poor
set of assumptions like reductionist physicalism, that instinct, that aspiration towards, you know,
numerosity, religious numerosity has to find a way to express itself through the restricted channels
it's given. And what happens then? Well, it's singleitarianism. It's computers will be conscious.
Not only that, you'll be able to upload your consciousness into computers, thereby becoming
immortal, which is one of the key religious ideas. And you become immortal, achieving more
immortality. And because of the singularity, machines will be able to construct ever more
intelligent machines with an exponential growth. And at some point, there will be a machine that is
effectively God, the Almighty, which controls everything, and would keep us fed, healthy,
and entertained, like in a Disneyland type zoo, as inferior animals, having a great life.
And we could look upon this great singularity machine as the Almighty Father. So what you see
there is the religious impulse expressing itself in profoundly distorted ways, which are out to write
contradictory to reason. And in that sense, you might say, well, that's contradictory with reason
as any other religion. Okay, I take that. But it is much more deficient of meaning than all the other
religions, because it aims at satisfying only sort of the base level of religious aspirations,
meaning immortality and the Almighty God. But it fails to address what is the meaning and purpose
of our lives. It gives you sort of a way out of our deepest anxieties, which is the anxiety of death
and the anxiety of not being in control. Now you can upload yourself and live forever and exert
control by proxy, because this supercomputer will share your values since you made it. But it doesn't
give us, you know, Viktor Frankl's or John Vervek's will to meaning. It doesn't give us a path towards
that. It may buy us the sense that we have then time, infinite time to figure out the question
of meaning later. But it doesn't give us a path towards that, unlike the other religions. All
the world's main religions give you some kind of path to a realization of meaning. So yeah,
I think that's what's going on. I think these these movements like singularitarianism and
consciousness uploading, they are just an expression of the religious impulse. And as at least as
irrational and as devoid of empirical foundations, as devoid of internal logical coherence, as
the better known religious myths going on around. I thought I was just going to say that was beautiful.
I don't know if you've heard it or not, but it goes back to your point about, you know, the
elevation of the nerds. I've heard Kurzweil described as the rapture of the nerds, from the
sort of christian evangelical idea of the rapture of the of the saved. And yeah, so the rapture of
the nerds. I don't know if you've heard that. I just thought I'd throw that out for you. Yeah.
I do want at some point, Kurt, to I want to like respond at this.
Sure. Sure. Sure. Respond quickly, if you don't mind.
Well, I'll just lay down a foreshadowing is I would really like to discuss more. I mean,
complete agreement. But I think I think this is symptomatic. It's not an isolated thing. I think
we see throughout our culture, many attempts to create earth sacs religions, to try and give
expression to this impulse, which tells me two things. As a psychologist tells me we should
be paying attention to this impulse. If that if it can't be repressed, it ultimately comes out in
frustrated forms. And besides, you know, the the scientific, you know, fantasies, we of course
have pseudo religious political ideologies that are doing similar things. So what is that impulse?
And why is it there? I think it's a very important question we should ask. Secondly,
and in connection with that, and I'll just lay this down, I want to come back and say more about
this. One of the deep differences is the offloading of the requirement for transformation. So one of
the big things that happens in the middle ages with the advent of normalism, and then it gets
taken up much later and extended. And it's part of the loss to the will to meaning, I would say,
is the idea and you can see, you can see quotes of this, like I could get your quotes just from
Descartes saying this, that we can access the deepest truths without undergoing even the most
superficial of transformations. Before that turning point, there was the idea that deep truths
required substantial, right? That you couldn't separate the knowledge project from the wisdom
project, that deep truths required deep transformation, even in the way people read the
Bible, for example, was fundamentally different. I can talk about that later. I'm not I'm not
proselytizing for Christianity. I'm just pointing to that as an example. And so what you see with
the rapture of the nerds is, I don't have to do any transformation. I can get the deep truths just
by doing some abstract theorizing, and then I can then realize the existential change also just in
term. And so I'm just expanding, I think, Bernardo, on what you talked about when you're saying there's
no path. There's no path for transformation. There's no path, right? And I think about how
ridiculous this claim is. We believe very deeply for everybody until we're like, I believe that kids
have to go through fundamental transformations before they're capable of accessing certain
ontological aspects of reality. And I think most people, if right, would agree with that. It's like,
no, no, the kid needs to mature more, they need to grow more, right? They need, right, before they can,
right? So don't explain Heidegger to a five year old, right, for something like that, right? Okay.
So, but we've got this fictional myth that when we're 20, that stops.
Yeah, exactly. You don't need to go through any more cognitive transformation or development
in order to access deeper ontological commitments. Now, Plato, for my primary example, held exactly
the opposite view, right? As the child is to the adult, the adult is to the sage. Just like you
had to go through a lot of transformation to be able to see through self-deception and self-illusion
to get deeper ontological purchase. You still have to do it now. There is no spiritual bypassing.
You can't just adopt a bunch of beliefs. So the path, I'm trying to really deepen the path.
I'm trying to really say, like, we have got to give up this fiction that we're finished
in terms of our cognitive access to reality when we're 20 or 25 years of age.
This is so cathartic to listen to this. Go on, go on.
What I was going to say, I mean, even if everything else wasn't bullshit, which I think it is,
about Kurzweil, at what age do you want to be uploaded? When you're 20? Man, I don't want to
be a 20-year-old forever. How about 30? I don't want to be a 30. I'm 60 now, so I can talk. Do I
even want to be 50 years old forever? Nope. I don't know. It probably has to do with the
computer revolution of the 70s and the early 80s, that the notion of nerdiness has become
elevated to an ideal. It's okay. It's good to be a nerd. It counts in your favor,
because we are so focused on propositional knowledge and the nerdish things, factual and
propositional knowledge. And we lost sight of, look, it's not okay to be a nerd. A nerd is,
by definition, somebody who has a profound imbalance in the development of a number
of psychic functions by focusing on only one. Could I just make one trade?
Could I just want, Bernardo comes from a more continental position, just because of listeners.
Psychic doesn't mean anything to have to do with ESP. Oh, yes. Right? Just to, we in North America
typically say psychological, just so people aren't misunderstanding him here. I don't want him to make
certain people in California happy by the indication of that term. So go ahead, please, Bernardo. I
just thought that was important to interject. Thank you for that. I don't mean that. I mean,
psychic in the psychological sense. We have many psychological functions, emotional functions,
feeling functions, intuitive functions, sense functions, people who really can perceive the
world with the richness of the world, which I can't, for instance, and the ability to think
in, according to axioms and rules of derivation, which is the nerd, the nerd way of thinking,
that's one psychic function, a sort of human computer, a human calculator, who is able to
write code. Look, I know that it was my life, you know, I used to do that. But to focus on that at
the expense of maturity on all the other aspects of the psyche of the mind, the human mind,
is not okay. This should not be elevated by our culture into a sort of go, a sort of ideal.
You're talking about the veneration of intellect?
Only the modern sense of it, not the ancient sense of intellect, not the ancient sense at all.
Exactly. Exactly. It's a veneration of a particular form of intellect,
and which we now think it's okay. I mean, before we knew it was not okay, it was an offense to be
called a nerd. Somehow it has become okay. Where did we take this wrong turn? It's not okay to be
a nerd, it's okay to be a complete, mature, ever-evolving human being, ever-learning human being,
who has emotional intelligence, who pays attention to intuition, who has empathy,
who can share in the feelings of other people, and therefore can know what other people are
going through in their own minds, who has sensory skills, who is able to taste the flavor,
the subtleties of the flavor of food and wine. How many of us can't do that? Who has maturity about
life? In the US, I think I am with James Hillman on this. Hillman used to say that the US is in
love with innocence, which is precisely this notion that the innocence of dividing the world
into good and bad, black and white, that's something that's a childish way of looking
upon the world, because there is evil in all of us. Things are more subtle and complicated than
just this division between two polarities. But in the US, according to Jim Hillman,
this has become an ideal, this cult of innocence, which is a sort of a denial of the process of
maturation. It's unfortunate. So somehow, we are no longer elevating maturity, which goes
hand in hand with wisdom to its rightful place. We now think of old people as burdensome and
old fashioned people, not in tune with the times, as opposed to mature people who have a lot to
teach and share. We have this cult of innocence that Jim Hillman used to talk about. We have this
idolatry of nerds, which is my way of talking about it.
Sorry to interrupt. I've been thinking about for quite some time, which is the way that we view
the elderly in our culture. I wonder if the quality of a culture is how you view the elderly
and in our culture in the West. We view them as, well, we barely view them. We barely look up to
them. And if we do, it's only as a repository of stories of the past. How is it that we should
be viewing them? Well, look, I think you can make the mistake both ways. If you look at an old person,
and by definition, you expect wisdom from that person. Yeah, you're going too far because an
old person, old people have the same variability that not old people have. But I think what happened
is that we are no longer developing our sense for subtlety and nuance. We have become incapable
to recognize subtlety and nuance. We want to divide everything into neat drawers with a clear label,
because that's how we compartmentalize things, and that's how we give ourselves
intellectual justification for not thinking things through. We just label it quickly,
put it in a drawer, and you say, this is A, this is B, this is black, this is white.
And that means that all the subtlety and nuance where the core of the message is
flies over our heads. And because we've lost this sense for subtlety and nuance,
we don't recognize the wisdom in old people, because that wisdom expresses itself in subtlety
and nuance, not in clear-cut recipes. And everybody wants an easy right now, a clear-cut recipe.
Just give me the seven steps to happiness. That's what people want. And guess what? The treasure
is just underneath a few layers of subtlety and nuance. You cannot bypass those, but we've lost
our ability to see that. Therefore, we've lost our ability to recognize true wisdom, including
true wisdom in older people. We live in a falsified, in an arbitrarily simplified world,
so to say. And we make enormous efforts to confirm to ourselves that that's how the world is,
because it makes life more easier. So I want to follow up on that, because
first of all, the last point that Bernardo made, I want to give it some experimental empirical
teeth, because one of my colleagues at the University of Toronto, Lynn Hasher,
does work on working memory. So one of the things that Hasher made clear is we've gone from a simplistic
working memory to working memory as a higher-order relevance filter. That's why things like chunking,
work, working memory, anyways, there's just a lot of good evidence for that. Now, why am I
bringing that up? Just give me a sec, because there's very important correlations between measures of
working memory, especially its ability to filter out irrelevant information and measures of general
intelligence. They at times approach a parody. So there's something deeply connected there.
Okay, what does this all have to do with wisdom in old age? Okay, so when you take old people
and young people and you give them standard IQ measures, young people crush the old people.
Why? Because almost all the problems on a standard IQ test are well-defined problems,
like mathematical problems, a pattern completion where one of the answers
is available and you have to choose it. These are all well-defined problems.
So old people, they don't do very well because the young people get the answers faster. Well,
why? Well, the older people, the negative view as well, they're more distracted. And so let's put
the old people away. They're distracted. We can get to the bottom line. We're younger, we're fast.
You are. You're younger, you're fast. And for well-defined problems, you outperform.
But Lynn Hasher did some work and she's even got a thing called older brains or wiser brains.
It's in the title, right? Who? Now, Lynn Hasher at U of T, University of Toronto. And so what happens
with, you can give people, there's all kinds of ways of establishing this empirically. What
happens with older people, for example, when they're reading a text, they will keep more of the
possible meanings of a term active than young people. So that looks like if the point is to get
through, the older people are distracted. And if you give them a well-defined problem, they're
over here and the young people are zeroing on the correct answer that's theirs to be found.
But what if you switched to an ill-defined problem? An ill-defined problem, which we don't know,
we don't know what the important representation of our initial state is, the goal state. What are
the relevant operations? What are the relevant patterns to pay attention to? Now, when you do
that, older brains outcompete younger brains because they keep more options alive, which makes
them better at dealing with the multivariate dynamics of situations like messy, emotionally
laden interpersonal situations, which are, by the way, prototypical situations where we look for
people's wisdom. So I'm not claiming, Bernardo is right, that there's no simple correlation,
old age wisdom, but we ignore the potential for being more wise within our old people
because we have this seriously algorithmic notion of what intelligence is that blocks us
from seeing this defect as something that actually affords wise response to ill-defined problems.
Now, I think that, and I think that gives a lot of teeth about what Bernardo's saying about losing
nuance, losing nuance. I think for me, and so there's a lot here about propositional tyranny in that,
but I think what, I like to put this within the Frommian perspective, that I think we have confused
the halving of propositions with the becoming of wise, the becoming of mature. So Fromm famously,
he's an existential psychologist, he divided human motivations up into two broad camps,
there's, they're having needs, these are needs met by having something, having water,
having oxygen, having food, and it's very important that we be able to categorize that,
manipulate those objects, secure control over them. We have what Uber would call an IIT relationship
to them, and there's nothing wrong with that. If you don't have an IIT relationship with water,
if you treated water as an important individual that you shouldn't trespass on for moral reasons,
you're going to die. So you need to have that. Then he said there is what he called the being
mode. I'm not quite happy with that term, but what he meant is that there are needs that are
met by becoming being, like I have a need to become mature. So these are developmental needs,
and these are needs that are not met by categorically manipulating things. These are needs
that are met by the project, the Victor Frankel type project of meaning making, because what I'm
doing with becoming mature is I'm trying to construct an identity that is responsible to
the meanings in the world. Neither one of these is good or bad, but what Fromm argued is we get
into modal confusion. We try to satisfy being needs within the having mode. So then instead of
becoming mature, I buy a car instead of being in love, and notice we even use this word,
I have a lot of sex. And the point is we're not satisfying the developmental needs because,
again, my point, we're not going through any significant transformation. We're just acquiring
stuff, and we do this epistemically. We acquire propositions as opposed to going through fundamental
transformations. So we're locked into modal confusion. And so we spin this faster and faster
because it doesn't meet the needs. And what we're told by our culture is because you need more,
and you need more frequently and more often. And so we spin faster and faster and faster
as our being needs astrophy and we fall into addictions around our having needs. And I think
that's not just in the marketplace of mercantile products. I think it's in the epistemic marketplace
we are doing the same thing. We are confusing the having of propositions
with the transformation that's required to become wise and virtuous.
Okay, you said many interesting points.
This has been fantastic.
John, what you just mentioned reminds me of addiction in the reciprocal narrowing.
At one point, I would like you to talk about love, which is the opposite of that reciprocal opening
or some positive feedback effect there. And the reason why is because in many religions,
there's a God is tantamount to love. And in Bernardo's view, many people would see mind at
large as synonymous with God, which means there may be some relationship there that I'd like you
all to explore. Well, I mean, and this goes from one, I have a couple of slogans on my
signature in Gmail. And one of them is love is it's a classical slogan from Christian Neoplaton
is a love is its own kind of knowing. And I'll try and work towards that. It's an important
sake. So it's not just that God is love is that love is a kind of knowing. And, you know,
and John in the epistles, you know, says God is agape, right? And he's trying to he's trying
to bring both of those sides together. I think there are similar things in seek, seek, not
seekism, Sufism, because it's basically an integration of agape kind of love with Neoplatonism.
But but I'm just trying to make clear that I'm not making an exclusivity imperialistic
claim on Christianity's behalf. Neither am I like neither am I dismissing dismissing it.
But I think we should we do well to pay attention to that tradition, because I think of Jesus as
the sage of agape. I think that's a way of trying to understand him. I think there's similar ideas
in the Buddha with Karuna. And you want to talk about Jesus in the Buddha, maybe we can do that
also. Yeah, we will, we will either way go through the explication on love. So the idea
this came to me, right, there was a bunch of pieces, but I have the great good fortune to be
friends and colleagues with Mark Lewis, who's one of the premier neuroscientists,
and cognitive scientists doing work on addiction. And he's doing it, he did it also from the inside,
because he was also himself an addict. And you're always an addict in some sense. So you want to
read the autobiography, you can read memoirs of an addictive brain. He part of the reason why he
went into neuroscience was to, it was to, to understand addiction. I have a friend of mine
who said, you people go into psychology to study their defects. And since mine is relevance
realization, again, that I guess I'm way double being irrelevant. But the point is that
Are you being facetious? Are you being honest?
Both. My intent was there's there's some truth to it. But hopefully there's also some humor in it.
So what's, what's Mark's model? You know, and Mark was, you know, one of the first people to
propose a dynamical system interpretation of emotions. He's a forerunner in a lot of ways.
He's also, you know, he's also a gifted therapist. He's kind of polymath in this important way.
And so I was also, I was at a conference and it was not just him, but a bunch of psychologists
and neuroscientists where it was a, it was, you know, a mini, it was a symposium within the conference
on basically challenging the disease model of addiction. And the disease model of addiction
is the idea that, you know, you ingest the substance and it's like a disease in you and we have to get
rid of the disease. And that aligns with a lot of sort of governmental policies and the way
governments like to deal with things. Even though the evidence that prohibition is a completely
failed strategy with dealing with addiction. So what they, and it doesn't account for the
data well. So you have weird phenomena like this, you have Vietnam soldiers using opiates in Vietnam,
opiates, opioid prices, right? And then they come back to the United States and without any
therapy or anything else, the vast majority of them stop using. They're in highly stressful
situations. They're taking opioids to escape trauma. That should, they should, they're
ingesting this substance. It's inherently addictive. They come back and they don't.
That's just one among many facts, empirical facts. It's like the disease model isn't fitting well.
I have this substance, it infects me and it compels me. So instead, Mark proposes a learning model
of addiction. And it goes like, and he calls it reciprocal narrowing. It goes like this. So I'll
use alcohol just because I can presume that most people are familiar with that, that, that intoxicant.
Um, so I face some stressful situations. So I drink some alcohol to reduce the stress. The problem
with that is it reduces my cognitive flexibility, makes me much more susceptible to impulsivity,
hyperbolic discounting. It basically shrinks. And what happens there is my world, my world,
I don't mean physically, but the options available to me in my world shrink. Now that means, but
that my problems become more exigent and pressing on me, right? And I've lost the ability to manipulate
and, and, and get to alternatives. So now I'm more stressed. So I'm going to drink more alcohol
and I'm going to reduce my cognitive flexibility anymore, even more. And then the world's going
to shrink down and then I'm going to shrink down. And I use this idea from, uh, you know,
Clifford Geertz about an agent arena relationship. We, our agency is always co-defined by, uh,
how we turn the world into an arena for action. And the arena is always co-defined with the type
of agency we're assuming. And so what happens is your agency is shrinking and the world's
optionality is shrinking until the world can't be any other than it is right now. And you can't be
any other than you are right now. And that's when you're addicted. That's addiction. And this fits
the data way, way better. But governments don't like this because the kind of changes you have
to bring aren't changes where you can simply prohibit a substance, uh, because, right? So
what I was having, literally having lunch with Mark, you know, and I've done a lot of work on
Play-Doh and the Play-Doh Platonic notion of Adagaga. And I said to Mark, I said, but if there's
reciprocal narrowing, isn't there reciprocal opening? And he went like that. It was like,
yes, of course there has to be. And then I thought about this and this is clearly what Play-Doh
advocates for. And you can see it very clearly in the Republic. You know, I get,
I bring about a sort of intracyclic harmony and that reduces my impulsivity, my self-deception. I
see more real patterns in the world. I then get better at detecting real patterns. I internalize
that and right. I better afford my inner justice. And then that allows me to connect better. And so
I reciprocally open. And Play-Doh, I think rightly describes that as love. Now he thinks of it as
eros, but Socratic eros is very different than our meaning of eros. I'll put that aside. Let's just
say it's love for now. Well, why might that be the case? Well, if you look at the work of Aaron,
that's the last name, not the first name. How do you get people to sort of fall in love with each
other? You get them to do mutually accelerating disclosure. You get them to be on theologutions.
Yeah, sort of. So what it is is if I open up a bit about me and you reciprocate by opening up a bit
about me, first of all, I start to see you better and you start to see me better. So we're doing
Mindsight Resonance. And that allows me to, not only can I open up more, I can open up better
because I can open up more, but I have a better sense of how you're seeing things because you've
opened up to me. So I start to open up more and better and then you reciprocate by opening up
more and better. And we do this. We reciprocally open. And that will make people fall in love.
Now, not necessarily erotic love. It can be phyliac love. It can be agapec, right? But
that reciprocal opening, we know it as love. It is a way of knowing by which we bind ourselves
to, right? We bind our being needs to another being and we reciprocally go through transformation
and open up to each other. And I think we can fall in love. This is, I think, a platonic claim
that we should think about taking seriously again. We can fall in love with reality. We can fall in
love with the world in a profound way. And I think part of the meeting crisis is getting people so
they can fall in love again with reality and with the depths of reality. And so the reciprocal opening
and the love and the anagage, I think all converge in sort of a coherent manner.
And I think reciprocal opening is also what's happening in therapy. That's people come in with
the propositional knowledge of what needs to change. It does almost shit. So there's almost
nothing for them. What a good therapist does is take them through a process of reciprocal opening
until they get to be a different person living in a different kind of world that is now viable
to them. They want to be that person over there living in that world, but they don't know how to
get there because they don't have the religious and wisdom traditions that afford people the
serious play, the developmental play in reciprocal opening that affords that kind of transformation.
So I hope that answered your question. You're watching this channel because you're interested
in theoretical physics, consciousness, and the ostensible connection between the two. What's
required to follow some of these arguments is facility with mathematics, as well as discernment
of the underlying physical laws. And you may think that this is beyond you, but that's false.
Brilliant provides pollucid explanations of abstruse phenomenon such as quantum computing,
general relativity, and even group theory. When you hear that the standard model is based on U1
cross SU2 cross SU3, that's group theory, for example. Now this isn't just for neo fights either.
For example, I have a degree in math and physics and I still found some of the intuitions given
in these lessons to vastly aid my penetration into these subjects, for example, electricity and
magnetism. Sign up today at brilliant.org slash toe, that is T-O-E, for free. You'll also get
20% off the annual premium subscription. Try four of the lessons at least. Don't stop before four.
And I think you'll be greatly surprised at the ease at which you comprehend subjects you
previously had trouble grokking. Links are in the description. This notion of reciprocal opening,
so that's agape, that's love, is synonymous in many religions, especially Christianity with God,
in terms of John mentioned in John's epistle. And your theory has mind at large, which is
similar to God. So is there any link between reciprocal opening and mind at large? And then
we're going to get to religion without a religion or what do we do to solve our current meaning
crisis? Well, let me start by saying what John just said makes all kinds of sense to me from
first person experience perspective. This idea of love as this reciprocal opening as
becoming more than you thought you were in that dance of love, it makes all kinds of sense to me.
And I think it's a beautiful way to visualize it and communicate it. It's a very hard act to follow
after that. So I will make a comment, Kurt, on your question, but restricted to a point I think
is important to not meant as a complete answer. I can't follow what we've just had it. And I'm
completely in peace for not being able to follow what we've just seen. But I make a comment that
I think is important. Would love be part of mind at large? Surely love is clearly a part of nature.
It's a kind of a force that binds things together. Maybe the correlate of love on the screen of
perception is gravity. But we also know that the universe's expansion is accelerating. So there is
this other thing we call dark energy right now, which seems to have the opposite effect.
To deny that what we call evil is also part of nature would be naive, I think. And I think
it's not only naive, it's dangerous because it has led to a sort of an extreme attempt to
spiritualize reality. And I use, I'm going to use the word spirit and soul, not in the religious
sense, but in the psychological sense. So spirit is sky, air, sunlight, abstractions,
single-sidedness, summon bonum, the summon bonum of the New Testament, the pure good,
that spirit, there's this flights of abstraction and spiritualization. And soul is on the other
end. Soul is earthly. It's moist. It's dark. It's where the roots suck their life energy from.
It's Hades, the mythical hell, but also the place where the goddess of spring emerges from every
year to renew life. So this is all soul. It's the ground of reality. And it's morally ambiguous.
It's a place where that psychologists know that there comes insight and profound deception,
good and evil. It's where the human shadow resides. And we have this tendency, probably started already
with Christianity, because the God of the Old Testament was morally very ambiguous,
a tribal God, very morally ambiguous. And with the New Testament, God was pure good.
And to this day, our culture seems to have this notion that we have to go always only towards
spirit, this single-sidedness of light and goodness and abstraction and lightness,
not only light, but lightness, this airy floating quality of spirit. And what happens is that because
this has become our ideal, we close our eyes to the soul side of ourselves, to our shadows,
to the earthly, to the dark, moist, womb-like, cave-like aspect of ourselves, which is the
place in nature that is pregnant with all potentialities, all unrealized potentials.
And where growth ultimately comes from, where the energy of the spring comes from,
the energy of transformation, there is a kind of self-honesty that is required to be in contact
with that soul side of life. And we have a culture that does its best to eliminate it from existence,
to deny it, to become completely single-sided. And then what happens, and that's the dangerous
thing, what do you do with a part of yourself that is intrinsic to you, but which you do not
recognize? You project it. So where does the evil go? It goes to the criminals in prison. It goes
to the Palestinians in the West, in Gaza, or the Israelis across the world, depending on which
side you are. It goes to the Jews during the second, well, the time preceding the Second World War,
since the late 19th century. You project that. And the moment you project it, that's when you
get into conflict. That's where war comes from. That's where civil unrest comes from. That's where
all the crap, all the shit that's happening comes from. And that's why we become unable to deal with
it with maturity. It's because we've become unable to see that in ourselves, to empathize with that,
and therefore have a subtle, nuanced approach to how we deal with it, a mature approach to how we
deal with the dark side, how we deal with the evil forces. We are totally innocent about how to deal
with it, because we are so focused on love as opposed to the dark energy. We are so focused on
air and clouds and light and abstraction as opposed to the humid, dark, earthly ground of
our being where we are rooted. And this lack of sophistication, this lack of self-awareness
is what makes it impossible for us to have empathy and to understand the other side. And if you
cannot understand the other side, you don't need to agree. You don't need to give it free reign.
That's not what I'm saying. I'm not saying let's give free reign to the shadow side. No.
But if you don't want to give free reign to the shadow side, you have to know it. You have to
know what it is. You have to know what it's doing. But if you repress and deny it, you don't see what
it's doing. And that's when it gets free reign. You see, it gets free reign precisely by being
ignored, by not being legitimized, by our not giving it, not telling it the following words.
I see you. I recognize your right to exist within me. But I shall not give you free reign. Our
inability to do that is what sets off this madhouse that we are seeing right now. It's right
right now popping up in the Middle East. But it's always popping up somewhere. So
that's what I wanted to say. Every time we talk about love, and now I'll link back to your question
finally, every time we talk about love, and you want to say, well, mind that the large is love,
it's God, it's the sumum bonum, it's all true. But it's half of the truth. And ignoring denying
the right of the other half to exist, to be there, is immature and dangerous. So
with the same conviction that I would say, yes, love is, mind that the large, it is God, I would
also say, and so is the energy that expressed itself through Hitler. And it's intrinsic to nature
and to humanity. I mean, your backyard is a blood bath right now. I think I mentioned to you last
time, you know, ants cutting up earthworms in pieces while they're wiggling alive. I mean,
it's a desert. Look at nature. Nature is a blood bath. What's happening? And to deny it,
to deny its existence, to not grant it the right to exist is a very mature, very dangerous move.
And today, an extraordinarily unpopular move. I mean, you run the risk of being culture cancelled
very swiftly, if you say what I just said. Now, why do I say that? Because I didn't give a damn
if I'm culture cancelled, you know, I don't need anymore this recognition from the outside that
it's fine, whatever way it goes. But I think it's very dangerous. It's a degree of psychological
unsophistication and immaturity that sits at the source of the evil we see in the world. Because
to control the shadow, you need to grant it the right to exist and to be there. And only then can
you police it. What does it mean to understand the shadow part of you, the evil part of you?
Does it mean to, in John's words, see its point of views or goals as plausible? What does it mean?
And how does one practically do it? Recognize that it exists. Recognize how it feels.
Before you rush to judgment and you say, well, my shadow side is wrong.
Fine, you will get there. But first, I will speak metaphorically because there's no other way to
speak about it. First, look at it and say, I see you. You exist in me. And it is okay that you exist
in me. I am not going to try to weed you out or cut off your head. I'm not going to deny your rights
to be. You are there. It's all right. However, I have a different point of view. I am metacognitive.
I can process things in a way that you cannot. And I will not give you free reign.
Now, you may even, to the degree that is safe and conducive to health and harmony,
you may even throw some breadcrumbs to it every now and then.
Indote your shadow side in a safe, controlled way. So it can also express itself as part of nature.
Because if you shut the door in it and you say, not only do I not see you, I don't grant you the
right to exist. I don't even recognize that you exist. That's where it's going to undermine you
from the ground up, from the roots up. If you go all towards the sun and you forget where you were
rooted, you will be able to do photosynthesis, but you will not have the minerals in the water
that sustain your life. Trees are a great metaphor for this. They need the sun. They need the spirit,
but they are rooted in soul. They are rooted in the darkness, moist realm of a moral ambiguity
where the shadow is. So I think for lacking this degree of sophistication, not only lacking it,
but elevating it as a positive cultural value to lack that sophistication is extraordinarily
dangerous because it's it's decreased the end of empathy. It turns the world into a dance of
projections that have very little to do with reality. There is more in common between
me and my enemy than the Bernardo who was 30 years old would ever dare contemplate as possible.
And the moment you see this, you may think, well, I don't want to get to that realization
because I hate myself. No, you would not because that comes with a degree of kindness and acceptance
towards yourself that you wouldn't be capable of before. And that same kindness then just gets
extended to the world at large. That ability, and I think old people have this ability,
they've gone through enough shit that they know that things are never quite black and white.
That behind that evil, there is something you share. You see, to understand something doesn't
mean that need to agree. To understand an evil act doesn't mean that you condone it. But we've
come to associate understanding with approval. We conflate these two things. And this is a
disaster. Look, I don't need to approve of what the SS did to understand what Austrians from
Austrian villages, what motivated them to join the SS. I can understand that. And I do understand
that. Do I condone it? Do I approve of it? Absolutely not. But that doesn't mean that
they shouldn't make an effort to understand, that they shouldn't make an effort to empathize
in some way because it's only through that understanding and empathy that we will solve
our problems, that we'll solve our conflicts. There's a lot I want to say in response to that.
First of all, I agree with that critique of pure airy spirituality. I try to make the case
that the very same processes that make us adaptively intelligent also make us
permanently susceptible to self-deception, that you can't extricate one from another.
The heuristics that allow us to avoid combinatorial explosion are the same heuristics that
bias us and prejudice. And try to somehow get the one without the other. It's a farcical endeavor.
It's a futile endeavor. And that doesn't mean we can't ameliorate the way Bernardo was saying,
but trying to get some sort of ontological separation, I think that's a fundamental
misunderstanding about how intelligence and adaptivity and meaning-making work.
And so what I'm proposing now is much more like the Buddhist perspective.
Realize that everything is threatened by dukkha. Realize that everything you do,
every domain, no matter what domain you're in, you can fall prey to self-deceptive,
self-destructive behavior because that's what dukkha is. And that's one of the noble truths.
So I think that actually lines up with how we're increasingly understanding the
functionality of cognition. Second riff point, and these are all related.
There's another point where I'm maybe now a little bit closer because I see Bernardo's
mind at large much more like the Dao than like God. I'm a Tai Chi player. I have been for three
decades. And so this is not just something I think about propositionally. I mean, in fact,
you don't really know the Dao until you're doing the Dao. You can't just like read about it.
And the idea, you know, that the Dao is disclosed between, you know, you all know the famous yin
yang and people don't, and notice that there's a little dot of black within the white and white
within the black and the line between the misinui. And there's a dynamic penetration and inter-co-creation
between the yang, which is the expansive area, and the yin, which is the earthy grounding. And so
if, you know, mind at large is more like the Dao, and that our primary relationship
is to it is one of ongoing maturation. So you do Tai Chi in order to become more mature in your
capacity to deal with the yin and the yang. And you hope that it percolates through your psyche
and permeates through your life. And that's what you're actually, and that's how to love it.
So I mean, I would suggest that there's a way of, there is, and Bernardo expressed,
there's a kind of love that is not trying to exclude the shadow. There's that, there's,
there is even the reciprocal opening to the shadow. And I want to point out something else.
This is right out of the Neoplatonic tradition. Now, Bernardo was speaking, and perhaps he was
speaking metaphorically, but I practice and I'm involved in like IFS and other things like that,
Emotion Focus Therapy, in which you don't just sort of describe it to yourself. You actually enact
these inner dialogues. You actually go into an imaginative space, you'll have a part come up,
and instead of trying to exclude it, you try and mature it. You try and first of all,
appreciate its adaptive functionality, and then get it to realize that that functionality is now
maladaptive, and it needs to grow. And this is, you know, this is why IFS, Mark Lewis, by the way,
recommend. Can you give a specific example? Sure. So internal family systems therapy is,
I'll try not to spill my own guts too much on this. But so
I have a part of me that when sort of feels threatened by overwhelming experience,
it's kind of like it wants to smash, it sort of smashes things. It wants to sort of, you know,
just disrupt whatever is happening now so that this situation cannot unfold anymore.
And so you sort of, well, what's that for? And then you try and appreciate, oh, well, that ability to
smash things, that's adaptive. When properly, you know, aligned, it allows me to criticize and
escape from oppressive things that are trying to hold me back. And so you get into dialogue with
this part, and you try to say, well, you're just smashing everything. They need to smash everything
all the time. And first of all, it says, yes, because if I don't, you're going to get overwhelmed.
And then you say, but, but can you step back? Can you sort of become aware of me? Right? As Bernardo
said, the metacognitive me and this wider scope. And you see all the skills that are available to us
now. It's like the Tai Chi. I've developed a finesse. I don't just have to smash things. We can
carry out that function. But could we do it more like a martial artist? So I even offer my part
when it starts to run, I said, Hey, why don't we just sort of do almost enact Tai Chi internally?
And it starts to get into a different framing. And it starts to think, Oh, wait, I can discharge
this function, but in more sort of finesse interaction, rather than just going in and
smashing it. And then what happens is the, the, the want an impulsive aspect of this,
that's confusing urgency and intense and intensity with legitimacy, it starts to become
less confused. It starts to realize, Oh, wait, I can meet the goal. First of all,
the goal doesn't have to be met the way I thought it has to be met. And I can meet the goal by,
you know, doing this other thing. And it's a process of basically internal dialogue. Sometimes
you're imagining the part and you're talking to it. Sometimes it's more like, like a direct
just intuition. Sometimes you get imagery that comes up, but you learn it's a skill. You learn to
enter into dialogue with this. It's very similar to something that's convergent in EFT,
motion focus therapy, the empty chair technique, which is you have, you feel an inner conflict.
And what you do is you move between the chairs and you'll have this part, go to that part,
take its perspective, take its identity, say what it wants to say. Now go to this other part,
take its perspective as I, and you, and I've done this, I've done a motion focused therapy with
Les Greenberg and stuff like, and what happens is the two parts start talking to each other,
they start realizing that they're there. I don't want to be too anthropomorphic,
but what happens, the point I'm making is this, there's, what's happening is a revolution right
now within the psychotherapeutic world of all these independent lines of convergence
on inner dialogue, being an effective thing. Now one of the, one of the things that's helped is
the Jungian version of this was too tied to visual imagery, speaking therapeutically. And
there's a wide variation, including no capacity for visual imagery in the populace. We have at
least five to 10% of the people that can't do visual imagery. So active imagination is not
available to them. So what's happened is people have tried to say, well, can we, can we, can we
save the baby from the, the bathwater? And can we get other forms? And they've moved into more
discourse, dialogic ways of carrying on these inner dialogues. And there's, it's sort of
gaining a lot of traction within the psychotherapeutic world. And I find that very interesting,
because for me, that's just the Neoplatonic tradition brought back, because it's very
clear that with things like Theurgia, the Neoplatonists were doing this inner kind of
dialectic dialogue, and then they were doing it between each other in philosophy. And then they
were doing it contemplatively with reality, and they were coordinating these three together. And
we're, I feel like, and this is just an intuition. So don't give it too much. But I feel what these
different fields are starting, starting, all starting to converge towards each other to potentially
give us a set of abilities that would give us a very powerful kind of way of notice what Bernardo
was doing, where we're going through a transformation so that we can realize not just in thought, but
in our being, some fundamental patterns within oncology. But I do think that all of that is
also still a kind of love. But again, not the spiritualized airy, it's, it's the ability,
like you say, there's a love, like it's, it's like what Plato talks about in, you know, in
when he compares Philea, Sophia to Phileanothea. I'm not trying to destroy the shadow. I'm also
not condoning it. I'm trying to understand and trying to open it up and open myself up to it in
the right way. At least that's how I understand it. And I don't know if that's consonant with
everything you're saying, Bernardo, but those are some of the riffs I wanted to get on. I'm very
excited about all of this happening right now, because it seems like I participate a lot in
these emerging communities of interpersonal dialogue. And man, do they become religious for
people almost automatically? I'm very much, like I said, really trying to understand the dialectic
within oncology. I think, by the way, that that separation from soul and spirit is again,
we get both in our culture, we get, we get, you know, just to sort of giving into raw emergence,
a kind of, you know, which is, you know, to take the soil but not try to grow from it, right? And
then you have the tree just receptive to the sunlight of emanation. And you know,
and even Plato was critical of that. He said, no, no, look at the sun and then go back down into
the cave. Because if you don't go back into the cave, you haven't really understood the sun, right?
You didn't get it. You didn't get it, right? And so I'm really trying to bring all these things
together in my work. So I was just, I'm sorry, it's not a counter argument. I'm just expressing
sort of convergence and excitement, what you were talking about. And it's very interesting to me
that the ICD's symptoms as positive symptoms rather than the generation of Erzatz religions
to the meeting crisis. So I'm interested how, I agree with Bruno, you see all of this stuff that
Kurt's violin on all this crap going on over here, but there's also this stuff going on over here.
And that's what I place my dollar of hope, that's my bet, is on these emerging
communities of practice and how they're also converging with each other. Sorry, that was a lot.
But that was, I was just really inspired by what Bernardo had to say.
To speak personally, I try to go by this screenwriting ad, which says that the more personal,
the pain, the more general. So if you try to speak in platitudes, no one relates. But if you're more
honest, then people tend to relate. I get this distinct feeling that I don't love myself.
And I'm unsure how to do shadow integration with one particular aspect of myself that I'll say.
Another is probably 20. But one is laziness. So I work hard, hard, hard, hard, hard, hard, hard.
And I feel like, well, one, I need to work hard because to prep for some of these podcasts
requires quite a bit of work. But every minute, almost every minute that I spend that I'm not
working, I'm unconsciously beating myself up saying that I'm wasting time, I'm wasting time,
I need to get back to work. And when I'm spending time with my wife, which I love,
all I love to do is work and to spend time with my wife. If I'm honest, when I'm spending time
with my wife, I'm thinking, why aren't I working right now? And so I have a feeling that comes
from me not loving myself. What interjection? Do you do the opposite? When you're working,
do you think, why am I not spending time with my wife? Sometimes. But I would say it happens more
often. But it does happen that I, when I'm working, I'm always looking forward to spending
time with my wife. I actually, I'm so happy that the two aspects of my life that I get to do almost
100% of the time is work intensely and spend time with my wife intensely. And when I'm spending
time with my wife, I'm not working. It's like watching a movie, going for a walk and so on.
I'm trying to point out something to you very frequently. And this goes back to what I said
a few minutes ago, very frequently. The reason why we can't integrate with something is because of
aspect disguise. Let's first give, I'll give a description that's not pertinent to your case.
And then let's try and apply it here. So somebody will come into the therapy and they'll say,
why are you here? And they'll say, I'm stubborn. Like I'm stubborn. I'm even flexible. And you
don't tackle that directly. You talk to them for a while and you get them off somewhere and you
say, tell me something you really like about yourself. And they'll say, I'm perseverance. I
really keep going. And they don't realize that those are two different aspects of the same function.
And I'm trying to get you to realize if your laziness is also the positive function
of taking you into relationship with your wife, then you can see that it's not just a drag on
your work. There's also a positive aspect to it. And you've got to, you've got to get out, you've
got to, you've got to bring the two aspects back together. If you're, if they're disintegrated
from each other, you can't integrate with them. They have to come back together before, because
you can't properly appreciate in all the meanings of the word, appreciate that reality and that
function and integrate with it unless it has been properly reintegrated back together. You
leave it like this and you try to integrate with this and this is going to kick in the ass or you
try to integrate with this and this is going to pull you into right. And if you don't put them back
together, you can't integrate with it. That's why I'm trying to get you to see is your laziness
also the thing, maybe that's also, Hey, I want to connect with my wife. I want to do there are
things other than my work that are important. That was just a suggestion. I mean, you need to do
therapy to do, do this, but I'm trying to get you to see like that, like you have, it's a
Bernardo way. It's a much more nuanced thing. Part of the problem with the current discourse
around shadow integration is it's very simplistic. It's almost like there's the black figure there
and what I'm going to do is just sort of bind, right? Exactly. That is not helpful. That is
not therapeutically helpful. And that failure to deal with aspect disguise is what blocks people
and one of the things about IFS and other therapies is they're trying to get,
they're trying to get people to see both aspects of any function.
Sorry, I was just trying to be helpful there.
Definitely are. And Bernardo, one time you told me that I take myself too seriously and I do and
it's, I try to not, I think I've taken myself less seriously since you've told me that, but not
drastically. It's difficult for me because I'm in many ways I'm extremely insecure. I don't feel
like I know anywhere near as much as I need to know when I look at what I have to learn,
not just for these podcasts, but what I would like to learn for my life, these theories of
everything's 200 of them. Man, I know 1% of what I should know. And I'm constantly beating myself
up like I should be farther along. I felt like I wasted five to eight years of my life in depression
and I am so far behind where I should be. And I look at other people and think at how much,
and admire how much they know. And then it pushes me to go even harder, but sometimes it exhausts me.
And I have a feeling that this and a lack of shadow integration is, and well, many other aspects
are the reason why I feel the way that I feel. And well, well that, I'll just say that.
Well, you sound like Socrates.
But I'm trying to be both funny. I'm trying to be a little bit therapeutic here. I'm trying to
be funny because humor gets around defenses. But I'm also trying to challenge you. I'm trying to
say, well, you know, really knowing that you don't know is, first of all, that's the socratic,
that's the central socratic insight, because only, and not knowing it the way you know,
two plus two equals four, but like, you know, Ivan Ilych knew he was going to die, right? Knowing
that is the thing that grounds and makes possible socratic humility. It makes possible wonder
and wisdom begins in wonder. So the gift you have out of this, the positive aspect of not knowing
is your capacity to find this wondrous and to find it that it calls to you and calls you beyond
yourself. If you knew all of this, you'd be static and dead. But you are capable of awe and wonder
precisely because you recognize that you don't know, and you know, and you take it seriously. But
that's again, I'm trying to get you to see, right? You have to put the two aspects together. Yes,
there's times when I feel that too, you know, like, you know, I wish I was as well read as that
person, I wish I was as mature as that person, and you can get down. But then I realized,
but the part of me that's making me down, I can, I can, I can aspect shift it. And that's the part
of me that can be transformed. Oh, I don't know. And that's good, because not knowing makes me
responsive to other people, makes me capable, makes me responsive to the world, makes me capable
of falling in love with other people and falling in love with the world, because if I can't find
them wonders, I'm not going to fall in love with them.
Yeah, I will speak out of my own experience and intuition. It's not an area where I have
expertise and like John, so I will speak as if what I'm saying were facts, but it's just how I
see it. Okay, it's grammatically, it's easier to just make statements and not keep on adding
disclaimers all the time. So what I think is this, you will always try to get out of this situation
through a paradigm of victory. So you will achieve victory in some kind of conceptual
wrestling match against yourself. But you will get out of this, in fact, through a completely
different paradigm, a paradigm of surrender to what you are, to what is the case about you.
Now, this may sound as bad news, but it's not because that surrender when it's authentic,
it comes hand in hand with a lot of loving kindness and acceptance towards yourself.
The judgments you pass on yourself sort of dissipate, not because they are resolved by choice,
but because those values are seen through. It's like Nietzsche's transvaluation of all values.
So it's not like one side of the equation will achieve victory, it's the very fight will be
seen through. And that seeing through has the quality of a kind of an exhalation, a surrender
with a lot of comprehension, understanding and loving kindness towards yourself,
which sort of transcends those paradigmatic values of what you should be as opposed to
what you think you are, how you should behave as opposed to how you think you behave. You come to
a place where you are what you are. You're lazy, that's okay, laziness is part of you. It doesn't
need to be judged constantly. It may surprise you because of what people perceive as my production.
I'm an extraordinarily lazy person, but I stopped fighting my laziness. I kid you not,
this is factually true. I am a very lazy person. Today, for instance, I had a whole lot of things
to do, but I gave me the excuse that I had a long debate at six. So I did absolutely nothing today.
The difference between you and me is that although I used to be very much like you,
I'm not seeing the time ahead of you. I'm in a different place. The place where I am now is,
okay, I've been very lazy today. It's fine. It's just the truth of the moment. It's what happened
at that point in time. I'm not going to drive myself nuts by judging myself.
There was a time I caused myself tremendous agony. I made a 30-second stupid mistake.
I tried to remove a siren from an alarm system in my house, knowing that it was not deactivated,
knowing full well it had a safety mode and it would go off.
But I thought, well, it goes off. I only need 10 seconds to pull the batteries out. It's okay.
Well, it went off and gave me terrible tinnitus. I have tinnitus in both years that sound like
a dentist's drill at three meters distance day and night. And it has driven me to the point of
planning my suicide twice for 30 minutes or so. Now, I went nuts against myself when that happened.
You know, look at the mirror and you were so bloody stupid. You know that was going to happen.
Look at what you did, you asshole. Now, that dissipated too. It doesn't come as a victory.
It's like you transit into another way of being that you don't achieve. You don't secure through
a paradigm of conflict and fight. You sort of just allow yourself to slide into it. It's
very hard to describe. But the good news is there is a place of peace that is almost inevitable
to arrive at. Even if you arrive at it 30 seconds before you die and you are already in your death
bed, usually people are forced into that place through major life dramas, a job loss, a divorce,
a death of a loved one. Some major thing that sort of shakes the edifice of your narratives,
which sort of overwhelms your ego, your ability to try to be in control or to pretend that you
are in control. And once that ability is taken out and you stop fighting, you sort of slide
into this place of acceptance, this transvaluation of all values in which, you know, judgment of
yourself sort of goes away and you are just leaving in service of your diamond. And my diamond is
not a Socratic diamond. It doesn't tell me what not to do. It tells me pretty explicitly what to
do. So I have a particularly severe diamond. And I live in peace with this paradigm of surrender
and slavery. My coat of arms has a chain. And I added that to symbolize the fact that my life
is in a wonderful condition of permanent slavery, slavery towards what nature wants to do through
me, a sort of complete giving up of the paradigm of control. I'm not in control, have never been in
control by the way. And it's all right. And there is no point in judging me. Who am I to judge me?
There is a form of arrogance built into self judgment. What's happening is what's happening.
What you are is what you are. Laziness has its place. If it becomes compulsive and addictive,
then it's something else. And then John can tell us what happens there. But this shadow side, the
shadow of laziness, the shadow of anger that we try to repress, they have their moment. They have
their moment of expression. So long as they don't become dysfunctional, that paradigm of acceptance
makes space for all that. And at some point, you look back and you see, you know, my life went
just like the way it went. And that was nature. And it couldn't have been any other way. And the
proof of it is that it was the way it was. I mean, Bernardo, you're sounding more and more like a
Tai Chi player to me all the time. But yeah, it's fingerland has a good book around this
title, Trying Not To Try, about how you see this thing within Taoism and Buddhism. I think,
perhaps also within Islam, it properly understood its notion of surrender too,
because what Islam literally means. But yeah, this idea of, and I've tried to,
because what you're trying to, it's interesting because you're both trying and
not trying. I mean, I just sit on the couch, I'm not doing Tai Chi. But if I get up and I say,
I'm going to make myself get into the flow state that I'll never get there. So you have to do this
finesse thing, where you open yourself up, but you have to let something take shape within you.
But you don't just let it impulsively. So I keep using Pascal's term, like instead of the spirit
of geometry, the spirit of finesse, it's a finessing kind of thing in which you really have to,
Iris Murdoch's things, you really have to give things their just attention, the attention that
they properly deserve. And figuring out the wisdom of how much attention to give something
and finesse, I think that's a big part of maturity and wisdom. And that's what I met
by when I talked about Philea Sophia, rather than Philea Nikea. Plato consistently contrasts them.
The people that are lovers of wisdom, as opposed to the people that are lovers of victory,
even over themselves. And so I just think that that was beautifully well said.
I don't know if you do anything from the Taoist tradition, but you certainly have
a sensibility that would open you up to those practices, I think, very readily.
Probably. I have no background in this thing. So I'm just speaking from where I am.
The quality I sense in it is the quality of tuning. It's more a tuning to the flow, frequency,
and energy of the moment without judging the energy of the moment. So if the energy of the
moment is like it was from me earlier today, laziness, sit on the living room and watch
electronics videos all afternoon. Then I tuned into that without that energy of judgment,
that energy of control, trying to make it be different. But it works the other way around as
well. Sometimes the energy of the moment is compulsive work. And I tuned into that too. It was
the case a couple of days ago. So that was the energy of the moment. That's what the diamond
wanted to do through me. So on we go. Let's go with it. Transvaluating all values. In other words,
without passing the judgment, whether it's good or bad, within reason, of course. I mean,
if I'm not going to surrender to the energy of anger, which happens often enough,
but I'm not going to give it free reign. The other day, I wanted to do something physically
bad to a neighbor. But okay, there I put limits on that. You know, it got closed, it came until
here. Oh, no, no, no, no, no. You're not going to have free reign. You are there. I recognize
you exist. There is this anger inside me, but I'll stop you here and I will go in and I will punch
a dustbag. I'll give it another outlet. But I was still in tune with it. I didn't repress that.
So I don't know. It has happened naturally to me after my 45th year, this sort of
sliding into the energy of the moment and not fighting it, you know, giving up the illusion
that I was ever in control. And just tune into the radio of nature within reason because I'm
a reflective being. After all, I will use my reflection to establish the limits. I know you
both have to go soon. But I just want to respond to that, please. Yeah, sure, sure. There's just
so much. I mean, if you heard me a minute ago, you're not a Tai Chi doer, your Tai Chi player
with the verb is to playing music. And so the music getting into attunement and playing music
and achieving harmony between the different tunes that you're attuning to is very much the central
Taoist metaphor. So I think, yeah, I think you might be a Taoist without knowing it, Bernardo,
but that that's meant in affection. Schopenhauer said that the closest thing, the closest human
activity to the intrinsic rhythms and characteristics of the wheel was music. Yeah, the rhythm and flow,
the ebb and flow of music was the clearest representation, the closest representation
to the wheel as it is in itself, as opposed to how it presents to us as representation.
So that has to do with that as well, tuning yourself to the flow of nature that is expressing
itself through you. And your only choice is you either fight that or you let it happen. So
I just choose now to not fight that.
I want to get to religion without a religion. But before we do that,
John, what age or what moment in your life was it that precipitated you feeling more
at peace or surrendering to a part of yourself that you resisted? Because right now, when I look
at both of you, you're calm, you seem to have a well-developed Veltan Shaung, otherwise it wouldn't
have asked you on to this program. And I think I lack almost all of those. Now I'm also being a bit
harsh on myself when I say that, but I'm definitely not to the degree of peace that you are. You
both are. And I'm curious, so John, what age or what moment, what happened to lead you to where
you are now? Well, that's a different question from the question of where did I realize peace,
because I don't think peace is something I have going back to form. I think peace is something
that I, like maturity, I should always be realizing. I mean, this is similar to the point
that McGee and Barbara make, that one of the surest signs that somebody isn't wise is that
they say to you, I am wise. And that has nothing to do with the synantics or the syntax of the
proposition. And I think the similar thing, I almost think somebody who says that I'm perpetually
at peace, I'd be a little bit worried about that they, I mean, the Buddha, for example,
classically warned against people who pursue meditation to get that sort of spiritually
bypassed contentedness, because then they're useless. They're useless for other people. They're
useless for trying to reduce suffering, enhancing agency, improving connectedness, meaning in life.
So I just want to say that I don't want to put it into the having mode way of understanding it.
What put me on the path to trying to realize peace within and peace without, if you'll allow me that,
sort of the Jewish notion of Shalom, or the Plato's notion of justice, which has a lot to do
with that kind of peace and harmony, not with our notion today so much. But put me on that path was
a loss and an encounter. I was in a fundamentalist Christianity that now upon reflection traumatized
me. I'm grateful for it though. I've learned with therapy and I'm being grateful to it because it,
you know how you have a mother tongue language? That Christianity was my mother religion. It gave
me the taste for meaning and wisdom and self-transcendence and fellowship and trying to get to a deeper
aspect and the sacred that I'm grateful for. But nevertheless, it seriously traumatized me.
And then there was experiences that brought me out of that. But, and I'm glad that that happened.
But because it was my mother religion, it left to kind of hold in me a gap. And then I did a lot
of thrashing around and became sort of a very antagonistic atheist and that kind of thing.
But, and I don't want to make it sound like they're stages. That kept going for a while,
but I'm talking about sort of attenuation on a graph. But in university, I encountered the
figure of Socrates in Plato's work. And it gave me an alternative way of thinking about how to
cultivate wisdom, self-transcendence, fellowship, a relationship to what's sacred, moving into the
depths. And that for me put me on a course of seeking. Now, what happens in academic philosophy,
I think Bernardo will back me up until very recently. The topic of wisdom drops off the table
and you get into, you know, epistemology and metaphysics. And, you know, and I think Bernardo
and I have shown that's valuable. And so I pursued it for its own sake. But the hunger for what I saw
in Socrates, and then later, as I guess alluded to in Spinoza, wasn't being met
in academic philosophy. So I undertook Tai Chi, the past in the meditation, meta-contemplation,
practices. And I started to get a sense of the perspectival, participatory,
procedural transformations of wisdom. And then, lo and behold, fourth generation cognitive science
was emerging. And people were starting in psychology to talk about wisdom before they talked about it
in philosophy, by the way. And these two streams just started to, there was like a kairos in the
world. The world was bringing these two together. And I needed them to come together. And I just
happened to be there at the right place and the right time for that convergence without
the convergence without and the convergence within met. And that was for me, the kairos,
the turning point. And that's the point from which I have not looked back. I hope that answers your
question. Bernardo, what about you? I don't think there was a specific point where a major transition
happened. I think it was a progressive sort of giving in to what is. I still suffer from a lot
of anxiety. So taking my cue from John, let me highlight this. I take it for granted that we
all suffer. So sometimes I don't emphasize this, but I don't want to come across as somebody
spiritually enlightened because I'm anything but and then I mean it when I say it. I suffer from
anxiety. But the difference is I don't fight with it anymore that much. When anxiety is there,
my anxiety is there. And before there would be multiple layers of fights and meta fights and
meta meta fights against the anxiety. Should I be anxious or not? I'm wasting my time by being
anxious. I don't have a reason to be anxious. So how do I make myself not be anxious? Oh,
that thing, you know, it's mushrooms. That didn't stop completely. But it's a lot less
present. There is an easier sort of, okay, this is the energy of the moment. I'm anxious. Okay,
I'm anxious. How did that happen? I think suffering has a lot to do with it. Suffering has a lot to
do with insight with becoming more mature, because it's the one thing in nature that makes you stop
and reevaluate your narratives. Because if you're not suffering, then you're living an epicurean
life, which is irresistibly unexamined. Why would you stop and examine it? You're having fun.
You're having a ball. So there is something about suffering that is directly tied, I would say,
even an enabler of insight and maturation, because it forces you to stop and think because, you know,
your game is not working. Something is going wrong in the game you're playing. Something is wrong
in your narratives, in your values, somewhere, something is not right. And it's that consistent
undermining that suffer puts you through like water against a rock, you know, it doesn't kick
the door open in one go. But over the years, it softens you like it softens the rock. It makes
you less angular, more roundish. There is more nuance, more subtlety, more finesse, as John put
it, and less internal fight. I wouldn't be able to tell you a precise moment, but it happened
through suffering, for sure. And it is happening. It's a verb, it's not a noun, it's not the place
you arrive at. It's a path that you accept to allow nature to pursue through you. And I say this
more or less metaphorically, I don't say this in a religious sense. I'm not saying that I'm
controlled, or some spirit incarnated in me, and I'm trying to convey the feeling of it through
metaphor. And the feeling of it is the feeling that you are not in control. It's just that you are
not fighting with the rhythm and flow of nature as it wants to go through you at that moment.
What I could tell you is that until I was, when I was 32, I was promoted to a director position
in the company I was working for, which is a major company. It was Europe's top 50. It's in the
FTSE, a major, major company. If that company stopped existing today, there would be no new
electronics for five to 10 years. And at 33, I was director, probably the youngest at the company
at that time. And that was the peak of my adaptive self. The adaptive self is that personality that
has found a way to secure a place in the world for themselves, despite all the shit that you go
through, like losing my father when I was 12, and then you adapt to the circumstances and you
create a way for you in the world. The adaptive self is a tool to get there. And it reached a
peak when I was 32 towards 33. And it was at that moment when something happened, I thought I had
found, well, I found a growth. I mean, the person who was then my wife, I found a growth in her
breast. And it took two weeks for doctors to rule out cancer. But in those two weeks, I was confronted
with the reality that although my adaptive self ticked every box that it had set for itself when
I was 12, like these are all the goals I've achieved in my life, although it was extraordinarily
successful. At the end, I was not in control of anything. And the carpet could be pulled out of
my feet the next moment. And it can happen now. I think I mentioned to you last time,
you can get a phone call in the next 30 seconds, that will destroy my life as I know it now.
So that happened. And that was the moment of awakening. That was the first, oh, shit.
And from that point, 33 until 43, 44, say, thick 10 years, that's when this transition
happened. And in that process, there was a lot of anxiety, a lot of inner fight.
But recently, it has gotten a lot better. For some reason, all I can tell you is that it's an
ongoing process that I didn't achieve. I slid into. And I would probably have
slide it into it kicking and screaming. The difference is, once I was sliding, I figured,
can't stop this slide anyway. So let's see where it goes.
Bernardo, can I ask you a question? Sure. Because one of the reasons why I've been
trying to come up with this, work out this notion of participatory knowing is, again, to try and get
out from a purely active or a purely passive epistemic and ontological existential stance.
The romantic, I just make it, the empiricist, I just receive it. And my experience is, these
processes, we have, there's similarities. That's what I try to get at with the idea that I
participated in it. I'm not just sort of passively receiving, and I'm not making it happen. It's
again, this trying not to try. I'm trying to, the metaphor I use is becoming someone's friend.
I can't make it happen. You're my friend. I can't just sort of like, okay, be my friend.
I have to participate in it. And so I'm trying to, I'm not only trying to make an
epistemological point about participatory knowing, I'm trying to give people a concept by which they
can understand how to get into right relationship with these kinds of pathways. Does that land
for you? Does that resonate for you? Absolutely. Look, I don't have a recipe as I'm sure you're
not asking for one either, because it's an easy way to go about it. But to me, it went hand in hand
with a form of self-knowledge and self-acceptance, which was intimately tied to my view of what
reality is. These two things were not separate from each other. So that's why I keep on insisting on
the importance of a plausible ontology that's conducive to this. Because for me, it was indispensable
because the way I'm put together, my intellect is the bouncer of my heart.
If I do not have a plausible intellectual hypothesis to ground whatever I'm pursuing,
I shut myself off from it. And there was a lot of shadow acceptance. Look, I never said this
because I was never asked, but I will volunteer this now. It will probably surprise the vast
majority of the audience. A big part of my shadow was vitriolic criticism of woo woo,
paranormal, new age, cosmic mind, all that stuff. I was so caustic about that. I would jump to
criticism so quickly. I would be so critical of all this stuff in my 20s and 30s. It required a
sort of involved years-long intellectual process for me to accept this because I needed the
intellectual plausibility. But it was not the only game. There was an emotional opening to
that softer side of myself that I'm giving expression to right now. If you met me 10 years ago,
I would have very little empathy. I would be very black and white. My IMTP score and a personality
test, my T score, was the maximum possible score. I have answered every question in a way that tilted
me to T. The evaluator, I was doing that for a company, the evaluator looked at that and thought,
you were the first perfect T, perfect thinker. Thinking over value is everything for you.
He said, I was the first to score a perfect score on the T, could not have been a higher.
That was my conscious self, my adaptive self. Everything was thinking because it helped.
It helped shut away the trauma of my father's loss. It helped so much. It was such a brilliant
adaptive move that had its place, but then it no longer had its place. Opening up to those other
psychic, well, psychological functions was a process of shadow acceptance for me. A very
difficult process of shadow acceptance because suddenly I was becoming everything I was critical
of, not to an extreme, but to even dip my toe in those waters was like, what am I doing? I still
have it. I still have it secretly. Last week I was invited to an online conference
and I really had to hold myself back because my shadow side was screaming about the style,
the language that other people were using. I was like, come on, get a grip. Stop this. Stop this
bullshit. Which of course is not the fact of the matter. Those people have their perspective. They
have their journey. They have their path, but integrating this in a way that doesn't go
to extremes either way was difficult. It's like an onion. It never ends. There is always a new
layer of acceptance of yourself, acceptance of the world. I call it the ball of string.
The ball of string. You're always unwinding it and it seems like it's never going to change.
It's endless. When you think you got there, then oh, no, no. Then comes the next thing from,
look at this now. And you go, oh, shit. It's even worse than I thought.
There's so much convergence between your story and mine on that point. I mean, I specifically took
up, I only described the light side of it. I did describe the shadow side of it. I specifically
took up the Tai Chi and the Buddhism and everything because that was me opening myself up to the
woo-woo and to kinds of knowing that weren't computational thought and argumentation for
very similar reasons. It changed me from behind. It changed me from my blind side. I didn't put
it vocally present, but that's what happened in the process, right? I think that's always how it
happens. It doesn't happen to your control. No, no. So I just wanted to share with you that I
resonated with what you said about that because it's something very similar for me. And I now have
garnered the reputation of the person. I suppose in this channel, I seem much more the positivist,
but I'm often in other things. I'm the person who talks about all the woo that other people
don't want to talk about. So yeah, I wrestle with that. I wrestle with something similar.
And I wrestle with how to separate critique, which anybody who's advocating position should
be open to critique and discussion from that destructive smasher that wants to just smash
it down. It's like, okay, here's how I respond. But part of responding is to try and genuinely
listen, which is often very challenging for me because I grew up having to listen to the word
of God and the word of my parents. And so my reactance to that is, I'm going to speak, and I'm
going to speak monologically, and I'm going to overwhelm people with my speaking. And one of the
shadow reasons why I'm taking up this whole Dialogos project is to learn, no, no, no. You don't want
to be a monologue. The Cartesian monologue, monadic mind is what got us into this problem.
And if you're going to really enter into a Dialogical mind, then listening matters as much as
speaking. But that's been very challenging for me because listening is often triggering a sense
of vulnerability to authority and to dictation. And I'm playing on both senses of the word dictation
there. Yeah, I recognize that. And it never ends in the sense that to this day, if you look at how
I articulate my own views, I articulate them purely on the basis of reason and empirical evidence.
So you still see that my shadow, although I accept it, it's there. And that's what I think is
important, that people who are in the paradigm of fight, they don't understand, to incorporate the
shadow doesn't mean that you killed the shadow or that you know, you sort of accept its expression.
And a big expression of my shadow, you see my work. My work is purely on the everything I do,
I argue on the basis of reason and evidence 100%. And I am fully aware that that's not a whole
story. I'm fully aware that there is a lot of intuition that there are aspects of reality
that do not comply to Aristotelian logic. Why should they? Why should the set of natural
axiomatic statements of a monkey be such that they encompass the whole of reality, right? Of
course not. So I'm keenly aware that introspective insight, intuition, feeling, these count as much
to build up one's worldview or more, maybe they count more than reason and evidence.
But I am the way I am. I have my shadow. And my shadow needs to go through this purely on the
basis of reason and evidence. I had private exercises about integrating my shadow. One paper
I published in a technical journal, the Journal of Consciousness Studies, one of the main philosophy
journals in the world today. You got the paper there, you have a PhD. I made a point, I usually
use the words extended mind or universal subjectivity, something academic and neutral. In that paper,
I thought I'm going to do an exercise here. I'm going to use the words cosmic consciousness,
which were the words that used to give me shock. I made a point of putting it there.
Yeah, and it was accepted the rest is history, but I sort of on purpose made my life more difficult
to sort of, you know, embrace the process I was in. So I wrote about cosmic consciousness,
I had to look in the mirror and say, I published a paper in which I talk about cosmic consciousness,
what are you going to do now? Are you going to shoot yourself in the head? No, it's done. It's
happened. So that was part of my own exercise. That's such a great story. Thank you for sharing
that. I've done similar things, but that's really precious. Thank you. That's really
wonderful. I'm happy that you can now apprehend it mostly through humorous lens,
rather than, you know, the tension that was at the time, no doubt when you were doing it.
There's still tension. There's always a new layer. Yeah, there's the humor,
which also helps a lot, I think. I mean, it's really conducive to cognitive flexibility and
insight. That's another thing that the West needs to just to throw out a random, not totally random,
but and this aligns with the stuff I talk about in a serious play. We need to figure out how to
reintegrate humor back into spirituality. That's part again of that separating the air from the
earth and the fact that, you know, somebody once pointed out, you know, there's no humor in the
Bible. That's a very odd thing. I asked someone this, did Jesus make any jokes? So not the worst
recorded. Now, I doubt that he didn't, because I mean, when you actually get closer, you know,
approaches to stage figures, they are, I mean, Socrates has a lot of humor running through
him. And there's all this stuff going on. He does word play and all kinds of humor. He could be
more funny, but nevertheless, but I think of somebody like Kierkegaard and the humor running
through his work is just, you can't separate, you can't separate the philosophical and the
spiritual project from the humor in Kierkegaard. And Kierkegaard said something really interesting
about these two figures. He said, I follow Jesus, but Socrates is my teacher. And so, and I really
resonate with that in some, in important ways. But I think, you know, I want to, I'm commending
Bernardo and I'm recommending and myself included that we try to reintegrate the spirit of humor
into our spirituality because of all of the work about how much humor, right, how much it integrates
different kinds of knowing, how much it facilitates cognitive flexibility, how much it opens you up
to other person's perspective, affords insight. The fact that we've kept that out of our spirituality
is only detrimental. It's only detrimental. And if you remember in the name of the Rose,
this was actually one of the central topics. Remember the document that was being kept hidden
and people were being killed about was Aristotle's treatise on laughter, right? And that's what had
to be kept out at all costs. And I think Echo was pointing to something really important there,
that if until we can properly reintegrate the spirit of humor with, you know, our spirituality,
I think we're still seriously truncated in our ability to develop a sensibility that is properly
or at least maybe even optimally responsive to the meeting crisis. So that's why I was glad
to see the humor mixed with that. Because, you know, people can relate those events and they can,
they can, they can go back into that. Yeah, exactly. You're always doing that. They can go back into
that like that moment of like, ah, right. But the fact that it was so spontaneously woven with
humor, I just wanted to commend that and recommend that to other people. And if humor is also something
you have to participate in, you can't make it and you can't just wait for it to happen, right?
Like you have to participate in it. You have to slide into it the way Bernardo says.
Yeah, at some point you go through this so many times that, you know, your, your self-opinions
and your, your opinions in general get shattered so many times that it becomes very difficult to
take yourself without humor. That's what I meant when I told you last time, Kurt, don't take yourself
too seriously. Take life seriously, but yourself less so. It has to do with that. Now, if we take
ourselves too seriously, it becomes too tight, you know, the process becomes too hard to,
then there's no point doing that. John, you mentioned the meaning crisis and the way I
wanted to end this was to talk about a religion without a religion, which is your term, John.
But what I mean is that it seems like we've lost, when I say we, I mean modern people, modern
people who value the intellect tend to disparage God and disparage traditional religion.
But then there's this whole. And then even Richard Feynman said that
one of the most important questions, if not the most important question is,
where do we go? What's the modern church? We can't just go back to church. You can't
simply believe. You can't just pray to a statue of Mary. I don't even think you should,
because that's like an idol. So I don't know how Catholics get around that. It's another issue.
But either way, what do we do? So John, do you mind
talking about that a bit? And then Bernardo, I'd like to hear your thoughts. This is more
about speculation rather than, there's no disagreement. It's almost like you're building
something together. Well, I wanted to say that a significant aspect of what I mean,
a dimension of what I mean by the religion that's not a religion is what has been happening here.
The kind of dialogue that is not just debate, the kind of dialogue that's, you know,
that has poesis in it and logos in it and not just logic in it. And so that's important. So when
I'm talking about the religion, so the reason I use a contradiction is because I'm trying to break
out of the way in which we've locked ourselves into an inappropriate sort of exclusivity.
But I want to say one caveat that's really important. I think it's completely empirically
justified in terms of the demographic to talk about the nuns, N-O-N-E-S. These are people who
officially who say on census and apparently sincerely that they have no, they do not belong
to any religion. Okay. Now, that's a, it's a growing group and it will soon be the majority.
That's the demographic fact. I do not want to simply dismiss because I get into good faith
in both senses of the word discussions, even deal logos with people who are Christian,
Buddhist, Muslim, Jewish. And I want to acknowledge and recognize that I see the sincere cultivation
of wisdom and meaning and this kind of humility and the attempt to get inner peace and to see,
to get ontological depth perception. And so I never intended the claim to be everybody's in this.
Okay. I want it, I want that very clear. I think if people are, you know, be able to cultivate
wisdom and virtue and sensibility, you know, transcend all the stuff we've been talking
about within their religion, I don't want to in any way throw a stumbling buck in front of them.
But back to the point, there is the demographic fact that church allegiance is even now starting
to decline in the United States of America. That's undeniable. And Europe is predominantly
non-religious by demographic and things like this. Okay. So there is a group of people,
and this has been growing. And that's the people I'm trying to address. I also helped,
I also hope, and I told that this is the case, that what the work I do helps people who are
within a religious tradition find more meaning and wisdom within it. But I think it's the case
that the nuns are a large and growing demographic, especially in the developing world. Okay.
Now, the thing we can't, with the thing we shouldn't think, still speaking demographically,
is they're all Sam Harris atheists. That's not, that's not what's going on. Are some of them that?
And I say that because I want to challenge the idea that it's primarily just intellect
that makes people go into the nuns. It's not intellect in our narrow, truncated,
suffocated sense of intellect right now. Some of it is, but most of these people readily and
reliably and enthusiastically describe themselves as spiritual, but not religious, which, and the
thing about that is the fact that that is so pervasively said and so pervasively valorized,
and so little thought is given to what the hell does that actually mean, right? In any kind of
coherent fashion indicates what's going on with these people. So what does that mean?
Well, that's the point. It means something like an incoherent sense that they want to deal with
self-deceptive, self-destructive patterns. They want to come to a more inner alignment. They want
to be more in touch with reality. They want to be more connected to other people. They want more
meaning in life. They want more wisdom. They want to be able to see, and they don't use this word,
but I would make the case that that's what they're talking about. They want to see virtue in themselves
and in the world. And I think that's why we have the issue, and I'm not taking a stance on this
politically, but we have the whole phenomena of virtue signaling that expresses a hunger in our
culture. Wherever you stand on the woke pseudo religion, there is a hunger that's being expressed
there. Why do we need virtue signaling? Because we're hungry for. We want to see it in ourselves
and other people, but we don't want to go through the transformations, the suffering that's required.
So these people are, that's what they mean. They want to do this, but they don't find,
and this is, I think, much more important than disbelief. They don't find for political reasons,
for experiential reasons, for idiosyncratic reasons, for reasons of trauma, for moral reasons.
They don't find the religions relevant. That's the main judgment. It's not falsity,
it's irrelevance. I want to use a Jamesian idea here, right? The religions aren't viable for them.
And simply trying to convince them that religion is belief is often, like, it's extremely clumsy,
because that's not the basis of the rejection. And so what they mean is, you know, I find those
things irrelevant to satisfying this need, but this need needs to be satisfied. And I'm not
clear what this need is. So what I'm going to do is I'm going to do this auto-didactic eclectic
search for practices and beliefs and images and groups of people. And what they basically do,
what spirituality means in practice, even though they won't say this, and there was a very good
argument, I say about this, is spirituality means the religion of me. It means my religion.
It means what I've done. Remember, not all religions are worship-based. So you have to give
up that Abrahamic ethnocentricity. What they're doing is they're cultivating an ecology of practice
that's trying to help them engage in self-transcendence, enhance connectedness, more inner peace,
more contact with what's real, including the reality of other people, get some kind of virtue
into their life. But they suffer from the fact that they suffer from any project that is driven
primarily in an auto-didactic, fragmented fashion. And so they are easily prey to both
internal and external compulsive manipulation, because my student, my RA, he's not my colleague,
Jensang Kang, he's Jensang Kim, he's done research. And let me say the whole thing,
because the whole thing is important. If you compare people who are within a religious tradition
to people that are outside of a religious tradition, and you compare them by our best
sort of measures on wisdom, and we are developing such measures, by the way,
the people within the religious traditions do better. That's an empirical thing. However,
there's no difference between the various traditions.
It just matters that you belong to one.
Right. So that's why I keep saying, and you know, and this goes with arguments made by Steven
Bachelor, right, when he talks about Buddhism, what's called belief, because we have reduced
religio, that sense of connectedness to belief, and even belief originally meant to give your
heart to something, but we've reduced it to the assertion of beliefs. We think, well, all of these
systems, look at how much they're in conflict at the belief level. But it turns out, I don't want
to say that not having beliefs, it would be functional. I'm not saying that. But what I'm
saying is, it's clear that the functionality for the cultivation of wisdom isn't found in the
semantic content of the propositions. And now, and I agree, and I'm going to reinforce it,
I agree with Bernardo's point that, and you can't situate a wisdom ecology in a vacuum. It has to
be situated in a forwarding worldview. And I totally acknowledge that. But what I'm trying to say here
is, they're trying to do this back to the nuns, you're reinforcing the very Cartesian, monologic,
monadic, individualistic frame, and the propositional tyranny, and all the proclivities we
all, myself included, share for self-deception, all of that's just getting reinforced by that
religion of me. And of course, one of the pervasive kinds of things it leads to is spiritual bypassing
and narcissism. And those are, I mean, and your Trungpa wrote a good book about this,
spiritual materialists in the socioeconomic virtue sense of materialism, not in the ontological sense.
Spiritual materialists are the worst. I mean, they're the worst of all. I mean,
because all they want to do is show you their trophy shelf of all their wonderful experiences
that show how unique they are and how the universe is uniquely caring about them. And it's like, wow,
that's harder to get through than somebody who's buying the car to become mature. Because at least
that person is confronting some frustration and suffering. You can get to them. But this person
over here can have the Buddha talks about the contentedness of the cabbage that would just
prevent them from the, you know, the Kierkegaardian realization of that they are always one step away
from the precipice of despair. And I thought it was...
Bernardo jumped in at some point soon.
Well, I just wanted to commend Bernardo on something that I forgot to commend him on,
which is I have also been in a place where suicide seemed the alternative for me.
I also suffer from the nears in my left ear. So I also have not heard silence
in decades. And it also comes with attacks of vertigo. So I just wanted to express
camaraderie with you, Sherrod, on that.
Thank you, Joe.
So Bernardo, about religion without a religion, what do you see as the
desiderata of it, or the criteria, or the checks that need to be ticked?
I think our loss of religion goes hand in hand with our loss of the meaning of certain words.
Because you see, we don't experience reality directly. We sort of tile the world around us
with a mosaic of conceptual signs, right, words. We leave the narrative that we tell ourselves
about what we are living. So words in a sense are important. And we've lost the meaning of so
many words. We've lost the meaning. And I'm not taking a cheap shot at homosexuals by saying this.
Certainly, I'm a defender of homosexuals if you read my site. But we've lost the full meaning
of the word gay, for instance. The meaning, the original meaning of the word gay is spontaneous
joy. But now, you know, now sort of linguistically, only homosexuals have spontaneous joy. Is that
fair now? We lost something. We lost the meaning of the word metaphysics, that which is more primaries
behind and precedes, precedes physics. Now it has become synonym for spiritual woo woo.
And we've lost the meaning of the word religion. Religion comes from the Latin religaere to
reconnect with the source or with transcendence with the ground level of reality from from which
the life force arises. But because of institutionalized religion, it now religion has become synonym with
morals, a moral code, dogmas and beliefs. Where is the rejoining? Where is the relinking? Where
is the religaere? Where is the religion? And the religion sort of got washed away. I mean,
look at the Vatican, they can get, and I say this with some despair, because I care about the total
collapse of Christianity in the West, and I've been to the Vatican, invited for events at the
Vatican, and I was growing hopeful over the last couple of years. But now look at what they are
doing. They use their airtime to talk about arbitrary morals and to insist on a, how to say,
calcified interpretation of scripture. So they contribute to this loss of the meaning of the
word religion. Religion is about the liturgy. It's about the symbolic ritual that points at a truth
that cannot be captured in a conceptual framework. Because why would the cognitive apparatus of a
primate evolved on planet Earth be broad enough to capture every salient truth about reality
in its own closed conceptual system? Why would that be the case? Of course, it's not the case.
There are relevant salient truths that cannot be said, they cannot be worded, that cannot be expressed
through a closed semantic and syntactical system. And I think what religion does is to use
an arsenal of symbols of liturgy to sort of point at that, such that you can have a direct
experience of it once you're shown the way, once you're given a hint, a set of rituals that sort of
puts you in the suitable frame of mind that is conducive to making that final leap yourself.
But that's not what we see. That's not what we see being done by institutionalized,
by the religious institutions that are supposed to nurture religion, especially after the
reformation, you know, you go to a Protestant church, it's fashioned exactly like a tribunal.
The preacher dresses like a judge. And even Catholicism, which still holds on to symbolism,
especially Eastern Christianity, which is not Catholic, but they hold on to those symbols.
But even they, the sermon is almost invariably a moral discourse, telling you how to live and
telling God what to do. Prayer has become, you know, we tell God what God should do. I mean,
where is the really God? We've lost religion. So in an effort to sort of recover that word,
I would say, you know, what we miss is religion, not spirituality. We need religion.
And I say this, I mean, I don't have the past you've had, John. So I don't have that trauma or that
code. So I speak more freely about it. But notice that what I mean by religion is not what religion
has de facto become, because of the way it was institutionalized for power reasons,
but what the word originally meant, what the Latin word originally meant. And I think we are in a
tremendous lack of that in the West. And I think that has a lot to do with the meaning crisis,
because if you are relinked with that transconceptual source, your relationship with yourself and
reality is immediately influenced and transformed by that link. If you open that valve again,
it's a nonconceptual thing. It's not something that you can put in words and explain rationally
in a closed system. You can't do that. But it's life changing, which conceptual systems are not.
And because we have such a long history of Christianity in the West, because that's sort
of built into, and I'll be a Jungian now, it's sort of built into the collective unconscious now.
I think the shortest path back to transcendence, back to that relegare with the meaning,
is through Christianity, but it has to be a Christianity of liturgy, not a Christianity
of morals and beliefs and judgments. Nobody is going to go to Sunday Mass to be judged,
to be told everything you're doing wrong, and to hit the chest and say,
mea culpa, mea culpa, mea culpa three times. As Jung said, myths are living things.
They have to constantly be reinterpreted. They have to grow. And there are many
departure points in Christianity for a sort of refreshing of the Christian myth.
So many. I mean, Jung pointed out one that was very recent to him. He died in 61, and this point
of departure was in 1950. Pius, the 16th elevation of the Virgin Mary to the mother of God, and she
was elevated to the position of sort of the fourth member of the Trinity, so to say, and that brings
in the feminine aspect. That's something to, there's something to be said about that. There is a new
departure point. What happened to Job? What God is that that is so unreflective that does what he
did to Job? What does he tell us about the divinity, about mind at large, whatever you want to call it,
about what is that reflectiveness, and what is our role as reflective beings towards God?
What is, what are we supposed to do for the divinity as opposed to keep telling the divinity
what to do for us? No, I mean, that's another departure point. How do we help God? What is the
meaning of our life in helping that which is transcendent to get to somewhere it apparently
is desperate to get to? These are all points of departure to refresh the myth and turn it
plausible because a myth, although it's never literal, it has to be vaguely plausible in order
to pass through the filter of the intellect and Christianity because it has been frozen for 2000
years deliberately since Constantine. It doesn't refresh itself. This is policy in the Vatican.
And if you talk to the authorities, to the powers that be in the Vatican, it is their policy that
it's the reliability of the tradition that makes Christianity unique. That's their point of view.
But the consequence of that is that you ossify the myth. You don't let it evolve and maintain its
plausibility, maintain its life, maintain its relevance to everyday life as a symbol pointing
somewhere. It has become so implausible, so ossified that it then turned into judgment, morals,
beliefs and dogmas. And nobody goes to church for that. Nobody in their sane mind will go to church
for being judged against ossified moral codes arbitrarily defined by a selective read of the
scripture. Because you can read scripture in a way that justifies nearly anything. Just choose
the book you read and you can basically go anywhere. Read the apocalypse and have a sense about the
Summon Bonin. Let's have a look whether it's really pure goodness when you read that book.
It was not for nothing that it was the most polemical book to be inserted in the Bible.
So, to be honest, I sort of despair a little bit about the end of religion. I think we need
religion desperately. What we don't need is a moral code, judgment and a set of ossified beliefs.
We need something dynamic that has life in it, that's not only outside, but sort of courses
through us and informs our relationship with ourselves and with that which is transcendent
and imminent in the world, that which is beyond Aristotelian logic, beyond language, beyond
conceptual schemes. So, I think that was a beautiful point. There's religious and religious,
they're both contenders for the etymology, but they converge on the idea of binding back or
binding together. And so, I just wanted to make it clear that there isn't a conflict that I tend
to use the term religious as opposed to religious. But they converge anyway, so that's not a big
issue. I was trying to capture that with, I think, with the notion of the religion that's not
religion, because I think religion has come to mean the set of beliefs, the judgment,
and worship is understood as acquiescence in some sort of supernatural authority,
basically, all the things you were saying have ossified. I think that is, and I try to trace
out, there's a long history of how we got to that point where religion has come to mean that.
So, what I'm talking about is not religion in that sense, but it's not a religion.
And the liturgy for me, the liturgy is what I talk about is an ecology of practices,
a whole bunch of practices that are like an ecology. They counterbalance, they coordinate,
they constrain and afford each other to intervene in our psyche in a dynamical and
parallel fashion, because one of the great lessons we've learned from both pedagogy and from
therapy is one-shot interventions into humans don't work, because they're so complex, self-adaptive,
that the system will just re-adapt. And this is, I think, the great insight of Buddhism with the
Eightfold Path. No, no, no. What you have to do, and it's the reason that it's represented by a wheel
with shared spokes, there's a deep symbolism there. It's a self-rolling, it's a self-organizing thing,
and what you want is you want an ecology of practices that is as dynamically self-organizing
as the thing that it's being applied to, so that you have a shot, a hope, of actually
transforming that really complex, recursive, multi-layered dynamical system that a human being is.
So, what I'm doing is I'm trying to really expand the notion of what you meant by the liturgy,
a liturgical, there's a set of practices, and most of the symbols, here's why I use Corban's notion,
are not imaginary, they're imaginal. They're not pictures in our mind, they're ways in which we
enact and seriously play with the world. Just so readers, sorry, not readers, listeners get a
distinction. The imaginary is when I say picture a sailboat in your mind. That's different from
when a child picks up a stick and starts walking in a certain way and pretends that they're a Roman
centurion. They're not forming a picture in their mind, what they're doing is they're adopting a
certain way of configuring their agency and a certain way of seeing the world so that they can
train skills. Why do mammals seriously play? Because that is the primary place in which we
undergo development. And so, what I think, what religions are often doing at the level of ritual,
when they're creating a quality of practices, is they're doing sort of, sort of,
imaginably augmented reality. You know what augmented reality is when you project
virtual reality onto reality in order to see things like a heads-up display for a
debt pilot or something like that? I think religions do that, and I mean this as a cognitive
scientific proposal. They do imaginal enactment so that they can do imaginal augmentation of
reality so that they can, like the child, go through serious, we can go through serious,
both individually and collectively, and I think that's important, you know, development. And again,
I think this is part of the Frommian critique. Religion has degenerated into the having of
dogma rather than the developing of wise, virtuous people. And they've confused that project, I agree
with you, Bernardo, with moral, you know, moral pronouncements. It's like, no, no, no. Telling
me over and over again that something is wrong. That's like telling somebody in therapy. You
don't want to do that anymore. Stop it. Exactly. That's not therapy. That doesn't help anybody,
right? Stop thinking these thoughts. Stop doing that. Right? And so, what I meant by a religion,
by religion, is trying to get all of that, you know, let me, the metaphor, all of that machinery
of an ecology of practices and an imaginably augmented serious play, right, honed in something
that is free from all of the dichotomies that strike back to the Axial Revolution, all the
dualisms that I think not only cut us off from each other, but cut us off from the world and
even from ourselves, and in a way that is also simultaneously responsive to the fact that many
of the mythological forms of the dualism have been undermined by the advancement of science,
right? We had the Copernican Revolution and then we had Darwin. We are being re-embedded.
We are no longer pilgrims from a supernatural realm. That's no longer a viable, and I mean it in
James's sense. That's not viable for us. Now, you can pretend all that science doesn't exist.
That's just, to my mind, spiritual bypassing. And I think that that'll translate into spiritual
bypassing in the rest of your life. And I grew up with people that did that and the claims of
certainty that just put the lie to, had the lie put to them by the anxiety-driven nature of their
lives. It's like, ah, right? We need to somehow come up, and this is part of what I'm talking to
you. We need to come up with a worldview, and I want to use this next word very carefully,
that properly homes our ecology of practices and our enacted imaginal augmentations of
individual social and ontological reality in a way that properly homes them, that validates them,
that gives them, as you said, that we can reliably point to, there's a wise exemplar,
right? There's a path that seems reasonable. And like you said, it doesn't have to be
any kind of equivalent to a scientific theory. But I agree with you, if it doesn't pass the
prima facie filter of plausibility, people are going to be, again, cut into this horrible,
dualistic dichotomy against themselves. And therefore, they're not going to get the inner
peace, the religio within and without that they are seeking. 100 percent agree.
Thank you both. Honestly, thank you so much. It was a pleasure for me. I'm honored to have you
both on. And the audience, if you could see the live chat, the audience, the audience is
overwhelmingly positive. I don't see a single negative comment. Thank you. And where can the
audience find out more about you? John and then Bernardo. John, where can the audience find out
more about you? Sorry, I was just trying to take a look at the live. I mean, the best place to
get to what I think is my apex or most important project is awakening from the meeting crisis.
And there'll be links to that. I think if you should, if you took seriously what I just said
about the exemplification, the exemplification of theologos, I also have an ongoing series called
Voices with Reveki, where I try to do this with people. And then if you want to see the attempt
to integrate theologos with cognitive science directed towards a lot of these issues, I have
two series out there. One is complete called Untangling the World Not, that I unfold dialogically
with Greg Enriquez and then a current one, which is on the nature of consciousness. And so it's
relevant to both of these discussions. And then there's one that's being released right now called
the Elusive Eye, Capital Eye, with Greg Enriquez and Christopher Mastropietro. Again, a dialogical
presentation of the cognitive science and the psychology and the existential philosophy around
this thing we invoke so much, and we know so little about, which is the self. Well, what is a
self? What kind of entity is it? And how should we properly know thyself? He doesn't really mean
your autobiography. He means know what kind of thing a self is. And that's why he often calls
it also being a mortal, a mortal, by the way. So that's how people can reach me. If you want to
know my academic work, just go on Google Scholar and put in my name and you'll get the stuff I
published. You might, if you want, if you're interested in the meaning crisis and mythology
interacting, I also have a book free online called Zombies in Western Culture, a 21st century crisis,
which is how the zombie mythology, as Lou said, is the mythology of our time, because we argue
that it's the mythology. I did it with Chris Mastropietro and Philip Misovic. It's the mythology
by which the culture is expressing, not resolving, but expressing the meaning crisis right now.
Bernardo, where can they find out more about you? What are you working on next?
I'm working for Essentia Foundation now, which is sort of a new platform in which I'm basically
working to promote other people's work, not my own, but in this direction of a ontology of idealism,
some form of objective idealism. That's what I would point people to, go to EssentiaFoundation.org,
one word, Essentia, foundation.org. And about me, just type my name on Google or go to
BernardoCastro.com, one word as well. And Bernardo, I hope that there's an opportunity for you and I
to hang out in person at some point in the future. I would enjoy that greatly.
I'd really enjoy that as well. And talk about our favorite philosophers, because you dropped a few
names then and was like, oh, I was itchy to talk with you about Kiko and a few others.
Okay. Have a great night, both of you. Oh, and for the people watching, if you
would like to see more conversations like this, please do consider going to patreon.com
slash Kurt Jaimungal. Every dollar helps. And there are many other theologutions I'd like to
have. So for example, what's coming up is Yosha Bach. Kastrop mentioned him. Yosha Bach and Donald
Hoffman. That's in the end of August. And at some point, John, I would like to get you and
I don't know if I can announce it because we're still working on it, but a special person.
Okay. What did it say? Three hours and 40?
Four hours, two minutes, 49 seconds for me.
I don't know. I've got six, nine, six, three, six, three, five.
Oh, that's fine. Don't worry about that. Don't worry about that. Okay. Okay. Thank you. Thank you.
Bernardo. Thanks for doing this, Kurt. Appreciate it.
Yeah. Thank you very much, Kurt.
Thank you for staying up, Bernardo. I know it's probably 10 p.m. there.
10 o'clock. I have to have dinner.
Yeah, go eat, go eat. I'm going to email you, Bernardo, and ask you some
advice as to how I should speak to Rupert Spira, because apparently it's a different mode.
To speak to him, you mentioned that he's not interested in analytical conversation.
So I'm going to email you and ask you about that as well.
But contrary to a lot of the other spiritual teachers, he can engage with it.
But he would try to have you have the insights directly, as opposed to telling you what the
insight is. Great. Well, I'm looking forward to it. Thank you. Thank you a lot.
John, many thanks. Appreciate it again.
You too, Bernardo. Wonderful. And I met what I said. I hope at some point we can
hang out together in person. That'd be wonderful.
It shall happen. It shall happen. I see it happening.
Good. Bye-bye. All right, guys, take care. Bye.
Just a second. It's not over. There's a bonus section of audience questions.
Could you ask about the paradox inherent in the trying not to do?
In some states of being, you might be tone deaf. I feel sometimes force is needed.
I think the person is referring to Slingerland's phrase, trying not to try,
which is not the same thing as trying not to do. There's a very important distinction there.
The idea is very, like, let me give you the example of, you can't just, I'm going to go
into the flow state right now. There we go. No, no, no, right. But that doesn't mean you
can just sit here and wait for the flow state to happen. What do you have to do? You have to
cultivate the finesse of learning how to get into the right relationship. And that means also
attitudinal and sensibility so that there's a real possibility that flow will take shape.
This is why I try to use the notion of participation. And repeatedly, it's, you know, and I understand
when you're sparring with people, you're trying not to force it. You're trying to actually flow
with the person. One of the best things to, if you're sparring with a person is to complement them.
That was a really good block because what they then do is they monitor their blocking and then
they lose flow, right? So, yeah, I get what you're saying that the point about, you know,
sometimes you need force. There's this notion in Tai Chi Chuan of Pung, which is I want to hold my
arm as if water was flowing through it. It's not rigid like this. And it's not limp like that. It's
like waters flowing through it because what that does is it coordinates all the small muscles and
the large muscles and brain body coordination so that I can flow any inertial force through it
very, very effectively. And by the way, you can, you enhance that through imaginal augmentation.
Actually practice imagining having water flow through your hand and then having somebody
press on your arm and know what the difference between resisting it with force and resisting it
with flow. Because there's a real felt difference and there's a difference in the functionality.
So, I understand, I think, I hope, I'm trying to be open, I'm trying to be responsible to, like,
sometimes you have to just keep going and I get that. But what I want to say is one of the things
you have to, you have to give up the notion even of keep going as a willpower. One of the most
disconfirmed notions in empirical psychology is the notion of willpower. It was actually seriously
proposed by Bowman Weister. They're initially thought, you know, there's sort of mental energy
that we, like the ego depletion that we have at reserve to just push ourselves through things.
And then it turned out that there's been just massive failures to replicate that.
It doesn't look like that's the case. What seems to be the case is what you want to do
is develop a capacity to get more flexibility in your framing of situations. So options open up to
you. So that's the effort. The effort is in making yourself more flexible and responsive,
more liable to catch the flow. And the more frequently you do that, the more frequently you
will do it. And that's the way you sort of persist. I'm sorry, I'm trying to, I'm trying to speak
almost as I would within the Tai Chi, you know, Tai Chi Chuan instruction. But like, it's very
predictive of people that who will like, who are trying to deal with, I will just do, they,
it's predicted that those people will fail, that they will fall into recidivism. Right.
Let me give you an example. I'm going to lose weight. My willpower, you'll fail.
Right. And in fact, I've lost 20 pounds on this diet. Within five years, you'll be back to where
you were 95%. I'm really confident in that prediction. What is one of the things that
tends to put people in the 5% joining a group of people who are also trying to lose weight?
That is a much more powerful predictor than you. Right. And I'm not, I'm not trying to insult
anybody. I was insulting myself there because I remember doing that kind of thing. Right. And
so, yeah, you have to persist sometimes, but try to think of the persistence as flexibility and finesse
and putting yourself into right relationship with others as a way of keeping you going,
rather than you being like Sisyphus pushing the rock up the hill. That's how you try to answer
that question. Okay, Bernardo, I'll repeat the question. And by the way, it wasn't Queer Doe,
it was Mr. Chocolate Cookie. I can't add to what John has just said. All right. Okay. So Queer
Doe, now this is actually Queer Doe's question. Is the move toward veganism in our society an
example of shedding of spiritual bypass of thinking humans are special and supreme? So Bernardo.
Look, I think if we are to have a viable civilization consuming a lot less meat and a lot
more vegetables is a indispensable element of the way out. And there are million reasons for this.
Agriculture of animals is extremely inefficient. You need a whole lot of water, a whole lot of
space. So it's a very inefficient way to produce proteins and calories. It's a planet racking way
of doing that, not to mention the incredible amount of suffering that is inflicted on higher
animals with complete nervous systems, because we treat them as products. So I think the consumption
of meat we engage in today is preposterous. It's outrageous morally. It's an affront to our
responsibility towards future generations. And it is literally carcinogenic towards us. It's also
unhealthy. It's an indulgement of a addiction that we do not want to give up. So I think
something in the direction of veganism is indispensable. But can you remind me of the
context of the question again, because that's not what he actually asked.
Sure. Yeah, sure. And just as an aside, there's a great video by this YouTuber called What I've
Learned that demonstrates that much of the environmental claims against meat eating has
been debunked. And I'll send you that after because it's surprising. So is the move toward
veganism in our society an example of shedding of spiritual bypass of thinking humans are special
and supreme? No, I don't think so. I don't even see, I don't even quite see the motivation for the
question. I don't think reducing the amount of meat we consume is a sign of any spiritual
transformation. I think it's a sign of reason, good, old, plain reason. If you want to do something
good to yourself, to others, animals on the planet, you will consume less meat. It's as clear cut,
but now and unavoidable as that, I think. John, do you have any thoughts to add to that?
Well, I'd like to see the debunking video. I suspect I will have a lot of critical responses
to it because I think the biomechanics of how many people you can feed with wheat versus how
many people you can feed with the cows that you fed the wheat to is just like the cow has to use
most of that energy to be a cow. So I'm not clear how you can get out. That seems to me just to be
a rock bottom, you know, a bioeconomic fact that you're not going to be able to debunk.
I can briefly say one of them is that most of the land that cows are on or the land that
food cannot be grown on anyway, and much of the time when they talk about the water that's used
for a pound of meat, that's rainwater, which would have come onto that land anyway. And so
there's many other, there's many ways that the statistics that we know about that are alarming
with regard to meat production, speaking purely of rumen and animals, that has been debunked or
at least highly contested. And I didn't know about this until just a month ago. Now that doesn't,
at all, cover the suffering of animals, which to me is the main point. I don't like how they're
treated. I can speak from a personal experience. We have a vegetable garden here at home.
The main patch is about 35 square meters. We have different patches, but the main patch is 35
square meters. And every year, we produce a lot more vegetables than we can eat. I am my girlfriend.
And we distribute to our neighbors. We are well known for this. Around July,
the food distribution begins here. Now in that same space, I perhaps could keep three chickens
and eat their eggs. There's no comparison. When it comes to pound for pound, what they can use that
space for to produce vegetables is just incomparable to the equivalent using a lower animal. I
certainly could not have a cow in that space. The difference would be that you wouldn't be growing
a cow or a sheep or a chicken in that place where you could grow vegetables, but instead
to do both. I'll send you the video. Well, but you know, look at Brazil. Where are they growing
cows? Where there was verging rainforest before? So to claim that that space cannot be used for
anything else is a self affirming question. It's the idea that it's sort of unproductive
because it's just laying there and we're not growing wheat on it. We couldn't grow wheat on it.
That's to fail to see the whole intricate way in which the ecology works that supports the areas
of land upon which we grow the wheat. That's just a very atomistic appraisal. Anyways, we're
arguing in absentia. We need to see the video. And you know, Bernardo and I both, we have our
knives out and we should stop. And I do want to respond to the other part of the question.
Sure. If I could be allowed. I agree. I agree with Bernardo. I think you could make a completely
justifiable justification of veganism in some way along that. I mean, it depends. I try to
find the intersection point and I'm not saying that I'm right. I'm saying this is what has worked
for me between the moral arguments and these kinds of ecological argument. So I don't eat mammals.
I don't eat octopus because they have the complex nervous systems. They probably have
the metacognition and the fluid intelligence that is similar enough to mine that they,
in some, I don't mean metacognitively, but they value their existence in a way that's comparable
to mine. And the mammals tend to be the most egregious for the socioeconomic
and ecological. You know, and there's also the methane issues around the cows and stuff like that.
So I think you can make that, you can make that move totally that way. And I agree with Bernardo.
I think a lot of people do make the move that way. I do think it's possible that there are people who
also take up veganism as a transformative practice in which they are trying to get out of an
anthropocentric way of being. I have interacted with those people. I agree with Bernardo. I do
not think that that is a requirement in order to be a vegan. But do I think it's possible that
people take it up as, you know, something, and I don't mean an insult either way, something analogous
to kosher. Human beings have traditionally managed their diet as a way of bringing around
fundamental transformations. And one of the transformations that I think does need to be,
you know, realized today is getting out of a kind of, you know, unquestioned anthropocentric
worldview. And veganism had ideal individuals in which they live veganism. I think that's the
right verb. They live veganism as a way of trying to do something in that sense, religious,
for the transformation of kind of, you know, of a fundamental transformation of their cognitive
culture of grammar. They want to get out of an anthropocentric way of being. And I think if
people are doing it that, I think that's also justifiable. I think that's a justifiable reason
for taking up veganism. And I would think of that as a, I think you could make a good case,
I'm trying to, that that's a religious act, as opposed to an act of socioeconomic or moral prudence.
I don't know if we're not going to sustain anything about that. But that's,
I can, I can see where you're coming from. I'm not sure I agree. But I can clearly see.
Just to give you some background for why I said I'm not sure I agree. I think the
productization of life is a very serious problem. But if you look at ancient cultures,
they would kill a bison and eat the bison. That could also be a form of religious expression.
If you respect the animal you killed as a sacrifice to give you sustenance. So I think
historically, you know, Abraham was asked to kill his son. The idea of sacrifice
has been embedded historically, as far as we can go. So I wouldn't,
my tendency is not to make anything fundamental about meat at a religious level. What I think is
fundamentally wrong is the productization of life. That I think is an affront. It's a disaster
that we should never have allowed to start. But now we've allowed it not only to start,
but to develop and to become addicted to it. Yeah, I see that. I think, you know, the product,
I think you call it the purification of life, the commoditization of everything. I think that's
part of the Frommian modal confusion. I don't know. I think there is something to speak about
killing what you're going to eat. I think it has become... And also the reverse, eating what you
kill. And eating what you kill. Exactly. It has become too easy to go to the supermarket and buy
a slice of beef and think of it as a steak, not as the muscle, bloody muscle of a leaving,
breathing creature that had a high level nervous system. I think there is something to be said
to the idea that if you want to eat meat, one, you have to pay the integral cost. And the integral
cost is many, many, many times higher than what we are paying today. And two, if you really want it,
then kill what you're going to eat. Because killing is something that ties you up to that
life you've taken forever, for all eternity. And there is a form of respect, a form of
anti-banalization when you are forced to kill what you're going to eat. And in the old times,
in the old times, like 100 years ago, you know, Europe of the 1920s, grandma would go, you know,
to the chicken pan, take a chicken and kill that chicken. And that process would be witnessed by
the kids or kill a pig. Have you ever seen a pig being killed? It's a very, very noisy, very bloody,
very long drawn out affair. I think if you were forced to have to pay that price for your sustenance,
I think it's valid, in principle, to take a life, a hunter taking a life to sustain his family.
Because it forces you a level of respect, it forces you an awareness of the cost
for that life of being robbed of it, for sustaining yours, that I think makes the whole thing
harmonious. Again, nature is not all a sea of roses. Nature entails enormous sacrifices.
The problem is that we get the benefit and we hide the sacrifice away from ourselves. And that is
what I think is dysfunctional. And we cannot feed 7.5 billion people with meat in a way that
would do justice to what I'm saying. You cannot have 7.5 billion people go hunt a wild boar.
There aren't enough wild places and wild boars around. So I think because we have become so many,
the only way, the only decent way out of it is something very close to veganism. Perhaps we
can allow ourselves the luxury of meat now and then if we pay the actual price of it,
instead of this fictitious price we pay today, which is not the integral price of meat.
That was very good. Last question is from David. What did you guys enjoy most about this conversation?
It's conversing, being in the presence of John and being in his dance.
The appreciating, the real capacity to appreciate both in the sense of
understand value and the increase in value, we use appreciate to mean all of those,
to appreciate the dance of the logos as an inherently valuable aesthetic
independent from the victory of the debate. I really enjoy that. I genuinely enjoy that with
Bernardo. I share it completely. Yeah. For me, it's like sparring in martial arts. The asshole
is the person who in sparring tries to knock you out all the time because it's like, no, no,
no. That's not what we're doing here. We're trying to help each other get better at something.
And you get into the flow state when that happens and that's wonderful for both people.
And the other person grows and you grow through each other and all of that has so much value.
And I think the value of that has been lost by the adversarial zero-sum game
model of debate and discourse that now is pervasive in our culture. And so while I
appreciated and I did a lot of the content, the opportunity to exemplify the joy
of participating in the flow of the dance of the logos, that's really important to me.
Exemplifying it more and more to people, right now to my mind, I'm not saying this will go
for all of eternity, but right now to my... We can't get enough of that right now. We can't get
enough of the aesthetically pleasing, this is Plato and me making it beautiful,
the aesthetically pleasing presentation of the dance of the logos. We can't get enough of that
right now. We need more and more of it all the time. So I thank you, Kurt, for affording this and
making it possible. And lastly, before we recorded the podcast, I was feeling extremely nervous.
And so I asked John, who is an expert meditator for some advice. After this, I'm including an
extra bit which happened directly before we went live, particularly because people have already
commented that this isn't a live stream, this is a love stream. And I thought you might get a kick
out of seeing the interactions between John and Bernardo. John, you may need to help me out right
now for one minute with some breathing exercises to calm me down. Can you take me through? I'm
honest for 30 seconds. Okay, so close your eyes. And what I want you to do is move forward a little
bit so you feel off center forward and then a little bit back so you feel off center backwards.
Now keep going back and forth slowly, a little less each time, slowly zeroing in where you feel
centered front to back. Once you feel centered back and forth, now do the same thing side to side.
Move to your left, then to your right, again, a little less each time until you zero in where you
feel centered side to side. Okay, now repeat the same thing with your head.
Back and forth side to side.
Now when you feel centered, just feel as everything's dropping down into your lower belly.
Okay.
Thank you, my friend. You're welcome, my friend. Critique was that, well, there are two critiques.
One was from people who are unfamiliar with you, John. They're more Bernardo fans that are like,
look at John getting all worked up. That's fine. I personally like that. I think that's
what made it engaging. Number two is, yeah, exactly. I hope that, I mean, I aspire that
even if I get passionate or worked up, I've never in any way insulted or disrespected.
Not at all. Nowhere near. Oh, no, you can get a lot harder than that. I come from the corporate
world 20 years. I mean, my skin is thicker than a crocodile. It's no problem. It's important.
I get that, but I also feel affection for you, Bernardo. So do I, John. Yeah, so I want to make
sure that's conveyed as well. Yeah, but you don't need to pay special attention to it or
walk on eggshells. No, just be yourself. It's fine.
