Welcome to Theories of Everything. My name is Kurt Geimangel and today we have a special
series, a new series called Rethinking the Foundations. This year, the Rethinking the
Foundations of Physics is centered around the question of what is unification? I'm honored
that I get to bring you an astonishing lecture, tying together almost every unsolved problem
in physics in a bow, so not only a neat bow, but a simple one by Professor Neil Turok.
Professor Turok is a cosmologist who holds something called the Carlo Fidani Roger Penrose
Distinguished Visiting Chair, if I'm not mistaken, at the Perimeter Institute and also the Higgs
Chair of Theoretical Physics at the University of Edinburgh. And to those who are unfamiliar
to physics, if this was the 1800s, those chairs would be called thrones. So anyway,
take it away, sir.
Thank you very much, Kurt. It's a great pleasure to be with you. Let me just start by saying
how much I appreciate your podcast. I think it's run in a different way than other ones,
more conversational. And I think that's wonderful to get more discussion, we can have the better.
And so I'm looking forward to lots of interaction with the audience. The issues at stake are
very basic to our understanding of where we sit, why we're here, how we got to be here,
and so on. And I think, hopefully, the ideas I'll explain are accessible enough for everyone
to engage with. So I'm going to show my screen. So the title of my tour is really designed
to address the basic question Kurt is asking in this series, namely, what is unification?
And the answer I would give is that unification, understanding the laws of physics and the nature
of the universe in a unified way, means understanding the universe, that the laws of physics and
the arena for physics, namely space and time, are really a single entity. And you might
think this was obvious, that our best way of understanding the unified laws of physics
is to look at the universe. That's the maximum data we have available. And not to do that,
is kind of insane, is that you are trying to invent things about physics, which are outside
the universe. And perhaps unsurprisingly, this has led people to worry about a multiverse.
And this is kind of the road string theory has gone down. And I feel that road may well be,
is likely to be a dead end. And what we have to do is pay much more attention
to what we actually see and observe in the universe. And I believe that for some reason,
we don't yet understand what we see and observe in the universe teaches us about nature at a
very profound level. So we have this sort of information coming in about the universe now.
And I believe this is an ideal moment, very opportune moment to think about unification.
But in doing so, we must take that data very, very seriously. That doesn't mean believing every
rumor or slight difference between the basic picture and observations. Many of those are due
to observational problems. These observations are very difficult in cosmology. Sometimes
they make mistakes, and they eventually get corrected over many years or even decades.
So don't take the observations absolutely literally, but do be guided by the broad
gist of those observations. And of course, as in every area of sunets, we may always turn out to
be wrong. But I believe this is the best route to progress is take our theories very seriously,
insist on logical consistency, and but equally insist on realism, that these theories do match
and are consistent with what we see in the universe. So for me, pursuing unification in its own
right without thinking about the universe is a unlikely to be a successful strategy. Equally
thinking about the universe without thinking about unification, as you'll see in this talk,
doesn't really make sense because the new the universe we see includes logical paradoxes,
such as the emergence of everything from a single point, namely the Big Bang singularity.
And without thinking about unification, we really don't know how to begin
to address those logical paradoxes. So that's the title of my talk. I thought that since
Kurt often has a philosophical flavor to his presentations, which I find fascinating, by the
way. Well, that's one word for it. I thought I'd start with a philosophical quote,
which is rather nice and echoes what I'll be saying in the talk, that life can only be understood
backwards, namely looking at by looking at our past. That's the only evidence that we have.
But it has to be looked forwards, namely, the future is, of course, the most interesting thing
about life and what we make of the future. And as you'll see in this talk, the past and the future
get connected in very profound ways. And I think we're just beginning to understand
what that means. Now, as you're well known in cosmology, looking out from our vantage point
on Earth, looking out into space is also looking back in time. And that's because light has a finite
speed. And so as we look outwards, we're seeing the universe or the objects in the universe as they were
longer and longer ago. So as we look outwards, this is what we see, of course, our solar system
in nearby. But as we go further, this is a logarithmic scale, by the way. So the scale
gets very rapidly longer as you go out in radius. What is the origin of this picture, by the way?
Is this yours? Oh, yes. I mean, the origin that I've given the credit. Pablo Carlos, sorry,
yes. No, it's an artistic picture. But I think it's a very beautiful picture. Essentially,
it's telling us what we see when we look out in the universe. So nearby, we see the solar system,
of course, of most distant planets we're seeing as they were a few minutes or hours ago. But
as we go further and further out, we're seeing galaxies and stars as they were forming
up to a billion years ago. And going further outwards, we see what we call a cosmic web,
which is basically structure as it was emerging from an initial smooth, almost uniform, almost
perfectly uniform universe. That's the cosmic web, the sort of fringes on the outskirts of the picture.
If we go even further out with the red circle here is what we call the last scattering surface.
It's the hot surface of the radiation coming out of the Big Bang as it was radiating
the microwaves, which we now receive as the remnant radiation from the hot Big Bang.
So we're essentially sitting in the middle of a microwave oven. And as we look outwards,
we're seeing the hot surface that was emitting those microwaves. When it was emitting them,
incidentally, its temperature was about 3000 degrees centigrade. So only a factor of two
different than the sun. So essentially, we're outside the sun, but inside a cavity whose surface
looks pretty much like the surface of the sun. And then if we go even further out
before that surface, I imagine we're using a form of light which can penetrate the hot radiation
of the Big Bang, for example, gravitational waves, which would do so.
We reach the white circle, which is the Big Bang singularity. And so that seems to be
the beginning of the universe, which we are surrounded by, although actually it's a point.
Now, to see how that works, keep in mind that this picture I'm showing now is really a cross
section of a four dimensional universe, namely time and space. And we are connected to every
point on this picture by a light ray. So this is what we actually see. But if I try to draw the
if I try to draw the full four dimensional picture, I've got to add the time dimension
as well as space. And you see, we if we are sitting on the right of this picture
in the center of this patch of space around us, the green curves here show the trajectory
of light or or something traveling speed of light. As it came out of the Big Bang singularity,
the it then traveled outwards at the speed of light. But of course, you've got to also take
into account the fact that the effect that as you go backwards in time, the universe is shrinking
in size. So what looks to us in this picture as a big circle on the outskirts of what we can see
is actually this focal point on the left, where all that light all those light rays in fact came
out all the same point in space. Professor, is there anything special about this point where
if you look toward the middle of this, it initially is going up, it's sloping up to the right,
and then it starts sloping down to the right. Is there anything special about that point where
it changes? No, no, there's nothing special. This is just if I you see so if I drawn this the curve
for an observer living a billion years ago, you know, only 12.7 years billion years after the Big
Bang, the light would converge a little bit to the left of where I've drawn it. And so it would
bend downwards a bit sooner than the curve I show. So this curve is really if you like the curve
that we see, being where we are in space and time in the universe, it's our past horizon
and or our past light cone. So normally in special relativity, you learn about light cones,
but they are, you know, they're obtained just by drawing straight lines and then making them
into a surface of revolution. The difference in an expanding universe is that the light cones
themselves shrink down to a point at the Big Bang singularity because the universe is shrinking as
we go back in time. So so this is what we can see. We see a slice of the universe. And weirdly
enough, the outskirts of the slides are actually a single point, which is the Big Bang singularity.
And that's what we want to resolve. And so everything I'm going to tell you about today
rests on a resolution of that strange paradox that the whole universe came out, the universe we see
came out of a single point. Now, as well as the arena for physics, we need to, of course, think
about the laws of physics. And the laws of physics we know are shown in this picture. We have the
particles, namely the quarks and the leptons. And so the quarks make up nuclear matter,
protons and neutrons. And versions there are, there are three families of quark, each of them
containing an uptight quark and a downtight quark. And then we have leptons, which are
sort of generalizations of the electrons, which, which orbit around atoms. And they're
similarly three families of leptons, each with an electron-like particle and each with a neutrino-like
particle. So those are the particles. And then we have the forces, which are the
electroweak strong and strong forces. And those are mediated by gauge bosons. The particles we
describe as fermions, they describe by Dirac's equation. So all of these things are very well
established. The Higgs boson somehow connects all of them because the Higgs boson is responsible,
or the Higgs field is actually responsible for breaking the symmetry in the standard model.
And it contributes mass to many, to all of these particles that you see in this picture.
So those are the laws of particle physics. And then I've drawn gravity as this blue curve that
sort of couples to everything, because gravity is really universal. And gravity feels everything,
everything else in the picture. So we have to somehow combine all of these laws
with this picture of the universe in order to, in order to try to make a coherent picture.
And where it doesn't work, we have to extend these laws to make it work.
Now, as I mentioned, we live outside the sun. So this is the hot surface of the sun.
And it's completely remarkable that the color of the sun tells us Planck's constant. I mean,
it, it actually, the fact that the sun has a single color, and it has a temperature of 6,000 degrees,
one can infer from the color directly Planck's constant. And so if there were no quantization
of photons, hot objects like the sun simply could not exist. It's the quantization of light
which allows hot objects to exist without radiating an infinite amount of energy.
If you take the Planck's constant to zero, you find the rate of radiation from the sun would go to
infinity, and the sun would disappear in a puff of smoke in no time at all. So this is an example
about of how the universe teaches us its laws. And by, you know, this is not how
Planck's law of radiation was discovered, because people didn't really understand what the sun was
at that point in time. But it could have been. And so by taking the observations as seriously as
possible, trying to make them consistent, one actually learns all about the fundamental laws
of physics. And right now we're doing the same with the the other version of the sun, if you like,
which is this cosmic microwave background sphere, which within which we live. It's a hot radiating
surface. By looking at it, we can see what happened at the Big Bang singularity.
Why do you call it the other version of the sun? Well, in this picture, you see the sun is at the
center of the picture. And we orbit around it. But the red sphere is the represents obviously
this is a two dimensional cross section of a sphere. And the spherical the red circle on
this picture represents a sphere which surrounds us a two dimensional sphere on the sky, which
surrounds us and it's hot. And it was radiating radiation at about 3000 degrees C when or Kelvin,
when the radiation decoupled, it's called the surface of decoupling. And so the radiation
decoupled from the hot plasma in the Big Bang. And the radiation just just traveled freely
from that surface to our telescopes at the center of the picture. So, you know, we're outside the
sun, we're inside the surface of last gathering or this red surface. And by staring at the red
surface, we hope to learn the equivalent of the laws of quantum mechanics, which we could have
learned by staring at the sun. So here is the surface. Here is that surface plotted in much
more detail. So this picture shows a projection onto a plane of that two dimensional spherical
surface which surrounds us called the surface of last scattering. So this is very much like
a map in an atlas, you know, representing the surface of the earth. This is a two dimensional map
representing the sphere that surrounds us. And what you notice what's plotted is the
temperature of the radiation on that surface as projected forward to the present day.
And that temperature varies from point to point on that surface. And these are the
fundamental variations of temperature and density, which came out of the Big Bang. And which
later were responsible for the creation of structure in the universe. So these variations
are very small in magnitude. The temperature of the surface, as I mentioned, was about 3000 degrees
Kelvin when it emitted the microwave radiation. But the temperature varied from place to place
by about one part by a few parts in 100,000. And so the variations in temperature plotted on this
picture are very modest in size, just a few parts in 100,000. But you can see the pattern
of temperature variations. And this picture, you know, has been made by a number of beautiful
experiments, including the Planck satellite. So we now have access to it.
The top curve, let's start with the bottom curve. The bottom curve shows what happens
if I look at this map with a Fourier lens, namely a Fourier transform it with respect
to spherical harmonics on the sky. And then I plot the magnitudes of those spherical harmonics,
the average magnitude against L, the harmonic number. And you see this beautiful red curve
on the bottom. This was actually predicted in the early 1970s by Jim Peebles and others.
And later Jim Peebles won the Nobel Prize for that. It's a rather clear cut prediction,
but it rests on a particular assumption about the cosmological parameters,
which I'll get to in a moment. So the temperature pattern has this oscillatory power spectrum.
Above that is the polarization power spectrum. And I'm particularly proud of this because this is
a calculation we did for the first time when I was a young cosmologist. So we calculated the red
curve. And then rather amazingly, the data points are the blue points. And you can see
they fit perfectly on that curve. Now the key point is that this is with no free parameters.
You fit the free parameters of the cosmology to the bottom curve,
and then just predicts the top curve. And it fits spectacularly well. That's not because
we were a particular clever without calculation. We weren't. We simply turned the crank on a way
of calculating this invented by Chandrasekhar in the 1930s. But the difference is that we have the
data and we can turn that data into predictions and they fit beautifully with what we see.
So in other words, for the bottom graph, that's a temperature graph,
you have some knobs that you can fiddle with and these are called the parameters.
How many are there? Five. So there are five parameters that go into there. And then you've
developed when you were a young student, a function that takes in those five parameters
and outputs that top graph. But those parameters were fixed by someone else for the bottom graph.
Absolutely. So there were no new parameters you had to introduce for the top one.
We had no freedom to introduce parameters. So all that went into the top curve are the
Einstein equations for gravity and the equations for the propagation of radiation,
which, as I say, were developed by Chandrasekhar in the 1930s. And they just use Maxwell's equations
and interactions of light with electrons. So we didn't do anything. We were the engineers
in this game, okay? We just took the known laws and applied them. Nobody had bothered to do the
top calculation because frankly, they didn't expect to see it ever measured. And I had to
persuade, I persuaded the experimentalists on the point satellite to include detectors
to measure the polarization. You see, the numbers are tiny. And if you look at the units and the
top curve, it's micro-Kelvin squared. So they had to measure the polarization with an accuracy
of a few micro-Kelvin, two or three micro-Kelvin. That's a very big task.
Yes. Well, you must not have been just some whippersnapper then to have such influence over
someone to develop such a sophisticated tool by merely suggesting it.
Well, I was lucky. As I say, all the equations were lying around in the literature. Nobody
had bothered. Actually, some people had bothered, but they'd gotten it wrong. You can make lots of
mistakes in theoretical calculations. As far as I know, we were the first people who actually did
it seriously and correctly. And we got the curve. And it agrees beautifully. So this just,
this changed was a turning point in my career, because you look at this curve and you say,
my goodness, the universe is simple. We have five basic parameters, as I explain in a moment.
We fit those to some data set. Could be the temperature in the lower curve, could be the
galaxy distribution, many other forms of data. So fit it to some data and predict everything else.
And the claim is that everything we see is fit by these five parameters.
And you can measure those five parameters in multiple ways. And this is called the Lambda CDM
model. And really, it's amazing that it's so simple and so far fits everything. And the more
and more data we've got, the better the fit. It's really quite remarkable. There are always
some tensions. People claim the Hubble constant isn't quite consistent and so on. But be very
careful about believing those because quite often they are later found to be wrong. And
many of them are only two sigma or two and a half sigma. So far.
So that's what you were referring to earlier in the talk when you said, don't believe every
rumor. Yes, exactly. Exactly. I see. So every week or every year, there's a new tension or anomaly.
Absolutely. And most of them just most of them fade away. And people forgot about them.
What has survived is a remarkably simple model, which as I say is seems to be consistent,
you know, within three sigma or four sigma. Or I mean, particle physicists like to use
five sigma. They never believe anything less than five sigma. And that's a good rule. I would say
actually in applying it to cosmology, cosmological measurements are much more difficult to control
than particle physics experiments. So not in the lab, you know, you're measuring
the natural universe. And I would say our criterion for accepting a measurement should
be stronger than five sigma. If it's five sigma in particle physics, surely in cosmology, it's
got to be seven or eight sigma. If you apply that criterion, there are no anomalies with this model.
So here's the model. It's called Landau CDM. It's more or less what Einstein envisaged
in his very first paper on cosmology. Einstein asked himself, what is the simplest form
of matter or energy? And he knew they were equivalent because E equals mc squared. So he
knew mass and energy equivalent. If you just say, what's the simplest conceivable form of energy,
the answer is very obvious. It's the cosmological constant, which is what he invented.
It's a form of energy which is absolutely uniform in space, in time, and furthermore,
is what we call Lorentz invariant. Namely, if you travel at some velocity, this stuff doesn't
change at all. No matter how fast you travel, the cosmological constant is exactly the same
as it was if you're not traveling. So he invented the cosmological constant, tried to make a model
of cosmology with only that constant. It didn't work because he tried to make a static
universe. Actually, he didn't know the universe was expanding. The Landau CDM model includes the
cosmological constant, which is 70% of the known energy in the universe. It includes dark matter.
That's a big mystery, but in this talk, I'm going to resolve that mystery by explaining what the
simplest candidate is for the dark matter. And actually, I've already shown it to you on a previous
slide. I'll explain why, but the dark matter makes up about 25% of the energy in the universe,
and the remainder is in nuclear particles and electrons, just the stuff ordinary matter is
made of, and of course, photons. So there are five parameters in the model. One is the density
of the cosmological constant, how much energy there is in what we call lambda per cubic meter.
The second one is how much dark matter there is, again, just how much per cubic meter in the universe.
And the final one is the proportion of nuclear matter to photons. And that's a free parameter
in the model. Actually, it will be explained by the picture I will describe, not predicted,
but explained. Namely, there are enough free parameters in the laws of physics to fit the
number of nuclear particles per photon from what we already know. Now, the fourth and fifth parameters
describe the variations in density across the universe. This cosmic web, as you see in the
picture, the variations on the temperature map of the microwave background radiation. Those
require very simple form of density variations. It's known as random Gaussian noise, which means
it's just like ripples on the surface of the sea. There are no complex structures. It's
literally a random superposition of waves where the waves have a particular strength or power
as a function of wavelength. So there are two parameters there. One is the amplitude. This
is about the one part in 100,000 that I mentioned before. That's the amplitude of these primordial
density waves. And the second parameter is what's called a red tilt. It means that the waves get
ever so slightly stronger as you go to longer wavelengths. In condensed matter physics, such a
phenomenon is very familiar. It's called a critical exponent. It means that basically the
fluctuations either get a little bit stronger with scale or a little bit weaker with scale,
but this scales in a certain way. In the case of cosmology, the red tilt means that if I go to
wavelengths 10 times as long, the amplitude of the ripples increases by 5%. That's not much.
And if I go, I think if I go a billion times longer in length scale, the amplitude doubles.
Can one also interpret that as it being more numerous?
No. It's just that the strength of the wave gets a little bit stronger. The waves are all random
Gaussian, so it's literally just a random superposition of waves. But when I say the strength
of the waves, I mean the amplitude of waves, the fractional change in the density.
Right. What I meant was that if you were to add two waves, of course, they would have to be directly
on top one another, then you can interpret that as two medium-sized waves giving rise to something
that's one large. You could, but when you say random Gaussian noise, you're saying that I just
take a bunch of waves of a given wavelength, point them in random directions with random phases,
and throw them on top of each other. Then I pick waves of another wavelength,
need to tell you how strong those waves are, again, make a random superposition of them
and put them on top of each other. And that's everything we see is consistent with that. Random
Gaussian noise with two parameters describing the power spectrum. One is the amplitude and
the other is this slight tilt. Now, at the end of the talk, I'm going to tell you that our theory
predicts numbers four and number five almost on the nose, okay, and based on the laws of physics
we already know. So it's very striking and we'll see if this holds up, you know,
essentially it's problem solved, but we'll see. So as you can imagine, I am really quite excited
about this. Now, dark matter. So I used to believe that dark matter was the one sure indication we
had of physics beyond the physics we know, right, the laws of particles and forces which I showed
you. We thought, many people thought, the dark matter must be made of something else,
another particle, right? And literally there are tens of thousands of suggestions
as to what the dark matter might be. And many, many people have built their careers
inventing and then trying dark matter particles or other explanations and then trying to test those
in experiments. In fact, we can see the dark matter quite directly now. This is a beautiful
picture from the ACT experiment. ACT is a Atacama Cosmology Telescope and it's actually
measuring the microwave radiation. That's what the picture shows is the surface on the left is
emitting light. What we see is the map on the right and as the light travels through the universe,
it gets deflected by dark matter by the gravity of the dark matter. Just like, you know, water in
a glass of water will deflect the whatever's behind the glass of water so that when you look
through it, you'll see it lensed by the water. So dark matter does the same thing. You can use
this to literally measure using the bending of light to you can measure the density of dark matter
and you can measure the density variations in the dark matter. And this all fits beautifully
with the Lambda CDM model. Would you, in order to do that, have to know the leftmost CMB?
No, you don't need to know it. What you need to do is to assume, okay, that the leftmost CMB
is random Gaussian noise with a power spectrum, which has been measured by the
Planck's satellite. So just two numbers specify the spectrum. And then what you do is the thing,
the only thing you measure is on the right, which if you can sort of see they put streaks on that map.
The streaks show the effect of the lensing. It basically stretches spherical peaks. If you have
random Gaussian noise, the peaks tend to be quite spherical. But if you lens it, that tends to shear
the pattern. And it turns out you can just measure the shear in the pattern due to gravitational
lensing. And from that shear, you can infer the density of the dark matter. So it's really amazing,
all this works. And with those five parameters, you can fit everything and there is no
inconsistency. And this has all become rather precise. I mean, these gravitational lensing
measurements are now involve huge amounts of data. And they're all absolutely compatible. In some
sense, it's a very disappointing, you know, people design this, these enormous, you know,
expensive telescopes that go through this huge data analysis, they would love nothing more than to
find a contradiction. Okay, that'd be super exciting. Well, they haven't found one.
On the contrary, everything fits remarkably well. So let's come back to the biggest puzzle of all.
How on earth did everything we see come out of a point? And the key, I believe, is a certain
symmetry in the laws of physics we already know. Namely, the laws of those forces of nature,
one of which is electromagnetic forces, the light, the laws of light and electric and magnetic fields,
and the laws of particle physics, we know, which were written down by Dirac with Dirac equation.
Those two theories happen to have a symmetry under rescaling space. So this is actually the
reason why a light wave is in fact is essentially the same as an x-ray. An x-ray is just a scaled
down version of a light wave, you know, you just shrink the length scale, shrink the wavelength
of the light, and you'll get an x-ray. Expand the wavelength of the light, and you'll get a radial
wave. Light is essentially the same thing, scaled up and down. You know, it can come in
all forms. They all obey the same equation. They just have longer or shorter. It's uniquely
specified by the wavelength. And the reason that is possible, the reason the theory behaves like
that, it has a symmetry. And the symmetry is scaling symmetry, rescaling length and time.
And, you know, you get shorter or longer wavelength, higher frequency or lower frequency light.
Now, Dirac's equation has the same property as long as you ignore the masses of the particles.
So in other words, when these equations are taken to be massless limit, and the Big Bang
is exactly such a place, because the plasma is extremely hot, so masses are irrelevant there.
And so it's very tempting to believe that at the Big Bang singularity, essentially there was
nothing but light and light like particles. And they all have this scaling symmetry.
Now, that scaling symmetry is very deep, very profound. And what it's telling us in sort of
colloquial terms is that the matter did not know about the size of the universe.
It evolves in such a way that it doesn't care that the universe is shrinking
as we go back in time. And so the matter is evolving, as if the universe were in fact
not shrinking to a point, or can be described mathematically with ignoring the shrinking
way of the universe. And this is what we noticed about the Einstein equations
and the laws of radiation. The Big Bang singularities are very particular type of singularity
called a conformal singularity. Conformal, and I'll tell you a little bit more about conformal.
Conformal symmetry, this is a picture which sort of illustrates this.
So light and particles are described as gauge fields and fermions in the standard model,
a la Maxwell and Dirac. Now conformal symmetry is a symmetry of light and massless particles.
Conformal symmetry means that you can actually rescale space and time locally,
and the equations are invariant. So here's an example. Imagine I was solving Maxwell's equations
inside a cylinder. So the boundary of the cylinder was a circle, as the last picture shows.
Alternatively, imagine I was solving Maxwell's equations inside a square pipe.
Okay, so the cross-section was a square. Conformal symmetry tells you those two situations are
actually identical as far as the light is concerned. And often, so the grid you see on the right,
you know, that's just a coordinate grid. It's useful for writing down equations or
putting them on a computer, but has no particular physical significance. Now if I
distort the square on the right into the disc on the left with a conformal transformation,
that means a local change of scale, which does not change angles, it only changes lengths.
I get the picture on the left. So that's another grid. I could solve the Maxwell's equations on
that grid. And then the statement of conformal symmetry is that these two things give exactly
the same result. So these funny points where you see this pile-up of grid points in the left-hand
picture, they're a little bit like the Big Bang singularity, right? There's a sort of pile-up
of space into a point. And what it's saying is you just have to blow that up with a conformal
transformation, just expand your grid. And the equations are just the same in the new picture.
So we actually use this picture to make sense of the Big Bang singularity.
So we go back to the Big Bang singularity. Now imagine blowing up that singularity. I don't
mean in the sense of explosion. I mean in a mathematical sense, like changing the scale
of space. So one can do this mathematically. And then the singularity actually becomes a
finite. It's not a point. It's now a finite patch. And then we impose a boundary condition
on that patch, which implements mirror symmetry. So that initial patch at the Big Bang,
we treat as if it were a mirror. So normally when we deal with, let's say, Maxwell's equations
in a mirror, the propagation of light in the presence of mirror, there are two ways to do it.
Either you impose a boundary condition at the mirror, you say that transfer the electric field
parallel to the mirror has to be zero. And you literally solve the equations showing how the
light travels to the mirror, bounces off the mirror and comes back. That's one way of doing it.
It's actually a very rather tedious way of doing it. There's a much nicer way of doing it, which is
to say, look, I'm looking at myself in the mirror. Let me make a, if I'm right handed, let me make a
left handed version of myself, put that behind the mirror. Okay. Yes. So it's a fictitious person.
That's literally a mirror image of me, put it behind the mirror and equal distance from the mirror,
throw the mirror away, and just solve Maxwell's equations for the light coming from that person
to me. That's called a method of images in physics. It's a very elegant way of solving
boundary value problems. And what we're claiming is that you can apply the same method
to describe the Big Bang. The Big Bang is a mirror. So I literally take the post bang universe,
make an image of it before the Big Bang. And then I would just propagate light and particles
from that pre bang universe through the Big Bang singularity because of conformal symmetry.
That propagation is completely smooth and regular and predictable. And I propagate that forward to
see what we see. So we claim that this extended or mirror universe picture is absolutely compatible.
With everything we see in the universe. So in a certain sense, when we look back towards the Big
Bang, we are seeing our own image. Okay, that the Big Bang is a boundary condition. It's not,
you shouldn't think about, you see the conventional way about thinking about the Big Bang, which I
think leads to terrible paradoxes, is that somebody input all the stuff in the universe
at the Big Bang and sort of throw it apart. Right. What we're doing is the opposite of that.
We said, no, the Big Bang, all that happens in the Big Bang is a boundary condition,
which the matter has to respect. If you look at this, the traditional way is that
someone or something just spurred everything into existence from that single point.
Exactly. But then you're saying that this is an improved picture.
Yes. However, it just looks like someone or something spurred all from all points at once.
So it doesn't seem like much of an improvement. So tell me why this is different.
Right. No, good question. You might say our picture looks like somebody made two universes,
so surely it's twice as difficult. Yes. No, good point. What we're saying is that there is a,
yeah, in fact, the answer is this.
Great. Natural lead up.
Yes. The answer is this. So the most fundamental law of physics we know,
which is a direct consequence of quantum mechanics and relativity is called CPT symmetry.
CPT symmetry was discovered in the 30s and 40s as an inevitable consequence of bringing quantum
mechanics and relativity together. So it underlies quantum field theory. Now, what is CPT symmetry?
CPT symmetry says the following, that if I look at some physical process
and I try to make another physical process using a law of symmetry. So take some physical process,
turn every particle into its antiparticle. That's what the C does.
P inverts space. So literally just send any space coordinate in three dimensional space
to its inverse. X goes to minus X. That's an inversion of space. That's a very dramatic
thing to do, but the laws, you know, you can do this with the laws of physics.
T is time reversal. So whatever's going forward in time, make it go backwards in time.
The CPT theorem in relativistic quantum physics tells you that the rate for any process
and its CPT conjugate process is identical. Okay, so this is kind of analogous to time reversal
in Newtonian mechanics. You know, in Newtonian mechanics, you can take any the laws of motion
and reverse time. And because the second order equations in time, you know, they are invariant.
So Newtonian mechanics has no arrow of time. And in relativity, the generalization is CPT.
So we take our observed universe, the right hand part of this picture. It has more matter
than antimatter. Okay, so it is not invariant under C. And it's not invariant under T, it's
going one way in time. And so the right hand side of this picture violates CPT. But if you
apply CPT to the right hand side of the universe, what you get is the left hand side, namely every
particle goes to its antiparticle. What was going forwards in time moving to the right in the right
hand part of the picture is now going forwards in time moving to the left in the left hand part
of the picture. And so the statement is that if you want the universe to respect the laws of physics,
in the most obvious way, namely that it is invariant under CPT, then you are led to this
doubled picture. And in the doubled picture, there is then a very natural boundary condition,
which is symmetrical under CPT. And the boundary condition is the one that we use.
So we're saying the Big Bang is a CPT mirror. And this resolves the fundamental puzzle of why
the universe appears to us to violate its own laws. You know, we saw more matter than antimatter,
that looks like the universe is not invariant under C. Likewise, we see time going one way.
And that's incompatible with the fact that the laws of physics are invariant under
reversing time and changing matter to antimatter. So what we're doing here is an extremely minimal
application of CPT to the universe. And the consequence is this mirror universe hypothesis.
So to put it differently, anyone who makes any other hypothesis is going to have to violate
CPT. And that's a losing battle. So we were very surprised.
So in Newtonian mechanics, if you take a ball, and there's no friction, and you drop it,
it hits, and then it comes right back up. Exactly. Okay, now if you were to look
locally, if you were to just look at half a second, you would say, well, look, there is a
difference between the future and the past, because in the past it starts to go down,
but in the future it starts to go up. But you're saying, well, you have to look at the whole
picture. Of course. So let's take the full movie. Of course. Okay, so now philosophically speaking,
we used that word earlier. Sure. What is someone who's watching this supposed to feel?
There's some religions that say something or someone or the universe started itself,
and you experienced this world once. Right. Then there are some other
traditions that say you experience it cyclically, infinitely. Right. And then there's here,
which seems to suggest, well, you experience everything twice. No, because you see, when I
say we're using the method of images to impose a boundary condition at the Big Bang. So this
picture is a mathematical picture, a device, which is useful in order to impose a particular
boundary at the Big Bang. So in this picture, the universe in a certain sense creates itself.
Okay, it's extremely minimal. Everything I described could be described by just taking
the right half of the picture with this boundary condition, which is in effect the result of
doubling it and imposing the symmetry. You see, if I double it and impose a symmetry,
the doubling goes away. Right. Because the left and right halves are identical.
So then to be specific, is it correct to say the Big Bang is a mirror or that
for mathematical convenience, it's useful to model the Big Bang as a mirror? Like,
is that the more elaborate correct statement or the Big Bang is a mirror is the correct statement?
Correct statement is the Big Bang is a mirror. And for any mirror, it is useful to double
the universe. I see. Yeah. The doubling is just a mathematical trip, which you can use for any mirror.
And we're saying that literally the Big Bang is a mirror. So I would say that this, I mean,
certainly in my experience, and I've worked with Stephen Hawking and I've worked with a number of
other such people on scenarios for cosmology, there is no doubt this is the most economical
hypothesis you can make. And because it's consistent compatible with the laws of physics
and extremely minimal. So, you know, either it's right or it's wrong. We'll see that's the attractive
feature of this whole setup is that it is eminently disprovable. And that makes it interesting.
So, yeah, as I mentioned, these laws, the particles and forces actually do have this symmetry
under local changes of scale. And that allows us to resolve the Big Bang singularity
to blow up the point everything came from into a patch. And then that patch is the mirror
at the Big Bang. This is actually all the particles we know. Now, notice something funny
about this picture. Alright, so the neutrinos in the bottom left have a superscript L, okay,
meaning that they are left handed. If they are traveling along in the direction of your,
of the thumb of your left hand, the spin follows the fingers of your left hand.
So, it's rather strange that the light neutrinos we see only come in the left handed variety.
All the other particles have a right handed and a left handed version.
Now, so that is, you know, what we see in laboratory experiments. We only ever see
left handed neutrinos. However, if we were, yeah, so if we were to,
to imagine the simplest or the most minimal conceivable extension of the standard laws of
physics, what would it be? And I just made it, right? I went from this slide to that slide
by removing the L, okay. Now, all the particles have both left and right handed versions. Okay.
And my claim, our claim, this is worth lathe and boil, our claim is that removing that L,
in other words, giving the neutrinos a right handed as well as a left handed version,
allows you to solve the problem of dark matter, okay, in an extremely minimal way,
with the mirror hypothesis. So, now imagine these are the laws of physics. There's no L
anymore on any particle. Every particle has left and right versions.
Now, what happens is I take my left handed neutrino, it's coming in from the left.
It then, what we call, we say that it can oscillate into a right handed neutrino,
the new right in the middle, and oscillate back into a left handed neutrino on the right.
Now, the left handed neutrinos are very light neutrinos are very light particles,
they don't have much mass. If the right handed, if the right handed neutrino is very heavy,
then this process can only be a virtual process. You can't, you had a certain amount of energy,
you can't stay as the right handed neutrino, you just don't have enough energy
to account for its mass. So, you've got to go back to being a left handed neutrino.
So, this is what we call neutrino oscillations, the left handed neutrinos can oscillate briefly
into a right handed neutrino. And then they find themselves in, if you like,
they've got more mass than they can account for with their energy. And so, they go back
into being a left handed neutrino. This mechanism is a mechanism for giving the left handed
neutrinos a small mass. And neutrino masses started to be measured in the 1970s.
And this mechanism was quickly realized as the simplest explanation for those masses,
namely, if there are right handed neutrinos, which are very heavy,
this would explain why the left handed neutrinos are very light. You see, the heavier the right
handed neutrino, the shorter the time you're going to spend as a right handed neutrino.
And so, basically, the heavier you make it, the less and less probable it is that the neutrino
oscillates in this way. And so, it's called the seesaw mechanism because the heavier you make
the right handed neutrino, the lighter the mass of the left handed neutrino. So, this was understood
in the 70s. And at that time, people could have said, oh, well, maybe the dark matter
is a right handed neutrino. You see, the right handed neutrino is a very obvious candidate
because it has no electromagnetic charge. It doesn't couple to the strong or the weak force
at all. So, the only thing the right handed neutrino couples to is the Higgs field, this thing
mentioned, noted by H, and gravity. So, for the right handed neutrino to be the dark matter,
all you need to do is a switch off this coupling. Okay. So, actually, this is the important one.
You don't want... So, for the right handed neutrino to be the dark matter, the only problem
is that it can decay. This diagram shows the right handed neutrino decaying into a Higgs
and a left handed neutrino. So, if you want the dark matter to be stable, it has to have survived
for at least 14 billion years, you've got to switch off this vertex. And if you switch off
that vertex, you must switch off this vertex because they're the same vertex. And if you do that,
it means the left handed neutrino cannot oscillate into the right handed neutrino.
And this actually means the left handed guy must be massless. So, just from this picture,
you can see that if the dark matter is stable and consists of right handed neutrinos, then
it's plausible that one of the left handed neutrinos is massless. And that's actually
our prediction, which is going to be tested in the next five years. So, now, how do we... The
second thing you've got to do is you've actually got to mate these right handed neutrinos, right?
How do they get made? And the way they get made is rather beautiful. You see, if I switch off this
vertex, the right hand... There are actually three of these right handed neutrinos and three
vertices. So, I'm somewhat simplifying the story. But if I take one of them and I switch off its
vertex, then it actually doesn't couple to anything except gravity. So, this poor right
handed neutrino is sitting there in the universe. It doesn't see the hot plasma at all. And the
mystery is, how did it get created? You know, what determines its abundance? And so, this was
actually our first starting point with this whole picture. We realized the right handed neutrinos
are produced as Hawking radiation from the Big Bang. That it is simply the time dependence
of the universe that creates these right handed particles. It literally pulls them out of a vacuum,
which is a process called Hawking radiation. It's due to gravity. It's due to their coupling
to gravity and due to the fact that the universe is expanding. So, what we showed is that if their
mass was 500 million times the mass of a proton, then they account for all the dark matter we see.
And this is the simplest yet explanation for the dark matter. It's just right handed neutrinos.
They were created by the expansion of the universe. To calculate that creation, we had to assume a
particular quantum state for the right handed neutrinos. And what we did is to use the state
defined by CPT symmetry and the mirror hypothesis. Okay, so all of this is kind of self consistent.
And is that a bound on the mass of the right handed neutrino or is that like an actual prediction
for it? It's an exact prediction. Okay, that has to be its mass. Now, it's very hard to measure
indirectly. I mean, you would have to literally have a little gravimeter and go through space and
wait until the right handed neutrino traveled past you and measure the deflection due to its mass.
Okay, one day that will be possible. It's not possible today. But no, this is a very precise
prediction of its mass. There are no free parameters in that prediction. So, if it's stable,
the lightest neutrino is massless. Why? Because to make it stable, I had to switch off this vertex.
And if I switch off this vertex, I have to switch off that one. And that means this left handed
neutrino cannot acquire a mass by becoming a virtual right handed neutrino for a little,
a little while. So, the prediction is the lightest neutrino, namely, one of these left handed
neutrinos is exactly massless. And amazingly, this is now possible using the Euclid
survey, satellite telescope survey now underway. And basically, what you do is measure the strength
of clustering of galaxies, strength and clustering galaxies on a certain scale, which corresponds to
the, well, yeah, let me start again. The way you measure neutrino masses using galaxy surveys,
and it's quite extraordinary that you can do this, is by measuring the strength of the clustering of
matter. Now, if the neutrinos are massless, they do not clump with the rest of the matter.
If they have a mass, then as the universe expands, they actually slow down relative to the expansion,
because the mass kind of becomes important, and they no longer are moving at speed of light.
They slow down, and they clump with the other matter. And that effect turns out to be large enough
that by measuring the clustering of galaxies, you can measure the mass of the neutrino.
And so they claim they will be able to check that the lightest neutrino is massless
to within about five sigma, quite accurately, using these forthcoming galaxy surveys
within the next five years. So should this prediction be confirmed, my claim is that this
will be easily the most compelling explanation for the dark matter. There are other predictions.
We can predict the decay rate of atomic nuclei, a process called neutrino-less double-beta decay,
but that process is very, very slow and may take one or two decades to measure.
It's a very, very tough experimental test, but if this one works out, there will be very strong
motivation for doing nuclear physics experiments to check this idea that the dark matter is the
right-handed neutrino. So where do we get to? Well, the Big Bang was a special
type of singularity. The size of the universe is governed by what we call the scale factor.
This comes into the metric on spacetime. And what happens is that as time goes to zero,
the scale factor, the size of the universe, shrinks to zero in a very simple way, just
linearly in time. When it hits zero, we call that a conformal zero. And meaning that the scale
shrinks to zero, the overall scale shrinks to zero, so colloquially the universe is at a point.
But as I mentioned, you can always blow up the scale, essentially by dividing by this
quantity that goes to zero. You can blow it up and that becomes the mirror. So this conformal zero
in this picture of the Big Bang becomes, in fact, an extended three-dimensional
mirror in what we call the conformal frame. So what we're saying is that the conformal
for geometry is actually regular at the Big Bang. So this is a resolution of the Big Bang
singularity. The Big Bang is not the shrinking away. I mean, the Big Bang is in a sense a shrinking
away of space, but the thing is that the particles and forces are not affected by that shrinking.
They're still obeying equations as if they were an extended three-dimensional space.
So this is a way of resolving the Big Bang singularity and turning it into a mirror.
So I was going to tell you about explaining the geometry of the universe, but I think that's too
long. I want to talk a little bit about the most exciting and most recent development in
this hypothesis. So this is addressing the very fundamental dilemma which occurs in coupling
quantum fields to gravity. So we know that in order to describe the laws of fundamental physics,
we have to use quantum fields. This is an extremely successful technique and it's the basis for the
standard model. Everything is described by quantum fields in the standard model. However, these quantum
fields look like the right-hand picture in the vacuum. And this is just a consequence of the
Heisenberg uncertainty principle. You might want to set a field to zero and just say there's no
electrical magnetic field in space, but this is inconsistent with quantum mechanics. Why?
Because the magnetic field is like a coordinate of a particle, x, and the electric field is like
the velocity of a particle or its momentum. And the Heisenberg uncertainty principle says that
either you measure x or you measure p, you can't measure both. You can't set the position of particle
to zero and its momentum to zero at the same time. You can be one or the other. And so what
happens in the quantum vacuum, you might say, okay, let's have zero electric field, but then you've
got infinite magnetic field. You might say, okay, zero magnetic field, but then you've got infinite
electric field. So the compromise which happens in the vacuum is that neither the electric nor the
magnetic fields are zero. They're both oscillating with what is called zero point fluctuations.
So the vacuum is full of these fluctuations which are pictured in the right hand side.
And these are all the fields in the standard model, the electron fields, the photon fields,
the strong force, the weak force, everything is sort of going crazy in the vacuum. I say going
crazy advisedly because there's infinite energy in these oscillations. This is a very deep paradox
about trying to couple quantum fields to gravity. Now, not only do you get infinite energy in the
vacuum, as I mentioned, gravity detects all energy. And in particular, it's very hard to stop gravity
feeling all this energy in the vacuum. So you led to this immediate paradox that gravity is
coupling to an infinity. And cosmology doesn't really make any sense. So people cheat in various
ways. They subtract their infinity in certain ways. But there's a further problem which is that these
zero point fluctuations in the vacuum spoil this beautiful local scale symmetry of the Maxwell
and Dirac theory, which we needed in order to make sense of the Big Bang singularity.
So these vacuum fluctuations seem to prevent us describing the Big Bang singularity as a mirror.
So what we have done recently, very recently, is we discovered an entirely new mechanism,
A for cancelling the energy in the vacuum, B for restoring the symmetry of Maxwell and Dirac,
the local scale symmetry. And we found we could do that in a very unique way. We call them dimension
zero fields. They're rather peculiar fields. They do not have any particles. They merely exist,
if you like, in the vacuum. So all they do is sit there and cancel out these various diseases in
the vacuum. Okay, so it's again extremely minimal addition to the standard model. It's very unique.
Their properties are uniquely defined. And then rather miraculously, these same
extra ingredient, the same extra ingredient in the vacuum, turns out to explain the origin of
the density variations. And so this is now rather technical. I'm going to leak to a formula,
which I'm not going to justify. But this formula is a direct consequence of the assumptions I've
laid out. It says that the power spectrum in the early universe, that's this curly P thing,
as a function of wavelength is given by these numerical factors, which are just a consequence
of relativity quantum mechanics, quantum field theory, various numbers here, C beta, this alpha
y, alpha two and alpha three are the strong, weak and electromagnetic coupling constants,
as measured in the laboratory. Okay, so roughly speaking, you can say that this is
given by the fine structure constant. But it's for the strong, weak and electromagnetic forces.
So they're sure these these numbers are all a consequence of the standard model, right,
all these funny fractions, a direct consequence of the number of particles of various charges
and types in the standard model. So these are all standard model, this number of effective
degrees of freedom, this is basically the number of particles in the standard model.
So these numbers are just, you know, inescapable consequences of the standard model. This is the
this is the red tilt. You see this power of the fluctuations as a function of wavelength
is growing with wavelength, like lambda to this small power. And this small power turns out to be
0.04, which is what we observe in the cosmic microwave sky. Okay, so there is this rather
magical formula that comes out of those assumptions. It turns out, and this may be a
coincidence, but it's a very tempting one. Turns out that this formula matches both the amplitude
and the red tilt. So this number gives you 10 to the roughly 10 to the minus five.
Within a factor of two, it matches the observations. The red tilt it predicts is 0.042
using the CERN measurements of the strong coupling constant. And the observed number
from the Planck satellite is 0.041. So this is very tantalizing. All I would say at this point
is that I think very few cosmologists are, except us, are convinced by this. Yet,
I'm going around, Latham's going around giving talks, people are challenging us in various ways.
If only you could do the calculation this way or that way or check this or check that,
we might believe you. That's very important that we are checked and that we really present
a full-blown calculation to satisfy everyone. And there are various assumptions we've made.
They are always the simplest conceivable assumption, but there are some assumptions
in this result. If this turns out to be theoretically safe, no one points out a problem
with it. If the observations, as they improve, confirm this scaling, extends to even smaller
wavelengths, then this will be the explanation. And cosmology will be unified. So just to close
on this, what I've put forward here is the prospect, at least, of an extremely unified picture.
There is just the standard model and gravity, perhaps with a few little additions in the
vacuum, but no extra particles, no extra forces. And maybe we are actually very close
to understand all the physical laws governing the universe and how they describe the Big Bang
itself. If this is true, there are many, many other consequences. It leads to a new picture
of black holes, which resolves the black hole information paradox. It will lead to many other
predictions because it's so constrained, this picture. And there's no wiggle room. I mean,
either this picture is right or it's wrong. So we'll see. Here are some references of papers on
this. There are other papers on the archive and they're new papers in preparation. But thank you
very much for listening and I welcome any questions. Thank you so much, Professor.
The question and answer session is on theories of everything. Check for it in the description
or subscribe to get notified. It's a 90-minute Q&A about this lecture. Neil Turok was also
interviewed solo for two hours here on TOE, and this is the most watched interview with Neil Turok
ever. Check that out as well. Firstly, thank you for watching. Thank you for listening.
There's now a website, KurtGymungle.org, and that has a mailing list. The reason being that large
platforms like YouTube, like Patreon, they can disable you for whatever reason, whenever they
like. That's just part of the terms of service. Now, a direct mailing list ensures that I have an
untrammeled communication with you. Plus, soon I'll be releasing a one-page PDF of my top 10
toes. It's not as quintentarantino as it sounds like. Secondly, if you haven't subscribed or clicked
that like button, now is the time to do so. Why? Because each subscribe, each like helps YouTube
push this content to more people like yourself. Plus, it helps out Kurt directly, aka me. I also
found out last year that external links count plenty toward the algorithm, which means that
whenever you share on Twitter, say on Facebook or even on Reddit, etc., it shows YouTube,
hey, people are talking about this content outside of YouTube, which in turn,
greatly aids the distribution on YouTube. Thirdly, there's a remarkably active Discord and
subreddit for theories of everything where people explicate toes, they disagree respectfully about
theories and build as a community our own toe. Links to both are in the description. Fourthly,
you should know this podcast is on iTunes, it's on Spotify, it's on all of the audio platforms.
All you have to do is type in theories of everything and you'll find it.
Personally, I gained from rewatching lectures and podcasts. I also read in the comments that,
hey, toll listeners also gain from replaying. So how about instead you re-listen on those
platforms like iTunes, Spotify, Google Podcasts, whichever podcast catcher you use. And finally,
if you'd like to support more conversations like this, more content like this, then do consider
visiting patreon.com slash kirchheimongle and donating with whatever you like. There's also
PayPal, there's also crypto, there's also just joining on YouTube. Again, keep in mind it's
support from the sponsors and you that allow me to work on toe full time. You also get early access
to ad-free episodes, whether it's audio or video, it's audio in the case of Patreon, video in the
case of YouTube. For instance, this episode that you're listening to right now was released a few
days earlier. Every dollar helps far more than you think. Either way, your viewership is generosity
enough. Thank you so much.
