The Vedic Union with God and the Christian Union with God are totally different and in fact, in a sense, they are opposite.
With this knowledge comes power.
In this conversation we cover interpretations of quantum mechanics, the distinction between corporeal and physical reality, vertical causation and irreducible wholeness.
Wolfgang Smith is a mathematician, a physicist and a philosopher of science.
Who draws heavily from pre-modern ontology.
He obtained his bachelors in Columbia in physics, mathematics and philosophy simultaneously by the time he was 18.
Now that's unheard of.
Wolfgang was a mathematics professor at UCLA as well as MIT, publishing research in the field of differential geometry.
Then he worked as an aerodynamicist at Bell Aircraft Corporation on the problem of atmospheric re-entry.
As usual, with Toad, this guest goes their deepest out of any interview out there, their most technical.
And it should be that way because Wolfgang and I spent several days together.
In February and it was an absolute treat.
We recorded so much material with this living legend and I'm extremely honored and excited that I get to bring this to you while I share this with you.
Enjoy.
It's good to meet you, professor.
Yes, I've been looking forward to that.
I've been looking forward to this for quite some time.
So have I.
I'm going to begin by reading a poem.
If all the good people were clever and all the clever people were good, the world would be nicer than ever we thought it possibly could.
But somehow, to sell them or never, the two hit it off as they should.
The good are so harsh to the clever, the clever so rude to the good.
So friends, let it be our endeavor to make each by each understood.
For few can be good like the clever or clever so well as the good.
I like that.
Why do you like that?
First of all, I don't remember that this has ever been said and I think it needs to be said.
What about that?
Do you feel like applies to our age?
I think it applies really to every age.
Maybe more so to our age because our age is in very great need of wisdom.
We have all sorts of things, but wisdom we are generally lacking.
I hear this plenty that we were wiser in the past than we are now.
Is that true?
Firstly, can you define wisdom?
Well, I'm not sure that I can define it, but I can point out a fact about wisdom which we tend to forget nowadays.
Namely, that wisdom is closely related to tradition.
It is not something we invent, it is something we receive.
And this is something which I think is largely forgotten.
In fact, we bring up our young people to believe that everything just started a little while ago
and that we are essentially inventing wisdom.
I don't think wisdom is to be invented, it is to be received.
What do you mean that people are brought up to feel like this was all started some recent time ago?
What do you mean?
Well, I think the typical man of today thinks of wisdom and knowledge and enlightenment as something that came about rather recently.
It associates it with our science, our technology, our modern outlook.
I strongly disagree with that and I think one of the main points I have to make is that wisdom is something that actually is not invented, it is received.
I think it is very, very important to realize that it cannot be received unless we bring a certain humility.
And in fact, as I like to say, we need to approach this with folded hands.
I'm not sure that everyone today understands what I mean by that, but I think most people do.
Do you mean to say that most people nowadays think that proper morality came about from the enlightenment and prior to that we were backward and religious and irrational?
I don't know what percentage of people today believe that, but I know one thing that practically all our educational systems are geared to that message.
People no doubt are wise enough not to pay that much attention to it, to what our schools and universities transmit in that regard, but this is indeed the thrust of modern education.
Start from scratch. Science is the key to everything and in this regard, it all started in the 20th century, if you will, with the discoveries of quantum mechanics.
Can you tell us about how you got started in physics as well as started in philosophy?
Well, it clearly began at the age of 14. Somehow I got a hold, a very important book by Whitehead, Alfred North Whitehead, Science in the Modern World, and I read this book with great interest and so much so that I became absorbed in it.
I remember there were times when my mother called me down for dinner and I would say I can't come now, I'm thinking.
So this is an indication that it not only interested me, but I felt somehow fascinated by these questions.
And after reading a few popular science books, I think for a while there I was spellbound by what I would now call the scientific worldview, which made a lot of sense to me at that time,
and I accepted it as a true outlook on the cosmos.
And I wasn't satisfied with this, I wanted to go deeper, and so I applied to Cornell University when I was just starting the age of 15.
And I remember to this day that the application form asked the question, what do you want to major in and why?
And I said, I answered that I want to major in physics because I believe that physics is the key to the understanding of the universe.
And so this shows that somehow interesting myself in physics is natural to me, this is just how I'm constituted.
And so I entered Cornell University when I was 15 and I majored in physics, mathematics and philosophy.
And I think I was equally interested in all three of these subjects, I should say.
And in a sense they were three aspects of the same enigma, and let me say that it did not take long before I was terribly disappointed in what I encountered at Cornell University.
I was disappointed in the professors, I was disappointed in what they taught me, because somehow I felt that there was not enough seriousness, it was specialization and I didn't feel at home with these people.
So by the time I graduated from Cornell at age 18, I was very, very disillusioned with the universities.
Somehow I had a conception of wisdom which was something entirely different from the professionalism I found at Cornell University.
And I should mention that when I graduated I was offered a three year fellowship in the Sage School of Philosophy at Cornell.
So I could have gone on there for my PhD in philosophy, and in point of fact I accepted this and started out on a doctoral program in philosophy.
And if you can imagine, after three weeks I was so disappointed and felt so out of harmony with the presiding spirit there, that I went to the head of the philosophy department and told him,
I have not yet touched any money, I am quitting.
And he asked me what I am going to do, and I said I am going to the state of Oregon to be a lumberjack.
And it was on my way that after communicating this decision to my brother who was studying chemical engineering at Purdue,
my brother took this letter to the chairman of the physics department and said I have this young brother, he is smart but he is a little crazy, can you do anything for him?
And so the professor of the head of the physics department who happened to come from Austria, my country, he said tell your brother,
I want to see him Monday morning in my office, he is a graduate assistant in our department, I am offering him that.
So you see my attempt to escape from the universities did not succeed, I had scarcely cut my bridges as I thought, then against my will if you wish, I was called back.
So I spent two years then at Cornell University getting a master's degree in physics.
And I am very glad that I did because as it turned out this proved to be an important factor in my life, I received a certain basic background in contemporary physics.
So your initial bachelor's was math and philosophy and then your master's was physics?
Well actually I had a triple major at Cornell, I majored in physics, mathematics and philosophy and I liked all three subjects very much.
What aspect of physics did you do your master's in, did you specialize?
It was in quantum theory.
What aspect of quantum theory?
Well this was way back in 1948 to 1950, these are the two years I spent at Cornell.
It was basic quantum theory and incidentally we had very good professors because this was immediately after the war and a lot of top professors from Europe came to the United States
and at Purdue at that time many of the senior professors were from Germany.
And in fact the head of the department, his name was Loc Horowitz, he came from Vienna, my own hometown.
So why don't you explain to the audience and myself what is the measurement problem?
Well the measurement problem is something very very interesting.
As most people know I'm sure the world, the physical universe as perceived in quantum mechanics is something utterly different from the physical world as we normally know it and think of it.
And so a physical system in the eyes of quantum mechanics is described by so-called wave function.
So suppose you have the simplest system possible, a single particle.
The wave function description of that particle will give a certain probability that the particle is just about anywhere in the universe.
It is not at any particular point, in fact in reference to certain experiments, it can in fact multi-locate, it can pass through two slits at the same time.
So in short the world as seen in quantum mechanics is something utterly different from the world that we perceive in ordinary life.
And the world as described also in classical physics.
So the transition between quantum mechanics and classical physics takes place in the act of measurement.
And so you measure a quantum system and in a single instant the picture changes in place of a multi-locating particle described by wave function which is highly mathematical and only really the trained mathematician can understand what this wave function actually has to say.
So in an instant the picture changes from the quantum mechanical to the classical which means that after measurement the particle has a definite position, a definite momentum and so on.
After measurement we find ourselves, so to speak, in the world that we normally know as a physical universe.
And so what then is the measurement problem?
It is simply the question how does this miracle take place?
And leading physicists have been thinking about this problem ever since quantum mechanics really was discovered in 1926 to be exact.
But when it comes right down to it, no one has given us the answer.
I mean it remains an open question.
And so in 1995 I think it was, I became interested in that problem and I wanted to find a solution.
And after considerable thinking and research and reading I put it all together and wrote a book called The Quantum Enigma.
And in this quantum enigma I do propose a solution.
And the key idea, there are really two key ideas.
The first key idea is that we need to distinguish between the physical universe which is the universe as conceived by the classical physicist
and what I call the corporeal world which is something much richer.
The difference between the physical universe and the corporeal world is basically that the corporeal world is perceivable
which means that in addition to quantities it owns qualities.
For example, color.
So I postulated that color is not just a thing of the mind, it is actually a quality pertaining to the corporeal world.
So the physical universe then is the corporeal world as conceived by the physicists.
So in passing from the corporeal world to the physical something is lost.
And I regularized this all, I introduced the formalism.
So with every corporeal object x I associate a physical object which I call sx
and so there is actually a kind of function from x to sx because x determines sx.
So this was the first idea, the distinction between the corporeal world and the physical.
And having made this distinction you still have a problem left.
How namely does this transition take place?
Because in the active measurement there is a passage from the physical to the corporeal.
The quantum system, the wave function, describes the physical,
pertains to the physical universe and after the measurement is made
you are actually in the corporeal world because you couldn't have a measurement
if the result of the measurement were not perceptible.
So you end up with a pointer pointing to a certain location on a scale
and you visibly read off the measurement.
So measurement is a transition from the physical to the corporeal
and it is quite easy to understand rigorously that this transition cannot take place
through the causation known to physics.
So the causation known to physics is what I call horizontal causation
and it is affected by a process taking place in time.
On the other hand the transition from the physical to the corporeal plane
well I just explained it cannot be understood on the basis of horizontal causation
so a different mode of causation is required as this mode I call vertical causation
and it is easy to see on ontological grounds.
I mean we're here outside the domain of physics, you can't write an equation for vertical causation
you can't even talk of it as a physicist without introducing some other notion.
So this is what I called vertical causation
and the defining characteristic of vertical causation is the fact that it does not take place in time.
In other words it is instantaneous.
I think it will be of interest to put in a little bit of a comment at this point
because many people know that the Nobel Prize in physics issued in 2022
dealt with a certain question relating to quantum theory on one side and relativity on the other
and one has known for quite a while that the two cannot both be true.
Now the Nobel Prize of 2022 was issued for I think three experiments
which actually were able to decide which of the two theories is true
and we know they can't both be true.
There's something called the dell inequalities and quantum mechanics says
the results will be on this side of an inequality and Stein and physics says
the result will be on the other side of the inequality.
So these experiments actually decided between the two issues and the winner was quantum theory.
And now what does this have to do with vertical causation?
The answer is everything because the point at issue in these experiments
and therefore in the Nobel Prize was whether a physical effect can be transmitted instantaneously
in other words faster than the speed of light.
Relativity theory says no, nothing can be faster than the speed of light.
Quantum mechanics says yes when you make a measurement on a particle which is entangled
every particle entangled with this one will be instantly affected.
So there's a clear incompatibility here between classical physics and Einstein's relativity
on one side and quantum theory on the other and so as I said quantum theory one
and the implication is that classical physics in its Einsteinian mode is contradicted.
Very interesting that I think this has to do with the fact that they waited such a very long time
to issue that Nobel Prize I think what more than 30 years they waited.
And I think the reason is that this is a very hot potato.
By saying that quantum theory one and relativity theory lost you're stepping on a lot of tolls.
It's a very sensitive matter but quantum theory did win and the Nobel Prize acknowledges that
and incidentally what does that have to do with vertical causation?
The answer again is everything because it was really vertical causation that was at issue here
where there is a causality that acts instantaneously as quantum mechanics demands
over the Einstein was right that no causation can move faster than the speed of light.
So vertical causality won.
Ladies and gentlemen gather around for a lesson in the mathematics of slumber.
Are you aware of the remarkable correlation between a comfortable temperature at night
and the quality of one's sleep?
It's no secret that better sleep leads to greater fitness and increased productivity at work
even improved parenting such as patients etc.
With miracle made sheets you can bask in the wonders of self-cooling temperature regulation
which is proven to enhance sleep quality by a substantial 34%.
Inspired by the silver infused fabrics developed by NASA
miracle made has harnessed this innovative technology to provide you with a peaceful and uninterrupted night's sleep.
Hey let us not forget the unhygienic conditions often present in traditional bedding
which according to some studies have been known to harbor more bacteria than a toilet seat.
Miracle made offers a range of self-cleaning and eco-friendly bedding
preventing 99% of bacteria and requiring three times less laundry
and hello to luxurious comfort and quality.
Experience a healthy, cleaner and more rejuvenating sleep with miracle made sheets.
My wife and I both prioritize quality sleep and miracle made sheets
help make sleeping one of the highlights of our day or more specifically our night.
Upgrade your sleep with miracle made.
Go to trymiraclemade.com slash everything
and use the code everything to claim your free three piece towel set
and save over 40% off.
Again that's trymiracle.com slash everything.
Henson Shaving is a family owned aerospace parts manufacturer
that's made parts for the International Space Station
and the Mars Rover and now they're bringing that precision engineering
to your shaving experience.
So here's a personal story.
I gave the razor to Sam who's working behind the scenes here at the Toe podcast.
I didn't tell him who it was from.
I just said you need a razor.
He said sure.
Then I asked him hey how was that razor the next couple days later?
He's like Kurt that is the best razor I have ever used.
And then I said by the way that's a sponsor Henson.
That is fantastic and he looked it up and they're an aerospace engineering company.
So that's an aside story.
That's a true story.
It's packaged extremely carefully.
The handle looks beautiful.
The assembly takes 10 seconds and the blade is as precise as I've ever seen
in a commercial razor by using aerospace grade CNC machines.
Henson makes metal razors that extend less than the thickness of a human hair.
That means it's a secure and stable blade with no vibrations.
So the razor has built in channels and it evacuates hair and cream which makes clogging virtually impossible.
You blow it out and it's cleared.
That's what she said.
Henson shaving wants to produce the best razors.
Not the best razor business.
So that means no plastics, no subscriptions, no proprietary blades and no planned obsolescence.
And it's extremely affordable.
The Henson razor works with the standard dual edge blades that give you that old school shave
with the benefits of this new school tech.
Visit hensenshaving.com slash everything.
If you use that code you'll get two years worth of blades for free.
Just make sure to add them to your cart.
That's 100 free blades when you head to H-E-N-S-O-N-S-H-A-V-I-N-G dot com slash everything.
And use the code everything.
You'll hear that in quantum entanglement.
Sure, something is transmitted instantaneously, but you can't use it to send information.
And so special relativity says no information can be sent.
What do you say to that?
Well, I tend to think ontologically.
And ontologically there's no problem according to quantum theory.
There are effects which operate instantaneously.
So from an ontological point of view this settles the matter.
There's a clear contradiction here with relativity theory.
So from this point of view, from an ontological point of view, the matter is settled.
Quantum theory is true, at least in this particular experiment came out in favor of quantum theory.
There's no question about that.
And Einstein was very, very concerned about this point because he realized that the theory which it was his life's work to develop hinges upon the outcome of this experiment.
And what is, in a sense, ironic, it was Einstein himself who first conceived the basic structure of this experiment.
And he did so because he was hoping at least that this would empirically vindicate his theory with a v-quantum mechanics.
So in connection with this result, I would like to point out something which is very closely related to what we're talking about here.
My own approach to philosophy has always been instinctively Platonist.
I became interested in Platonism at a very early age and I never really wavered in this regard.
Something in me recognizes as the true ontology.
Now, when you study Platonism very, very carefully, you discover that the Platonist, Weltanschauung, conceives of the cosmos as inherently tripartite.
The three planes, if you want to put it that way, are firstly what I call the eternal plane, which is a domain which is subject neither to space nor to time.
And this is really where reality comes from.
Reality emanates from that domain.
And the second domain, which I call the, the Platonists call it the psychic domain, I call it intermediary.
So the psychic domain is subject to time but not to space.
And incidentally, I am convinced that this is integral Platonism, but I've never in any Platonist or Neoplatonist document read this interpretation.
I doubt not that all the real Platonists understood this very well, but it is of interest that, for whatever reason, I don't think it has been explicitly stated.
And then the third domain, I call the corporeal, is the world in which we normally find ourselves.
That domain is obviously subject to time but not to space.
Excuse me, both time and space.
So this is the basic tripartite ontology associated with Platonism.
Now let me just mention for the record that I think many people will be interested to know that this tripartite ontology is also found in the Vedic tradition, which is by far the oldest tradition in the world.
It antecedes all others, including the Judeo-Christian, which came much later.
So this tripartite ontology underlies both the Vedic and the Platonist traditions.
Let me say first of all, I find it very fascinating that the mere existence of this intermediary level implies the falsity of relativistic physics.
It is absolutely clear and beyond dispute because according to relativistic physics, there is no time and there is no space.
There is only a space-time.
And the fact that there is a time-only realm obviously contradicts that assumption.
So I was very fascinated to find, to discover that the both the Vedic and the Platonist ontology disproves all of relativistic physics at one stroke.
Incidentally, regarding the intermediary or psychic realm, let me point out that even though nobody in the western world knows these things now,
because we are all into the scientific, quote-unquote, scientific way of looking at things.
So even though we don't know about it, we spend a part of our life, our conscious life in that domain.
Namely, we enter that, we are in that domain whenever we dream.
The dream state is, we enter the dream state when we dream.
The dream state is which one?
The intermediary.
In the dreams, there is no space?
The space in the dream state is not real.
It's a kind of a hallucination.
And you can easily prove that because whereas the time that we experience in the dream state coincides with our temporal time,
I mean for example, I think everyone has experienced being awakened in the middle of a dream
and the point is the moment of awakening you can identify in the dream.
So the time in the dream state is none other than the time of the waking state.
But the space that you experience in the dream state proves to be unreal.
In the dream, you may see a castle on three-dimensional thing and the instant you wake up,
you realize that there never was such a thing, meaning this belonged to the dream state, but not to the corporeal.
So there is a rigorous precise ontological distinction between the three states.
You may say, well, what about the eternal state?
It is true that we normally do not experience that.
We do not experience it in the waking state.
We do not experience it in the dream state.
And this is exactly where these yogic traditions enter the picture.
In other words, to enter the eternal state is not given to the ordinary human being.
It is something that can be acquired, but at a great cost.
As everyone that has any acquaintance with these domains knows very well,
it is after a lifetime of endeavor under the guidance of someone who has himself received that from a master.
If you're lucky, you can do that. It's a great achievement.
And it turns out that this has not only been always the chief gore, as it were, in the Vedic tradition,
but the same is true in the Platonist.
And let me mention that this is something I did not know until very, very recently
when I came across some writings by 18th century British Platonist known as Thomas Taylor,
who for some unknowable reason strikes me as a perfect insider of the Platonist tradition.
How that is to be explained is totally beyond my comprehension,
but I have no doubt that Thomas Taylor knows very well what he is talking about
when he gives us, so to speak, an inside view of the Platonist tradition.
And it turns out that the Platonist tradition is identical to the Pythagorean.
In fact, it comes from the Pythagorean.
If you will, Plato was a distant disciple of Pythagoras.
And now what we learn from Thomas Taylor is that Pythagoras, as a young man, traveled to Egypt
and actually became a disciple of an Egyptian master.
And Thomas Taylor, where he gets this information from, I don't know.
Undoubtedly, there are sources.
But what I recognized immediately is that from the description that Thomas Taylor gives us
of the life of these disciples, when I read this, I said to myself,
my God, this is what I witnessed when 50 years ago I traveled in India
and lived amongst real sadhus.
That's how they live.
So this explains the correspondence between the Pythagorean Platonist tradition on the one side
and the Vedic on the other.
In a sense, they are the same tradition.
However, there is a very decisive feature of the Pythagorean Platonist tradition,
which, so far as I know, simply does not exist in the Vedic.
What is that?
It is the role of geometry.
Geometry in the hands of the Pythagoreans and Platonists was an instrument
which enabled the practicing yogi to ascend from the psychic to the eternal plane.
And conceptually, we can see how this is possible
because geometry, as a subject studied in our schools, for example,
pertains to the psychic realm.
It's the realm of thought, of consciousness.
But the truth of geometry, what it really deals with, pertains to the eternal plane.
After all, when you prove a theorem, you prove a theorem,
and the theorem is something that is eternal.
And in fact, geometry derives from the eternal plane
because what we experience, if you will, on the psychic realm
comes from the eternal.
If there were not an eternal geometry, there could be no geometry as we understand it.
So the Greeks, the Pythagoreans, first of all, understood this very well
and realized that because geometry does come from the eternal
and what it essentially asserts pertains to the eternal,
it can be used as an instrument to actually ascend from the psychic level
with this kind of happening out discussion right now,
even though it involves the corporeal, actually takes place on the psychic.
There is no geometry running around here on the corporeal plane.
We're talking about something at the psychic level.
And the crucial point is, and this is what the Pythagoreans and the Platonists understood so well,
the point is that because geometry derives from the eternal realm,
it is, in principle, possible to use geometry to ascend from the psychic to the...
So this is very easy to say, but as I indicated a moment ago,
the actual accomplishment of this is a lifetime task.
And incidentally, we're talking here,
an authentic spiritual tradition is nothing that you can access on your own.
It entails discipleship.
And this is vital.
I found in India when I was travelling there half a century ago,
every 14-year-old Brahmin boy would understand this very well.
It's simply known.
Here in the West it is almost totally unknown.
But the fact is, if you want to ascend to the eternal plane,
you have to become a disciple of someone who was himself a disciple.
And incidentally, both in the Vedic tradition and in the Pythagorean Platonists,
it is well understood that this path calls for lifelong celibacy.
So in India, I noticed this every 14-year-old Brahmin boy understands,
if you want to ascend this path, it will cost you lifelong celibacy.
And the writings of Thomas Taylor confirm that such was the case
in the Pythagorean tradition and undoubtedly also in the Platonists.
Incidentally, what I have said so far gives you the key
to understanding a very mysterious inscription
which reputedly was inscribed over the portal of the Plato-Platonic Academy.
In English it says, let no one ignorant of geometry enter here.
So we understand this now in a different way
because actually no one ignorant of geometry can enter here
if entering means to access the eternal plane.
So the modus operandi used in the Pythagorean Platonist tradition,
which comes from the Egyptian, differs from the Vedic
in the sense that the means of access were different.
Of course, they had the common elements of celibacy and this incredible practice.
You know, when I lived among Sadhus in India about 50 years ago,
I was amazed that these men spend a good 20 hours a day in other states, in higher states.
If you were to put a knife in their flesh while they are in these states,
there would be no reaction because they are no longer in this body.
And so I also realized then when they did come to North consciousness,
I could talk with them and it was, as you can imagine, absolutely fascinating to me
to talk to someone who has just been somewhere
that our wildest men in the contemporary West know nothing about.
I mean, we know nothing even about the intermediaries played.
Go to Princeton Institute for Advanced Studies.
I guarantee that there's not a single person there, unless he happens to have read the books that I've read,
knows about that.
And incidentally, in India, just about everyone knows about these things.
In fact, these three states, when you talk to an educated Hindu in my day,
you could converse with him about the so-called Tripuvana.
I talked to people who were businessmen and we could talk about the Tripuvana.
It was in their tradition.
Tripuvana is just a Sanskrit word meaning three worlds.
So after this trip to India, the first trip, I realized how ignorant we are in the West.
I mean, we know a little piece of the world.
We don't even know about the existence of the intermediary world,
which we actually enter just about every day in the dream state.
And let me in this connection tell you something which illustrates what I'm talking about here,
namely the fact that 50 years ago, and probably doesn't exist anymore,
but at that time there was this remarkable knowledge among even ordinary people in India.
So on my first trip to India, I think I landed in New Delhi and took a room in a hotel.
And that first evening I had some telephone conversations
and I was very, very happy to learn that someone whom I had great admiration for
was going to arrive in New Delhi the next day by train at 11 o'clock.
So I was very, very happy about that and just took a stroll in the city
and went to Old Delhi and on my return to the hotel I was accosted by,
I guess you could call him a fakir.
That means a person who has a little bit of knowledge of yoga but not all that much.
And this fakir accosted me out of the blue and says,
very lucky man.
So he says, oh yeah, he said very lucky man, tomorrow at 11 o'clock something good will happen.
Well, no one in New Delhi besides myself knew about this tomorrow at 11 o'clock,
which is really something that elated me.
And so I must have been thinking about it deeply.
So this fakir somehow picked that up out of thin air.
Well, this fact of course interested me.
So I went to a nearby garden with him to see what he can have to say.
And so he gave me a piece of paper and he said, look at it.
So I saw it was blank.
Then he says, please fold it and hold it in your hand.
So I did, so I held this paper.
And then he said, all right, now think of a number between one and a hundred.
So I thought of a number, I think it was 36.
And then he says, all right, now open your hand and look at the paper.
And on this paper was written 36.
So I gave him something and but on my way home to the hotel, I brooded on this.
How, what's going on?
And I think I figured it out.
The fact that he, he talked to me, he costed me in reference to something good that would happen tomorrow at 11 o'clock.
This was clearly a case of telepathy.
I mean, he was able to read my mind.
So then what about the 36 that number?
Well, I eventually did figure that out too.
There is something called invisible ink.
And so that number must have been written in invisible ink.
And it became visible when I held this in my hands.
Meanwhile, he puts that number into my mind.
So there were two for us supernatural powers that he had.
A, to read someone else's mind and B, to put something into someone else's mind.
So here, the first day in India, by chance encountered the fakir who had these two powers and he could demonstrate that to me.
Now, why do I speak of fakir?
Well, clearly these, these are yogic powers and you cannot, you cannot acquire them just out of books.
Absolutely not.
So this man had a guru.
He was a disciple or someone who was enough for the yogi to possess these two powers and therefore he could transmit it to his disciple.
All of this doesn't come on the cheap.
This fakir must have spent maybe two, three years.
I don't know a certain period of time as a disciple subject to a very disciplined kind of life to acquire these powers.
So why do we call him a fakir which is a somewhat derogatory term?
How do you spell that by the way?
F-A-T-I-R.
And if, as I understand it, a fakir is someone who has a certain knowledge of yoga, not a very high knowledge,
but a certain knowledge is the same and who instead of going on, I mean, ideally yoga is given to us in order to go all the way.
But there is a possibility that at various stages you stop and utilize this knowledge and it can be utilized in many ways.
You can become a millionaire if you play your cards right.
I mean, this knowledge is knowledge of a very unusual kind.
So the word fakir, as I understand it, refers to these yogis who instead of going on at a certain level use this half knowledge that they have for pecuniary purposes.
That's all right.
But it was so interesting.
My first day in India, I learned things which here in the West hardly anyone knows.
As I said, if you were to go to the Institute for Advanced Studies, I don't think you would find anyone there who has a ghost of an idea about these things.
And yes, it's real and it's in a way science.
It's a higher science than what we possess.
Because our sciences actually, our physical science doesn't even reach up to the corporeal level.
This is why I had to introduce it.
I had to distinguish between X and SX and that was one of the two keys to the resolution of the measurement problem.
The reason that top physicists have not been able to solve the problem to this day is that the ontology of physics doesn't suffice.
If there were only a physical domain and no corporeal domain which is higher than that, there could be no measurement.
So, I think I have made the point in light of my contact with India that there are things between heaven and earth that our sciences here in the West, our contemporary sciences, don't know anything about.
But would you agree, Brian, with my point that these things are there in the quantum world, but in potency.
You need to understand quantum mechanics. You do need the Aristotelian distinction between potency and act.
And in fact, Heisenberg understood this almost immediately when he said that so-called quantum particles are not real particles, they are potency.
They become real particles precisely when they interact with a corporeal instrument.
And as I show in my latest book on physics, the point of it is that the reality comes from the corporeal level.
In other words, the reason quantum physics deals with entities that in a sense do not exist is because classical physics is sub corporeal.
I mean, this little entity is corporeal, but when the physicist looks at it, it becomes physical.
In other words, he sees it as a physical entity, and as a physical entity, it still has being because the physical coaster receives its being from the corporeal.
Is the Sx a subset of X or is it a different domain?
It's a different domain. It's not a subset. It is something, you might say it's a physicist's way of comprehending X.
But the point that I'm making is that the reality comes from the corporeal.
It's the complete opposite of what contemporary scientists tend to believe.
Contemporary scientists tend to believe that the reality that we encounter here on the corporeal level derives ultimately from the particulate domain, the domain of quantum theory.
But the actual fact of the matter is just the opposite.
There's no intermediary here.
I have come to look upon physics from a rigorous, Platonist ontological standpoint, and there it is very, very simple.
All reality, all being comes from the eternal plane.
So, iconically, you have a circle with a center.
The center represents the eternal plane, the intermediary is the interior, and then the corporeal is the actual circumference of that circle.
I sort of taught myself to think in terms of this icon, because if you do, everything becomes very simple.
So, all the reality, whether in the corporeal world or the physical, derives from that center.
And now, how does it derive it through vertical causation?
So, how then is the reality of corporeal objects transmitted to the physical realm?
Well, the physical realm breaks into two parts, and this is absolutely essential.
You can't understand physics without that.
You have to make the distinction between subcorporeal physics, which is the physics of entities which derive from the corporeal level.
So, subcorporeal physics deals with objects sx derived from a corporeal x.
And the crucial point here is that because subcorporeal physics derives from the corporeal level, it receives being,
which is the same as irreducible wholeness, through vertical causation.
There's vertical causation from the corporeal level to the physical level, and that is why the physical level has a reality.
Technically speaking, it has being, because that being is transmitted from the corporeal to the physical level through vertical causation.
So, this is the story about classical physics.
Now, what about quantum mechanics?
Well, quantum mechanics is the physics of the transcorporeal.
Transcorporeal means not subcorporeal.
Do you describe that as tx? So, sx is classical physics?
Yes, classical physics is a physics of physical systems sx derived from x.
But in quantum theory, strange as it obviously must be, you are dealing with entities that are physical but not derived from a corporeal entity.
Now, if you think about this, and it's not quite that easy, I mean these are subtle points,
because the quantum world is not subcorporeal, it does not have its own intrinsic reality.
So, this is why quantum theory is so weird.
This is why particles can multi-locate, for example.
The answer is in plain terms that in itself, quantum entities have no reality, have no being.
So, how then can there be a classical physics, a quantum physics?
Well, the point is that the quantum realm does not exist all by itself.
It interacts with corporeal instruments in two ways.
First, in its definition, a quantum theory is not just a mental thing, it has a certain reality,
because by virtue of the instruments, the corporeal instruments, which define the physical system.
So, this already is one source which transmits reality to the non-reality of the quantum world
conceived in isolation from the corporeal.
The second way in which reality is transmitted into the quantum world from the corporeal is in the act of measurement.
And it is a great genius of Heisenberg, Werner Heisenberg.
He was the first one, the first human being in history who got a glimpse of that.
He said with reference to quantum theory that physics today is not based upon an outside reality,
but it is based upon an interplay of the observer with the observed.
In other words, the quantum world comes into existence through the activity of the physicist,
where there are no corporeal objects acting as instruments of measurement,
excuse me, I take this back, we need to distinguish between the act of defining a physical system
and the act of measuring a physical system thus defined.
These are two different acts, but they are both acts which come from the activity of the scientist.
So the scientist gives rise to the quantum world through this interplay between the corporeal and the transcoporeal,
which he actually initiates by in two ways, by defining the physical system, which is done with corporeal instruments,
and by measuring the physical system thus defined, which is also done with physical instruments.
So these are the two ways in which the physicist creates, if you will, the transcoporeal world.
The transcoporeal world is not God made, it's man made, it's not there until you A,
define the instruments, set up the instruments which define this physical system,
and B, then it's there in a potential sense, but that's not enough.
It isn't fully there until you measure it, and then you move from potency to act.
So there's X, there's SX, there's the transcoporeal, do you have a letter for that?
The transcoporeal is misleading because the transcoporeal doesn't really exist until the physicist comes into the picture,
because the transcoporeal is, so to speak, produced through the questions that the physicist gives, as the physicist asks.
I can quote the exact words of Heisenberg.
He says that the new physics is an interplay between the physicist and nature.
It is not, unless there is an interplay, an interaction between the physicist and his activity and nature,
there's no quantum world.
There's no transcoporeal quantum world because the transcoporeal quantum world comes into play in this two-fold activity of the physicist.
First, he defines a physical system, and this is done through physical instruments, well actually through corporeal instruments.
And having defined a physical system, the physicist is in a position to measure, to make measurements on that physical system,
and this is again done with corporeal instruments.
So it was Heisenberg who had this enormous insight, right at the very beginning,
that with the advent of quantum theory an entirely new physics has begun,
a physics in which the physicist is no longer the onlooker,
but he is also, if you will, in a way the creator of what he measures.
It's a two-way street, and the way Arthur Eddington expressed it, he says,
the mathematics isn't there till we put it there.
So it was, first Heisenberg, then Eddington, soon thereafter,
both had the same vision of physics, and it was completely different from the classical.
In classical physics, you postulate that the nature is out there,
and you are merely the spectator of what is actually out there.
And when you're dealing with large ensembles of the quantum world, this physics works fine.
But when you come down to smaller units, it breaks down.
And this is where, in a sense, the physicist himself creates what he measures.
So does this not apply to regular people who aren't physicists?
Well, we are discussing physics, so what is physics? It's what physicists do.
So the big change from classical to quantum physics came about when Heisenberg recognized
that when you are dealing with what we now call quantum systems,
we are dealing with something that we ourselves have in a way created.
So this is why Heisenberg said that we now understand that the physicist is not simply a spectator,
he is himself in a way creating the very things that he is measuring.
Because there are these two distinguishable phases of physics.
There is, first of all, the phase where you define a physical system which you do through corporeal instruments.
And having defined it, you then can measure it.
And this is how quantum physics comes about.
And the point is that in classical physics,
the system gains its reality first through being defined by corporeal instruments.
It's the corporeal instruments that define what the physicist is measuring.
And then it is, secondly, again corporeal instruments which actually measure the system that you have so to speak created.
Are our eyes a corporeal instrument?
Oh yes, of course.
I mean, I see your eyes, I see the color of the pupil in there.
So you don't mean to say you go into the lab and you set up a laser and then all of a sudden quantum mechanics is created.
So is this an observer, the table?
Well, there are really two tables.
The table of quantum physics, which is simply the Sx of this x.
And then there are the quantum tables.
So the Sx was the classical?
Yes, that's classical.
So the difference is that in quantum theory, the physicist not only describes what is out there, but in a sense he creates what is out there.
As Eddington said, the mathematics isn't there till we put it there.
We put that mathematics there.
And this is something that Heisenberg just understood as a metaphysician.
What sets Heisenberg apart from all other physicists of renown is that he was the son of a classicist.
Which means that Heisenberg was highly schooled in Plato and Aristotle.
And that gave him a new way of looking at things.
I don't know how many other physicists have really followed Heisenberg fully in this recognition.
And on account of this new way of seeing what physics is, he was able to recognize that the quantum world is ontologically beneath the corporeal.
Beneath the physical and the physical, of course.
So there are really three levels.
You've got the corporeal, which is the sense-perceived world.
Then you have the world of classical physics, which is sub-corporeal in the sense that it deals with entities Sx derived from X.
The classical physicist deals essentially with the corporeal world, but he is interested only at its quantitative aspect.
He closes his eyes, so to speak, to all the rest.
For example, he is blind to color.
And the sad thing is that it's one thing to forget about color when you put on your physics hat.
In fact, necessary.
That's how physics originates from that blindness.
What is sad is if you carry that blindness over to your normal life, then you become a materialist, and in a sense, you talk nonsense.
And not only do you talk nonsense, but you can't recognize that this is nonsense.
And this is more or less where the intellectual elite of the western world stands now,
that they take the physical universe to be real,
and the corporeal world is then what Descartes called the rest cogitans, the thing of the mind.
And this is what Whitehead called bifurcation, and he spent maybe 30 years of his life going around to all the universities in Europe and America,
trying to explain to the people how wrong this is, how actually foolish.
But the strange thing is that very few people got the message.
And in fact, anyone who tries to explain to a physicist the idea of bifurcation will, to his disappointment,
learn that the likelihood is 99.9 that the physicist won't understand a word he's saying.
Because this bifurcationist, and therefore spurious metaphysics, is so ingrained in the mind of a physicist,
and you know that's understandable, because you can't do physics until you bifurcate.
It is his bifurcation that in a sense creates the physical universe, and that's what the physicist is there to understand.
That's what he thinks about, morning, noon, at night, until he regains a normal state of mind when again the grass is green.
But while he's doing physics, the grass is not green. While he's doing physics, he is bifurcationist.
He's a Cartesian, and so he sees only a part of the world.
And incidentally, this is what makes the whole enterprise in a sense unwholesome, because man was not put here on earth to put on blinders,
and actually shut off the better half of the world, what the physicist casts out by his very modus operandi,
is in fact the creme de la creme, the world of color and sound, and all these innumerable things that poets think about,
and artists paint. This is all blocked out. As soon as you put on a physics hat, this no longer exists.
And what the tragedy is that many physicists, if not most, after doing physics for a good length of time,
they forget that the so-called physical universe is not the whole thing.
And so in a sense, they are split in two. I mean, the human part of the physicist is always there.
I mean, we breathe, and we feel pain, and so on. I don't even feel love.
But officially, we are democratic, and we know only atoms and the void. It's a terrible disease.
And it's a disease which can infect not only individuals, it can infect the whole society.
And this is what I have been trying to express in all my writings, that we, the modern contemporary west, are a sick society.
This is not how man is meant to be. We are not hitting on all cylinders.
In fact, the higher side of our nature is as it were excluded. It has no rights.
It has no place in the public marketplace. You won't learn about it in the universities,
because the message is that we've picked up the most ancient heresy in the history of the world,
the philosophy of Democritus, fifth century BC.
Democritus said, what was it? The Volga think of color, the bitter and the sweet.
In reality, they are only atoms and the void. It's amazing.
About 490 BC or something like that, Democritus came upon the scene,
and in a few words, he epitomized the philosophy which would dominate western civilization from the 17th century onwards.
So Democritus was very soon followed by Plato, and Plato completely invalidated the Democritian axiom.
So one can, and all of antiquity followed in the footsteps of Plato in that regard,
which means that the well-informed for 2,000 years, the well-informed understood very well
that this doctrine of atoms and the void is untenable.
And so one can very well say that it is the oldest heresy in the world.
And what we have done, beginning with people like Galileo and Descartes,
we have instituted the oldest heresy in the world as the basis of our intellectual culture.
And we have done so with the vengeance, because the Weltanschauung, which Galileo and Descartes instituted,
which as I said is a revival of the Democritian,
and is us what might be called the oldest heresy in the world, has now been baptized as an enlightenment.
So it's no wonder that we are in difficulty, because I think we can all agree
that basically a certain wisdom is necessary for a good life.
And on a global scale it's in fact necessary for survival.
You will not survive if your Weltanschauung is upside down.
And that it is.
So that's very simple, that's all I have to say.
I'm going to ask you if you have symbols for the Aveturnal, the psychic,
because you have X for an object in the corporeal.
So is it A and is it P for the Aveturnal, then the psychic is P?
I just want to know about the symbology of it, like the symbols that you write down.
Well the real symbology of it is what I call the cosmic icon.
So the circle which entails three elements.
The circle has the center, the interior, and the boundary, the circumference.
And so I really think that this idea of the circle, this iconic view of the circle,
is what's known to the Pythagorean and Platonists,
but so far as I know there's no literary evidence to that effect.
But that's how I think about it.
You know, since we are tripartite, corpus animus spiritus,
we also need to, as it were, understand things tripartite, in a tripartite way.
And so in order to understand these things that we're talking about here,
the cosmic icon really, for me, it needs to be there sort of in the background.
When I talk, for example, about geometry elevating you from the psychic to the Aveturnal realm,
I instinctively think of it in iconic terms.
So a certain visualization is almost necessary for me.
And so I think this is probably true for everyone.
Since we are tripartite, our thinking is also in a certain sense tripartite.
So the iconic way of dealing with very abstract, very metaphysical things is natural
because it is tripartite and we are tripartite.
So I'm always skeptical of people who claim they think just rationally.
I think an iconic dimension is absolutely necessary.
And then it becomes real and then it has power.
Otherwise, if it is, otherwise it is in truth a Cartesian risk cogitance
and that doesn't amount to anything.
Descartes has done a tremendous harm to Western civilization
by the fact that we have become Cartesian in our way of...
and this idea of the risk-extended entities in the so-called real world
and everything else, the risk cogitance, which we have degraded into a sort of a fantasy world,
you can see how this opens the door to something absolutely dehumanizing.
Because once you really become a believer in this dichotomy of risk-extension
and risk cogitance, you are incorrigibly subhuman.
You can never again attain the human level unless you cast out that idea.
It's a tough thing to cast out once you've become enslaved by it.
So this is why when you try to explain the idea of bifurcation to physicists, they really don't get it.
Do you want to explain bifurcation to the audience right now?
Yes, well, let me just finish this and we can.
Second.
You know, I'd like to ask you a question because I've wondered it, but I don't know if it's appropriate.
Ask away.
Judging by your name, I thought that your ancestry goes back to India, does it?
Oh, okay, good, well then.
I'm glad I'm talking much about Vedic culture because that's what you carry in your DNA.
So it's interesting that there is a certain parallel between your life and mine
because in my case, yes, I was born into a Catholic family,
but I sort of forgot all about it.
You know, then came the war and we almost got killed in the process.
And so by the time I settled in America, I had forgotten all about my Christianity
and as I told you, my mind became engrossed in other type of questions.
And it was during my college days that I became not only acquainted with...
I became not only acquainted with Indian culture, but tremendously drawn to it.
Yeah, future tennis faggot.
We had a great interest here, eventually, of it.
So it became very drawn to it and I first, if you read my book on physics,
I relate that story.
My first encounter with Hindu tradition was through Rabindranath Tagore.
I read a very famous little book of his called Gitanjali and that set me on fire.
So the next, for about 40 years of my life, I lived in a Vedic ambience.
I traveled to India...
Well, the first time I traveled to India I stayed seven months
and I lived exclusively amongst the sadhus and I came back a different man.
I realized when I was flying back I used to seven months
because I was just finishing a stretch at MIT and starting a stretch at UCLA.
So from the end of the winter semester to the beginning of the fall semester
I was free, so I went to India.
And when I flew back to Los Angeles after seven months of living amongst sadhus
and witnessing things that are incredible, I realized I'm not the same man.
The man who is flying back is not the man that was flying over.
I had been permanently changed and which is actually what should happen
when you open yourself to real sadhus, to people who have the experience of higher spheres.
You should be changed by that.
And the one thing I brought with me to India, great, great reverence.
Instinctively I approached these sadhus with folded hands
and it's amazing if we were together along many things, stories I could tell you,
but I invariably found that if you honor a sadhu just in your heart without any physical evidence
he knows it instantly and they always respond.
If you give something to a real sadhu he will give you something back
and what he gives you back is more valuable than all the golden foot knocks.
So I experienced this again and again when I was in India
and if there's anything good in my life I don't think it could have come without that contact.
And then when I was about 40 years old I married a wonderful Catholic woman
and in a sense she became my guru because not that she ever lectured,
but by her mere presence she connected me, reconnected me to Christianity.
My wife did the same for me.
Is that wonderful?
I grew up Christian and then I became an atheist from when I was 8 years old or so
because I remember asking my brother who was a physicist at the time
how did the universe come about and he said it could have come from quantum fluctuations
that's how nothing comes from something or something comes from nothing
and then I remember sitting and thinking okay then that solves the last problem I had
with the notion of God namely how can anything be here.
So from that point forward I became an atheist
and it wasn't until I met my wife and just her sweetness, her lovingness, her endearedness
I've never met someone that I felt like I can't hurt them
if I hurt them I would feel so horrible.
I like very much what you're saying it's wonderful
and it took me a long time also to get to think like that
and so you know it's amazing we have something really in common in the sense that in my life
it was Tha who brought me back to my Christian roots
and the fact that I had gone really quite deeply into the Vedantic way
turned out to be essential because it gave me something
that my fellow Christians here generally have not been exposed to
in other words I brought something back with me from India
which I was able to put to very good use.
There are very few meetings, genuine meetings between a western man and a Vedic man
and in fact the Vedic side of India has been under attack
ever since the British came there because the British of course introduced western ideas
and western modes of living and I don't want to go back to India
because I'm afraid I would not, the India that I experienced half a century ago doesn't exist anymore
maybe if you go to remote places in the Himalayas and the regions you will still meet it
but I'm sure it's essentially gone
and so I was blessed in the sense that I could still absorb that
and at the time when I was in India I thought like an Indian in other words
I totally forgot about my Christian background
it was really, it was somehow deep in my being but I wasn't conscious of it
so what I'm saying is that I was able to experience the Vedic India in a rather deep way
and this has been a great blessing in my life because it gave me something that is rather rare in this part of the world
and when I got back to Christianity I was able to integrate these two, these two sources if you will
and in fact I will give you a book I published last year called Vedanta in Light of Christian Wisdom
where I attack a very now prevalent philosophy, if you want to call it that
the so-called perennialists, people like Pritoshuon, Ananda Kumraswamy from India, Rene Gino, they are all perennialists
Perennialism means
Perennialism means that there is one high truth and one pure religion with the world over
and in particular they think that the different religions are different paths to the same summits
that all of the major religions lead to the same place
and this in fact this view is so widely disseminated nowadays that whether you talk to an educated Hindu
or an educated Muslim or an educated Christian, when it comes to the intellectual class
this is almost unanimously assumed nowadays
this is like the enlightenment of the spiritual community
so rationality is the enlightenment of the atheistic community
and then the spiritual community that feels like oh I have the answers is more of the type that feels like
well that religion is correct, it's distorted, it's somewhat incomplete but that one's correct
amongst the really educated people, word over, you find that this is almost axiomatic
and there was a time when I was in a way flirting with this outlook
I read Shuman and Shuman was a very brilliant man
and when you read him it is easy to fall into his way of looking at things
because he was a very powerful person, in fact I visited him in Bloomington here
he comes from Germany but early in life he converted to Islam
and then he founded the Tarika in Bloomington
so I had personal contact with him
and at the end I realized that this is not someone you want to follow
so I am probably now the chief literary exponent of the opposite view
instead of perennialism, the idea of all religions are different ways of climbing the same mountain
the first thesis and the primary thesis which I document in this book that I just mentioned
Vedanta in light of Christian rhythm, the first point, the main, the central point I document is
that the eschaton of the Vedic tradition and the eschaton of the Christian tradition
both are in a way to establish a union with God, there is no question about that
that is what true religion is about
but the point is that the Vedic union with God and the Christian union with God
are totally different and in fact in a sense they are opposite
because the Vedic union with God, I call it the nirvana option
because Buddhism and Hinduism are not totally the same
but the word nirvana which comes from the Buddha expresses it as perfectly as it can be expressed
nirvana literally means blowing out like a candle flame
and this is really what the Vedic path, the highest Vedic path, the Vedantic path, the Advaita path
accomplishes and aims to accomplish
it's a blowing out of the human
now the point is, it is a very deeply philosophical point to discover
that there is something in us which transcends the human
I mean there is something called Wolfgang Smith
but if you wipe that out
if a super yogi could put his hand on me and this Wolfgang Smith is gone
what would remain is the Nibbri Karpasamadhi, the supreme state of the Vedantic way
the Vedantic way is nirvana, it is a way of wiping out the merely human
it's hard to describe these things because we are touching rock bottom here
we are talking about absolutely foundational things
so the Vedic path is nirvana
in the Vedic tradition you speak about Nibbri Karpasamadhi
it is a state which very few sadhus even in India attain
but every now and then it is attained
and for example in the early and first half of the 20th century
there was a great sadhu in India who had attained that Nibbri Karpasamadhi state
and I read about him when I was very young
you have photographs of him
there are people who visited him and made conversations
and the point is that from our point of view this was a human being
we could talk to him and he could talk to us
but in reality that human side was just a facade
we think of him that way, he didn't experience himself as that
in other words he had attained the actual eschatom of the Vedic religion
and there are various names Nibbri Karpasamadhi
this is not nirvana, this is different?
it's the same, exactly the same
I'm convinced that Buddha even though he was not organically or historically related to India
nevertheless he belongs in the Vedic tradition
so that the distinction is accidental, it's not essential
so this is one eschatom
and incidentally, I mean it's like Mount Everest, it's too big for us to...
we can say the words but we don't really have any conception about that
now the important thing that I came to realize in the course of my life
is that the Christian eschatom is something utterly different
so much so that in a sense they are anti-portal
why?
the key is, as every Christian knows, the church fathers used to say
God became man so that man can become God
Bethel, who says that?
the fathers, I mean it was assumed
St. Augustine or St. Thomas Aquinas
they all would have agreed with that
who actually spoke these words?
I'm not enough of a scholar to
but it's a formula that is accepted in Christianity as orthodox
God became man so that man can become God
but to be more precise
the way of knowing God or seeing God
that is offered to us by Christianity
in contrast to the Vedantic way
is that by becoming a member of the mystical body of Christ through baptism
we are able to see God the Father through Christ the Son
through the Incarnate Christ
without the Incarnation there would be no such possibility
but this is why God became man
to form a bridge as it were between the human and the divine
and through that bridge we can come to God the Father through God the Son
and more specifically the Incarnate Son
there is a distinction between Christ as the second person of the Holy Trinity
and Christ as we worship Him in our churches
because what we worship and what otherwise could not really be worshiped
is God in the form of man
this is a crucial point
so through Christianity a new eschaton was given to mankind
and the interesting thing is that in Vedic days that did not exist
that became a reality when Christ was born on earth
and that is long after the Vedic period had begun
so the Sadhus in India were practicing their Vedanta
long before there was a Christianity
so that began with the birth of Christ
and it ended, it was completed with a resurrection
and we are part of that
we belong to that path
our path is not the direct path which is practiced in Vedanta
our path is through the God-man
and incidentally there is a wonderful passage in the Gospel of Saint John
which speaks very directly to this
it is taken from what is traditionally called the high priestly prayer
called so it is before the passion
when Christ went into this garden to pray
he said, addressing God the Father, he said
this is life eternal, to know thee the only true God and Jesus Christ who was sent
this says it all
coming from the mouth of God himself, this says it all
in other words our approach to salvation
to the union with God is through Jesus Christ who was sent
these are the actual words of Jesus
and when he says who was sent
is a direct reference to the Incarnation
in other words there could be no Christianity
no other path to God than the Vedic
if it were not for the Incarnation it is by God becoming man
that this other path was born
so the Vedas know nothing about that
in fact I was very surprised when in the recent days in writing this book that I'm going to give you
I was carefully thinking about all these issues
and I discovered to my surprise how very little of anything Christian was known to the Vedic tradition
for example the story of Adam and the idea of the fall of Adam and original sin
which is all integral to Christianity
is not known to the Vedas
in fact in Sanskrit there is strictly speaking no words expressing the Judeo-Christian idea of sin
bad karma is one thing but sin is something entirely different
and you will not find any mention in the Vedic literature of sin
in fact if you talk to sin to an indigenous Hindu
however educated he may be
he won't understand what you're saying
I speak to people who are on the western of the eastern end
meaning that they have a western interpretation of the east
and they like to say that well the east has everything that the west has and more
you're saying no
no
in fact you know what you just said
is part of the perennialist cradle
it all comes in the same package
and so this book that I wrote which I hope will be read by many perennialists
it's the only book I know of that is a rigorous contradiction of perennialism
and not only do I contradict the notion of many paths to the same summit
but I go into much more detail
for example I tried to demonstrate
that the eschaton of Christianity which is called salvation
is the polar opposite of the nirvanic goal
there are many words you can use to describe it in the Vedic terms
let's call it the nirvanic state
salvation and the nirvanic state are the complete opposite
why?
because in the nirvanic state the human person has disappeared
the Vedic path
there are many Vedic paths to lesser ends but the supreme Vedic path
is a path which requires the immolation of the human being
this is why if you go to India the sadhus they all wear garuva
that is the color that identifies the sadhu
and well in a country that burns the bodies of the dead
it is easy to see that the garuva color bears a reference to the self-immolation
and incidentally living with the sadhus for seven months as I did
I came to experiences I saw that this is what these men were doing
it was a self-immolation
and I admire them tremendously I mean just the strength that it needs
to rise above all our human proclivities to give that all up
to literally as it were take our body and consign it to the flames
this is what they do
and my hat off to them
I love them dearly I love them dearly because they were so kind to me
they immediately read all my mind and whatever is even beneath the mind
I was an open book to them
this is automatic if you rise to authentically high spiritual levels
everything here in this world becomes an open book
when you look at the person you can tell his future and his past
everything because in the eternal state everything is here now
so by the grace of God I got a glimpse of the greatness of the Hindu sadhus
the giants
and in fact when I was traveling in India
one of the great spiritual personalities was a woman
her name was Anandamurma
and incidentally your Trudeau person whom I don't like at all
he traveled to India and visited Anandamurma
I'll give him credit for that there was a noble thing to do
well Anandamurma from childhood represented the highest state of consciousness
I mean we of course saw her as a woman
but she did not for a moment think of herself that way
so she was more divine than human
and incidentally when you got to know her a little bit
the better you knew her the more you saw the divine part
the less you saw the human part
and they're different
and incidentally it was the first time I was able to encounter a Samadhi state
Samadhi is the super consciousness
she was on her birthday
and on her birthday she always went into Samadhi
and so when she was in Samadhi she was not in this world at all
and so there was the first time I'd read about Samadhi ever since I was 17 years old
I knew about it
but this is the first time I saw a human being in that state
and it's amazing because when she came out of Samadhi for about three or four hours
she was in Samadhi and when she came out of Samadhi
it was a sort of a gradual continuous process
and in this process her actual features changed
at first she looked like a young girl
and then the more she regained her normal state
the more she began to look as we normally saw her
of a rather past middle age woman
and so this was supernatural
I mean how can you change in a few minutes
from this word child to an old man
I mean this is clearly supernatural
and I knew of course that Samadhi state is something supernatural
it's something which in the ordinary Christian tradition is not known
you have to get into the esoteric side of Christianity
then you will begin to re...
had incidentally let me say this
years before that experience in India
yeah
years before that experience in India
I had already read about Samadhi states
and I visited in Italy
a bona fide Christian saint
no question about it Padre Pio is his name
he's been canonized
and when I first saw Padre Pio
he was being led into the church by another priest
and looking at Padre Pio
I said to myself my god he's in Samadhi
it was clear that in his consciousness
he was no longer seeing what we normally see
that's why another priest had to lead him by the hand
so having had some experience in India
I looked upon our spiritual champions with a different light
I saw the supernatural side
in something like Padre Pio
and so Samadhi is a real thing
you do see it also in the west
but only in the highest grades of sanctity
it's...
it is more known where I speak about India
as big about India half a century ago
I don't think there's much left of that spiritual culture
because India has been westernized
and contemporary western culture
is like water to fire
water extinguishes fire
so I have no interest even if I were young
to go back to India because I've seen the best of India
and as I said when I was traveling there
I could still encounter and actually speak
the sadhus of very high rank
Did you speak in English?
Yeah, that's the one good thing
that came out of the British Raj
it made English the lingua franca of India
and for people like myself it was a godsend
because wherever I went I could speak to the people
of course that's an exaggeration
when I went into the countryside in India
the people only knew the particular Indian language
of that district
but anyone who's had a high school education
of course knew English
so it did give me access
and I remember I had beautiful conversations
with some of these sadhus
there was one in particular
he was the head of a monastery
and he spent 20 hours a day in these Samadhi states
but when he came out of it
he was very normal and natural
and he liked me
and he called me Smith Ananda
and at one point he said to me
he said we are seeking to enter the Abode of Death
and they ask us to write books
I've pondered over that statement
a lot of times
it says a lot
first of all it says that the Vedantic path
is a path to the Abode of Death
and you could write a whole book explaining that
it explains everything
so I was fascinated with that
and in my book as you will read
it explains what you learn
from the so-called Phoenicians
like the Presocratics
Parmenidus
Parmenidus
what we have from Parmenidus
in the form of fragments
is a journey
quote on quote to the Abode of Death
so when I heard from the Sadhu
we are trying to enter the Abode of Death
and I remember the Ha
Parmenidus said the same
and so in these Presocratics
were following a basically yogic discipline
which they received from the Phoenicians
so there was an actual connection with India there
and then as I write in this book
I record that Socrates
who was not from the Phoenician tradition at all
but Socrates did write that quote
philosophy is the practice of death
so in the Platonists
you find the same Vedic theme
that the way to wisdom
is to enter the Abode of Death
and we can now understand this
because the Samadhi state
which is state of enlightenment
in the Samadhi state
the normal human function sees
the breathing stops
the heartbeat does not stop completely
but it goes down
it's like the heartbeat of a hibernating bear
very very slow
just enough to keep the body alive
so the Vedic path is a path leading directly into death
so the Vedic people also have their resurrection
but it's a resurrection not in human form
what is a resurrection?
it is near Vikalpa Samadhi
it is that state
and in India
every now and then
you actually find a Sadhu
who is in that state
and as I told you in the early 20th century
one of these Hindu personalities
became world famous
I have books here in my library
where you can see his photograph
the German wrote that book
he records the conversations he had
with Ramana Maharshi
and chapter 2 of the book
deals with a French Benedictine monk
who came to India
he had a face-to-face visit with Ramana Maharshi
and from that point on
all he wanted to do is follow the Hindu sadhana
which he did follow successfully
up to a certain point
I think he was very very advanced
when he finally died
but what I bring out in this book
is that what he says about Christianity
following his, as it were, initiation
into the Vedic religion
is all wrong
so in chapter 2
I use the biography of Henri Lausau
the Benedictine monk
who then became in a way a disciple
of Ramana Maharshi
to show how completely distorted his view
of Christianity had become then
because he no longer had any idea about Christianity
he confused Christianity with Vedanta
and of course if you compare Christianity to Vedanta
from a Vedantic point of view
Christianity falls short of the mark
so this I think is one of the important features of this book
I correct something
that might have very dangerous effect upon many readers
because it would very falsely
it would essentially corroborate
the false ideas of the perennialists
this Henri Lausau after his conversion
if you will to Vedanta
saw everything through Vedantic eyes
so he was therefore in a sense
reproducing the perennialist outlook
so I regarded as an important part of my work
to rigorously disprove
what people like Shuan are talking about
because it's very dangerous
Shuan himself had attained rather high spiritual states
and that's when people become most dangerous
because they have a certain spiritual power
and yet they do not have the sanctity that should go with it
and then they become dangerous
Can you expand more on that last point
where people get close to enlightenment
what is it that they get close to and then they become dangerous?
To the extent that a person makes progress
in any spiritual path
whether it's Christian or Vedantic
with this knowledge comes power
and if you're not very pure in your inner being
it can very easily happen that you misuse that power
and then you have something very dangerous
Carl Jung had a phrase which said
beware of undeserved wisdom
Good phrase
he was referring to psychedelics
he was referring to you can get into certain states
psychedelics you can get what you at least
feel like are spiritual lessons
what do you make of that phrase?
Yes, it's a good phrase
and an important thing to understand
but let me tell you this
Jung is very very dangerous
because he certainly had a degree of knowledge
way above the average
but way below the degree of authentic religion
and in my first book
called Cosmos and Transcendence
I have a whole chapter on Carl Jung
which I entitle the deification of the unconscious
in other words Jung took the unconscious
and essentially put it in the place of God
and so what he really was presenting was a kind of religion
but it was a false religion
and there's nothing more dangerous
nothing more lethal in all the world
than a false religion
because even as true religion takes you up
a false religion takes you down
and in this book
my first book I talk about two false religions
one the religion of Sigmund Freud
which really was a kind of religion
so it has a Satan's religion if you can put it that way
and the religion of Jung
which leads in the same direction
but it is geared to intellectually more advanced people
so when a priest falls and goes down
it was usually through Sigmund through Carl Jung
and when a sensuous man falls and goes down
it was probably through Freud
both were very dangerous characters
and have had an enormous impact upon the western world
I have a friend who is a psychologist
and one of the few psychologists who is quite enlightened
most of them are on all sides of delusions
and he has written book after book
about the Freudian heritage
how Freud really brought us what he himself, Freud, called the plague
so it's a very dangerous thing
Freudianism is basically a religion
although it pretends to be a science
it isn't
well, it's a certain science
and so the evil that has come into our world
first through Sigmund Freud
and then through Carl Jung is enormous
what makes a religion false?
its origin, it comes from below
and of course the falsity is patent
in what the religion actually says
but in order to see that
you must have some bona fide knowledge
of an authentic religion
and this is very rare
in Christianity it pertains mainly to the esoterical level
in other words
if you take everything literally
this is all you need to know
in order to be saved
you can take the words of Christ
just in the most literal sense possible
and if you make this the guiding star of your life
you will attain salvation on the word of God
there are certain things
in fact what we are trying to talk about
I think is one of them
there are certain things
that cannot be comprehended
in Christian terms
on that level of understanding
so in Christianity and incidentally
this is not true for the Vedic tradition
in the Vedic tradition
there is no hard and fast division
between an exoteric knowledge
which is for all
and an esoteric knowledge
which is for an elite
it's the same teaching
but viewed on a different level
now in the Christian sphere
I think there is a fairly sharp dividing line
between a literal understanding
and a spiritual understanding
and of course as I said before
they both will lead you to God
but the difference is
that the literal understanding
does not lead you to a higher understanding
of your religion
for example
if you take Christianity on its literal level
you may very well end up saying
well these Hindus
they are all heretics
they are pagans
they believe in false gods and so on
and I'm afraid many of the missionaries
that came to India for example
they were not all very wise
and I think one of the reasons
why they accomplished so very little
is they looked upon Hinduism
from an exoteric point of view
and if you do so as a Christian
you don't really understand
in India as I said before I think
there is no hard and fast distinction
between esoteric and exoteric
which means that in a sense
it's all esoteric
in Christianity there is this division
and you see it in the teachings of Christ
this Christ clearly distinguishes
what he says so to speak for everyone
and what he says to his disciples
who needed to know more than that
so the reason why the Christian
the missionary activity in India
has been very unsuccessful
is that in order to actually reach
even mediocre Hindu
you need to speak from a different point of view
I remember I was one time
not on my first trip
but I was visiting in India
I think it was during Christmas break
and I was in a monastic community
in the Himalayan foothills of quite up north
and a Protestant minister came
and was addressing these monks
and he was talking on a purely exoteric level
which means that he saw all of Hinduism
as just a paganism and so on
he had not the foggiest idea
of what it was all about
and I must say I was impressed by these monks
they sat there
they didn't get excited or angry or anything
just think how a Christian would feel
when a Hindu came
and essentially made Christianity look like nonsense
we would be very upset
well they weren't
and they were very polite
and after that after he was finished
they said well thank you very much
for talking to us
and goodbye
so there was no connection at all
they said these sadhus were not a bit angry
they simply realized that this man
didn't know what he was talking about
and that's something we all need to know
and not get excited about it
because otherwise we'll have perpetual high blood pressure
but so the fact though
there has been very little contact
between Christianity and the Vedantic tradition
and I firmly believe
that the time will come soon
when such a contact will take place
and it will completely change
the outlook of the western world
so the time has come
when the exoteric level is not sufficient
in the days during the Middle Ages for example
with the exoteric knowledge of Christianity
you could get to heaven very readily
now it is not so clear
because the point is
on an exoteric level
you cannot protect yourself
against the heresy of our contemporary world
interesting interesting
in order to get out of this
the real paganism is not in authentic India
the real paganism is right here
our present day western culture
and to the extent that we are a part of that
we are cut off from Christianity
we cannot follow Christ and Mammon
at the same time
and this culture that we live in
is basically it comes from below
these are important things
because it's not just a matter of theory
it's not just a matter of metaphysical speculation
it's a matter of life and death
that's what it's all about
this is why we founded the foundation
because I hope that these ideas
which we are trying to express and disseminate
I hope that this will continue
and I...
You were talking about the foundation
what is it called?
Philosophia Initiative Foundation
Philosophia Initiative Foundation
I split the word philosophy into its roots
Philosophia Love of Wisdom
Right now that will be listed on the screen
and if you're just listening to this
it's in the description
You were speaking to Jonathan Peugeot
on Karen Wong's channel called the Meaning Code
Jonathan said that Christianity transcends non-dualism
through salvation
and that unity with God in the East
is seen as becoming the same as or becoming one with
whereas at least in Jonathan's words
unity with God to the Christian
is still retaining a multiplicity
so it's not just becoming one with
but even becoming more multiplied
and he says the blades of grass in heaven are more real
somehow we become more real
rather than this becoming more and more illusory
that this becomes more and more real
as we make union with God
and that sounds odd because how can you union
without being the same
and he would say that's part of what makes Christianity
difficult firstly to convey
we don't have words for it
we say union as the same
but there's the union with being multiplied
what do you make of that?
Well I agree
that
certainly Christianity
is a union with God
but
I don't know
exactly what
Jonathan means
incidentally when I had
our conversation together
I was very impressed by him
I was impressed by
by how he looks
and how he speaks
he is
a very deep man
a very fine Christian
and
very happy that we had a meeting
but
I don't know
whether he and I
look upon the
Vedic
religion
quite the same way
I'd have to talk to him
more to
get a
clear idea of how he looks upon it
there are two ways of looking upon it
one is
the usual way
of the Christian
of somehow
putting
the Vedic religion
down a few notches
how much that depends
upon what kind of a Christian you are
now
needless to say I disagree with that
there's no question
of putting one above the other
because
what I believe is
that
all true religion
comes from God
and certainly this is the case
in the Vedic
and this is the case in the Christian
and so
having said that
it follows really
that
there is more than one religion
with the understanding
that religion comes from God
if it didn't
you couldn't legitimately call it religion
it's
the word is I think from really God
really God
we're binding back
and only God can do that
and only God can tell us the way
so
I look upon
both
the Vedic and the Christian as
each true religion
which means that it comes from God
and it leads to God
but that said
and I think many many people
would say the same thing
what is
somewhat unusual about
the point of view at which I arrived
late in my life
is that
whereas I regard
both
the Vedic and the Christian as
true religion that means
a way leading to a union
with God
I do not agree
for example with the perennialists
that what stands at issue
is the same union
in fact
I have gone out of my way
trying to explain
that in point of fact
these two unions
are antipodal
because both are extremes
the Vedic extreme is
the extreme of self-immolation
it is to see it
in pictures which is the only thing
that we can do actually
it's as if we take this body
and cast it
into a blazing fire
what happens is that the body is burnt
it exists
no more after that
as body
and this is what
you actually
what confronts you
in the Vedic religion
when you take it at its highest level
it is a self-immolation
and this is why the sadhus
wear garu
the garu cloths
the Vedanta
is a path of self-immolation
and the Christian path
is something utterly different
and in fact
it is something that did not
really exist
in the Vedic age
I think
I've said many a time that
the Vedic is the oldest religion
in the world
and at the time
that the
Vedas and the Upanishads were written
that was
before
Abraham was even born
so the entire Judeo-Christian
tradition
which of course culminates
in the birth and teaching of Christ
and this
is
is later
than the Vedic tradition
so in the Vedic tradition
you find no Judeo-Christian
ideas at all
I was so
amazed
when
rather recently
I discovered
that basic notions
pertaining
to the Judeo-Christian religion
are completely unknown
in the Vedic world
for example Adam
and the fall of Adam
and the mortal sin
and
what I'm curious about
is remember how you were saying
the way that the more literalist
Christian speaks to the Hindu
it's not getting the message across
and in Christianity there is something
that talks about that
like Paul says to the Jew I became a Jew
to the lawless I become the lawless
what I'm curious about is
it's almost like there's the literal
and then there's a more esoteric interpretation
regardless there's a literal
then there's an esoteric and that we need to go
to the esoteric in order to combat
some of the perils of today
like materialism and so on
so what I'm curious about is
often people stop as if the bedrock is the literal
and then they go upward like I said
there's esoteric and then there's like the most esoteric
like there are degrees upward
but it doesn't seem like people consider that there could be
something that's more literal than the literal
more real than the real
I don't know what that means
the point is that I'm not terribly convinced
that the only way to speak
even to the Hindus or speak to materialists
and this is assuming materialism
is incorrect and so on is to move upward
maybe there's a moving downward somehow
but I don't know what that looks like
so I'm curious to know what your thoughts are
well I think
the division
between
the exoteric and the esoteric
is the only thing we need
to consider and talk about
because it's the only thing that is real
now
in the teaching of Christ
and in fact
right through the patristic age
the
exoteric
and the esoteric
co-existed almost
both
were well and alive
let me give you an example
in
St. Augustine's
Confessions
which was a book
so to speak written for everyone
you will encounter
the exoteric and the esoteric
side by side
some of the most
beautifully esoteric teachings
that I have ever heard
you will find in the Confessions
of St. Augustine
I'll give you one example
it's an example I love so much
I've
cited it often in my writings
St. Augustine begins a chapter
speaking
as it were to God
and he says
let me see if I can
I want to remember it precisely
he says
I see these
others beneath
thee
an existence they have
because they are from
thee
yet no existence
because they are not what
now
I won't go into this
now that would not be the time
but let me say
that this is one of the most
esoteric
statements I have ever read
and you could
give lectures
about it
you could
for example explain how all of Vedanta
is really contained
in these words
they go as deep and as high
as the human mind
can go
and yet it is something
that is
said casually
in
St. Augustine's autobiography
I mean the Confessions
is his autobiography
which
weaves into one
the story of his
intellectual and spiritual life
and also the teachings
of Christ on both
the exoteric
and the esoteric brain so everything
is in there
now
during the patristic
age
the both levels of
understanding
the exoteric and the esoteric
went hand in hand
it was part and parcel
of
the Christian
heritage
and then
during the middle ages
in the west mainly
in the west more than in the east
this equilibrium
was disturbed
and
esotericism
tended to disappear
I mean
there always were
and there always will be individuals
who have
been given from God
this higher vision
but
when I say it disappeared
I mean for instance
that it was no longer recognized
officially
and I'm sorry
to say that undoubtedly
many
esoteric Christians
were actually
burnt at the stake
in the European middle ages
this is a sad fact
which however is true
and you can't deny it
Meister Eckhardt for example
who was
in the opinion of many including my own
perhaps the greatest
esoterist
that western Christianity
ever produced
he was a master of
and he took
scholasticism
to its ultimate end
which is far above the esoteric level
he actually
was condemned by the inquisition
and would have been burnt at the stake
if he had lived two years longer
because two years after his death
a
a bull came out
known as in
agro dominici
that is the name of the bull
where 29
propositions
I think
which he had written down
were
declared heretical
and
in a sense
these
accusers
were justified
because
these 29
propositions
that were
declared heretical
were in fact
purely esoteric
and
they were formulated in a way
which was clearly
dangerous
to
ordinary people
there are things that are not meant
for ordinary people
and can be dangerous
and so I'm not accusing these
what was he called
well never mind
they
these censors
were doing something which is
inherently legitimate
I mean they were protecting the flock
from teachings
which would have been
dangerous to them
and in fact
if you want to find fault with
Master Eckert you could say
he was sometimes
too esoteric
in his manner of speaking
not realizing
that this could be dangerous to
ordinary folk
ordinary Christians
how is it dangerous
well for example
at one point he said
to me
now obviously
he was not just jabbering
if an ordinary person says that
it's nonsense
but when Master Eckert said this
it was
indicative of some high truth
there is a kernel of truth there
and he had
incidentally I've often
observed and even written
in some of my books
that what the manner
of expression that
Master Eckert used
I call koanik
because it is very similar
to what is used in Zen Buddhism
in Zen Buddhism
you have a kind of a custom
a tradition
that the master
teaches the disciple
by
throwing at him
statements
which cannot but be shocking
which obviously
make no sense
exoterically
and therefore force the disciple
to ascend to an esoteric level
for example
the story is told in many of these
Buddhist books
a disciple comes to the master
and says
what shall I do
if I see the Buddha
walking down the street
and the master says kill him
now
it's a perfect example
to
spoken to the disciple who has
the capacity to get the point
of it this is a very
powerful way of instructing him
because
there is a lot of emotion really
that enters into this
but
at the same time you run the
the risk that if the person
doesn't really
understand what you are saying
it may confuse him
it may even hurt his
religious beliefs
his face
so it's a double-edged sword
so
I've recognized the fact that
Master Eckhardt did
definitely express himself
in what I call
a koanic way
which is what got the inquisition
on his back
I am definitely no friend of
burning anybody alive
and I'm sorry
that the Catholic Church did that
but
it happened
you know
there are two churches
there's one that is holy because
it comes directly from God
but there's always a human element
if we were
confronted just by
God's church
because of Christ falling from
the master's
mouth
that would be one thing
but
religion must have also an earthly side
and so
conflicts do enter
and dangers do enter
and
you can look at
the so-called inquisition
from two directions
from an Orthodox Catholic point of view
you can say well it was necessary
because we had to
control the heretics
from another point of view
you can say it was a catastrophe
because
de facto you killed
of esotericism
what finally remained after
so many centuries of this kind of
rule
by the clergy
was
the
end of esotericism
in that killing Buddha
what's the proper way of interpreting it
well
you must kill our human way
of
looking at Buddha
you know in terms of
bones and flesh and blood
and
appetites and even perhaps
some human faults we don't know
that's not the real Buddha
and that's not the Buddha
you want to
set up as an exemplar
you need to
understand his message
and his
true nature
which can only be seen with a spiritual
eye
not with the eyes of flesh
something that Carl Jung said
in a sense it saved me
was that when delving into these topics
the danger of floating so far
above the ground
that you just start to float
and he said that's what happened to Nietzsche
and he said someone was asking Carl
why haven't you gone mad
why are you grounded
and Carl said the grounding of his feet
is one his patience
the people that he sees in his practice
and second his wife
I found that to be the case for me
that my wife is this grounding point
and if I didn't have that
I feel like I could think myself into madness
I could reason myself
into believing I don't exist
or you're all that exists or I'm a plate
and if people hear this then they think
that's a bit foolish to me
I don't think they've thought
deeply enough about
existence or about themselves
anyhow I heard that
you've also expressed a similar sentiment
in one of your books
there's a danger of floating too far up
in the same way that there's a danger
in being just rooted
mainly you start to criticize people
and you become racist and egocentric and so on
but it's not a danger of the same sort
can you express what your views are on that
well I'm glad you asked this question
good because
I think it's very very important
and in fact
it connects intimately with
all that we've been talking about
you see
there was a time
both
in the east and in the west
when
things were rather
normal
and so
the people who were interested
in the deep things
the esoteric
when it comes to the Christian
world as this division
there is no such
official division in the Vedic tradition
it's all
it's all one
but in Christianity there are these two
levels
and
in the early days
when things were normal
everybody was in the right place
and
the people
who were
more or less exoteric
in their DNA
in their natural
way
they would
get their spiritual
food from the ordinary
from the ordinary
sources
they would go to
a religion class
where a priest would
explain the words of Christ
and so on
and if they wanted to
go further beyond that
they would
find a suitable teacher
in the case of Saint Augustine
he
what was the name of this
wonderful saint
who
helped Saint Augustine
to convert
and to
ascend to an esoteric
understanding of Christianity
so everything was really
in order everyone
to understand what
he needed
it was at hand
and as time went on
the situation
changed
and more in the western
in the east
in the eastern part of
the Christian world
you find more
of the old system
of guru and disciple
but in the western world
and in a
sense
esotericism was
misrepresented
and
to a large extent
it was lost
they are always going to be
people
inspired
by God and people
who are very pure in their nature
and can go very deep
into prayer and can ascend
as it were the ladder of God
but
they are very very special people
and
what I'm saying is that
in the west
the
the normal supports
for that kind of an
ascent
cease to exist
and this is a problem
you did not have in the patristic
era
wherever you were
you were never too far from a
real Christian
man of experience
who had
a kind of firsthand knowledge
of the esoteric
plane
and this is what
in the west as I say
was getting scarcer
and scarcer
and finally almost
disappeared
and this is why
the outer church collapsed
and actually the splitting
up into many sects
so you had the Catholic church
which continued
as it were in a single
line from
the actual
days of Christ
in addition to that there were
various sects
which each had a little piece
of the truth
but
something essential was lacking
and
finally things got so bad
that the institutional
Catholic church itself
in a
visible sense collapsed
that's a sad truth
and I've written a book about that
my book on Theia des Shardins
is essentially
tells the story
of a man
who was
somewhere along the line
he was actually possessed
in a clinical sense
and he exerted
an enormous influence
upon the clergy
and
when you look at the Second Vatican
the council where essentially
the cleavage occurred
you find
the Theia des Shardins
was the
guiding spirit of that council
all the young clergymen
were somehow
it was almost like a kind of
madness I mean
I actually
in a sense it was
because it was occult
it was not a human thing
an occult power
manifested
through this Theia des Shardins
and
through Theia des Shardins
it really gained a kind of
power
over
the younger
generations in the church
so it was a revolution
and
we are now in the
in a
transitional
state
where
there is a lot of confusion
and things are
things are
happening
which
eventually
will lead
to a new rebirth
of the Christian religion
this
this splintering
will be no more
all who
regard Christ
as their savior
will belong to one and the same church
and
esotericism will again
be
not only it will again
enter
into play but in a sense
it will become the norm
which means
that this church
which
a great Christian master
has called
referred to as the church of the resurrection
this church
will be
not so much rational as it will be
mystical
because mysticism is something
that can be accessed
by anyone
regardless of his education for example
the simplest peasant
and the most
learned scholar
when it comes
to a mystical
recognition
they are on the same plane
they can speak the same language
so
this is what I learned
from a very holy
Catholic
figure very well known
Malachi Martin
he wrote these
best seller books
which
were widely known
in the Christian world
and I was
lucky I spent two years
in correspondence with him
and I had a lot of questions in my mind
so I would ask him
these questions and he would
answer them
in fact
a few years after he died
I was in
living contact with him for two years
and then he passed away
and a few years
after he passed away
I realized that this correspondence
we had was very important because
it brought up
questions which
were not ever officially
or publicly discussed
and I felt these are very
very important questions so
this little book came out
Malachi Martin
a response to Wolfgang Smith
and it's simply
the correspondence that we had over two years
but
the issues that
we were really
discussing in this correspondence
evidently was
something rather new
and this is why I'm glad this book is published
because
I regard Malachi Martin
as a very important figure
he has yet to be
recognized
and I feel
one day he will be
he was a man
of
very great spirituality
and
a very heroic man
and I hope that someday
he will be recognized
and
appreciate it
Do you think that both the
esoteric and the exoteric will be needed
in the new church or will just purely be esoteric?
No, both
both are needed because
humanity always
is comprised
by many different
types of people
we are
supposedly we're now all the same
it's not true
we're not all the same and thank God for that
because life would be very boring
if we were all the same
so there are many different types
of human beings
with many different
talents
and many different blind spots too
and this is what makes it all
very interesting
it would be utterly
boring if we were all the same
I was speaking to a psychiatrist
named Ian McGilchrist
I was talking to him about
that experience of solipsism
that I had before where just everything
was in my own head and he said
Kurt, you're not the same as the plant
and you're not the same as your wife
and you're not the same as God and so on
but you share an element and he said
the fact that you share implies that you're different
why? because you don't share
with yourself and I found
terribly insightful
the beautiful thing
about
the fact that there are men
and there are women
and they are different and not the same
let the gurus of the present day
say what they want
they
man and woman are
fundamentally different
the difference is so profound
that few people
are intelligent enough
to even get a glimpse
of that difference
what our present
civilization is trying
to do in this regard
is criminal
it is absolutely criminal
telling a young girl
that she can be a boy and so on
not only is it utter nonsense
it's like drinking cyanide
it poisons
it poisons the human beings
because
the difference between man
and woman is in a
sense sacred
because like all real
things it is rooted in God
going back to that other
statement that could potentially
be seen as dangerous which came from
Meister Eckhart saying that God cannot do
anything without me along those lines
what's the proper interpretation of that
you ask a very difficult
question
I don't think I ever gave this
a great deal of thought
because what fascinated
me when I read this
was to say ah-ha this is
Kwanik
this is Kwanik
and this is also why
Eckhart got into
such deep
trouble with the
Inquisition
because the Inquisition
had no comprehension of the
Kwanik nature of discourse
so they took
literally
what was never meant literally
I mean this statement God can do
nothing with me
obviously this was not for
a microsecond meant
to be taken literally
because that would be
flagrant lunacy
and in fact the whole point
of the Kwanik way
of expressing oneself
is to use
lunacy
as a means
of
jarring people out of their
everyday complacent
well done charm
which is actually
what you need to do
in order to grow spiritually
in order to understand
say
the saying of a saint
which is above the normal level
you must somehow
jolt yourself out of that normal level
because if you
don't do it you will never understand
what the saint is talking about
so
instinctively Meister
Eckhart
was Kwanik
in his
teaching not always
mind you
he was in fact technically speaking
he was
a scholastic
but
if you compare him say
to
Saint Thomas Aquinas
he was a very different kind
of scholastic
because Saint Thomas Aquinas
did not
cross the divide
between exoteric and esoteric
I think
their grounds were saying that
and as a matter of fact
the last
teaching
that Saint Thomas Aquinas
bequeased unto his disciples
it is a remark
that he made to Reginald
towards his private secretary
so in the last days
of his life
Saint Thomas Aquinas said
to his secretary
quote
I see now
that all I have written
is
false
even worse than that
is
me a straw
I see now that all I have
written is me a straw
and this
is an accurate
statement
regarding
his position
he decided
for reasons of his own
to
step back from the
esoteric level
if he had not done that
his fate would have been like that
of Meister Eckhardt and we would
probably not even know about him
he became
the doctor of the church and the
paragon of Christian
wisdom
for many many centuries
precisely because
he
took exotericism
to its ultimate level
he was very well
aware of the division
between what comes beyond that
and the exoteric plane
but he chose not to
follow that path
he perhaps knew that in the
providence of God
God
inspired Meister Eckhardt
to take care of the esoteric
which he did in a
non-proof ultra
manner supreme
perfection
and St. Thomas Aquinas
was to take care of the
exoteric
I think it's
a plausible conjecture
but in any case
what
Meister Eckhardt
did and
relatively few people
recognize this
is he
continued
what is called the scholastic
method
the scholastics had their own way
of dealing with
theological and metaphysical
issues
and it is different from what
we see in the world
for example
they use Aristotelian
terminology in a way
which you don't find anywhere else
so it's a specific
path if you will
and Meister Eckhardt
chose
to take that path all the way
to pull out all the stops
so to speak
which of course then got him into trouble
as we know
he just did not do that
I think
when it comes to things of that magnitude
you cannot but
conclude
that this must be in the will of God
God wanted
Meister Eckhardt
to give us as it were
to pull out all the stops
which he did
and he wanted St. Thomas Aquinas
to
remain
below a certain level
in order that
he can become
quote unquote the doctor of the church
Meister Eckhardt
although his teaching is if you will
hire
could not be
a doctor of the church
because he's not for everyone
and as I say
if you read the writings of Meister Eckhardt
there are many
many things that he says
which are definitely
dangerous
to the ordinary Christian
when you were speaking
near the beginning of this answer
you were saying that lunacy is a step along the path
now I just want to make clear
so were you saying that or are you saying like
look do not go insane
go seek help if you're feeling
well I was speaking
in a sort of
an esoteric letter
no I think it was a little
loosely that I was speaking
because there are two kinds
of lunacy in principle
there's the ordinary kind
of lunacy
which arises from a lack
of intelligence
and that's what
our clinical psychologists know
about
but there's another kind of
apparent lunacy
which is simply
wisdom
beyond an ordinary human level
when you wisdom
exceeds a certain plane
your manner of expressing it
can very
readily be seen
as
lunacy
and
in the history of
human religions
I think you can
in just about every religion point
to actual
historic figures
which had that kind of lunacy
so here's where I disagree
with Jung, Carl Jung
or maybe it's more that I don't know
so Carl Jung had the phrase that
beware of undeserved wisdom
and then you express the sentiment that
there's wisdom and if you're not ready for it
it's beyond your level
I don't know if what people attain
when they crack
or they have psychotic episodes and so on
is indeed wisdom
just they weren't ready for it
I was speaking to John Vervecky
who you spoke to
and John Vervecky says that there's something
that's incorrect if it's provoking such fear
or anxiety
there's something that's misframed
so I don't know if it's as simple as if truth is a ball
and you can grab it but you're not ready for it
I think somehow
if you're not ready for it
you grabbed something wrong
or it's not as simple as the grabbing of a ball
like a true ball and then
it hurts you in some way
but I think
there are both
we must recognize that
both of these things are real
on the one hand
you have
people who
for example try to ascend
in an intellectual or spiritual way
and incidentally
if you do this without
a guru without somebody
who is really a master and is guiding you
you're doing something that's very risky
I think this is what
happened to Nietzsche
I think Nietzsche was
by nature
a very very brilliant
and very very deep man
who as it were
by his DNA
was seeking God
but
in the European culture
of his day
there was no one who
could even understand Nietzsche
there were very few figures
in the Europe of that time
in the German speaking world
who had
any real conception
I think one of the few people
who
broke out of that
was Goethe
I think he was one of the few
but Goethe himself
was not clear about everything
but in Goethe
I see a man
who was way way beyond
the level of his day
Nietzsche was
I think by nature
equally deep
but somehow other
he
he got off the deep end
he got off the deep end
if Nietzsche had had
a proper guru
I think we would now
know him as a great man
this is why I worry
about myself
and then also some of the people who are watching
because I feel similar feelings
of going off the deep end
in these subjects
of this exploration of theories
of everything is helping
versus hindering
I want to make sure that what I'm doing is good
if that's just a worry
well
it is an absolutely marvelous
point that you raise
and the point which I think is very
very essential
especially in this day and age
because
in this day and age
I think two things are true
more people perhaps
than for a long time
to say ever before is too
too
grandiose
a word
but for a long time
we have in the western world
observed
a sort of a level of mediocrity
and true
because after
truths
where it comes from the heart
not from the cerebrum
were few and far between
now
because the world is growing
darker and more dangerous
there's no question about that
more and more people
whether they know it or not
they're seeking God
it's as simple as that
our civilization is so confused
and so anti-God
in its present manifestations
that many people who
seek God
do not in any way
realize that that's what they're doing
and so
there are a lot of
people
who
are seeking something which they do not
understand
and they do not also
know how
it is to be
thought
and
I think the
bottom line is
they need help
they need help as ever before
have you heard of the dark night of the soul?
yeah
yeah
and
in a sense
this is
almost an inevitable
episode
in the life of a seeker
in other words
in one way or another
everyone who
moves
from the ordinary, common
way of looking at life
to something that is
belongs to the supernatural
belongs to the spiritual
realm
needs to pass through
that state
but there is a
great difference
between someone who
makes this journey
under the
guidance of a
qualified teacher
and someone who doesn't
who sort of does it on his own
and
this is something that I think can be
said very apodictically
even though there are always
exceptions to just about every
rule but
we may safely take it
for granted that
if we truly
desire
higher knowledge and desire
somehow to draw closer
to God
we need
an appropriate
guide
there are basically
two ways
in the Vedic way
it is a question of finding
a guru
and then becoming a disciple
and
half a century ago
when I was traveling in India
and I am sure this is no longer
true today but in those days
if you were in India
and you wanted to find a guru
and you searched
and surely find someone
who was
qualified to act as your guru
because as I say
you could
go to the Himalayan regions
and you could find
areas like Rishikesh for example
where you would see these
real sadhus who spent
the greater part of the day
in
Samadhi states
that all exists then
I don't think it exists anymore
today so
the normal thing is
when a human being seeks God
and whether this is
in the Vedic or the Christian concept
in one way or another
you always are going to
need a guru
in India that
meant in those days
coming in contact
with a man
who has actually
attained access to
higher states
in the West
it means
associating yourself
with a legitimate church
which is able to transmit
the teaching of Christ
and the grace
that comes from that
and
that's a complicated subject
because
not all churches are equal
and they're also bad churches
so it's all complicated
here's something I have been thinking about
is it the case that you marry a church
or you marry a religion
but let's say a church in this case because we're in the West
in the same way that you marry a woman
namely that there is no perfect one
and if you're going to wait around and try and find a perfect
match
you're not going to find one so what you do is you commit yourself
knowing that there are flaws
I
I cannot look at things that way
because
it is certain that
in churches
there is a human element
but it is equally certain
that there is a pure
supernatural also
I'm a Catholic so I will
speak in
Catholic terms
what is
the supernatural
in the true
Catholic church
the supernatural
resides in the priesthood
and what is the priesthood
first of all to make a priest
it's like
the initiation I talked about
in India
you don't become a yogi
unless you
receive that
someone who is
and who himself received it
from his own guru
the same thing
in principle you find
in the Catholic church
to become
a priest
actually
I should talk about bishop because
priest is
something lower than that
to become a bishop
someone who is already a bishop
has to put his hands upon you
and say
something
sacred
and how did he
become a bishop
the same way so there is a
continuous chain
going right back to our lord
Jesus Christ
and his apostles
the apostles were the first
bishops if you will
and they became that
through the
the hands of Christ
and so the real treasure
in the Catholic church
and in the Orthodox church
the same applies in both cases
is that
the functionaries of religion
were all
part of the same
transmission
which
originates in Christ
and then through the
apostles
down the line
right to bishop Mahoney today
I shouldn't use Mahoney's name
because he was a terrible bishop
but
a real bishop
is part of that lineage
and you know it's like electricity
we have light here
and how is that possible
there is an actual wire
that connects this bulb
to something like
Niagara Falls which is
where this electric
power originates
so in similarly
in a bona fide
religion the functionaries
and there is no religion
without functionaries
somehow there must be a priesthood
the ordinary person
cannot serve as a
functionary for example I'm
now the priest
I cannot
forgive sins
I cannot do any of these
priestly acts
which are an integral
part of the church
and so
there must be this wire
going right back
to the origin which is in Christ
now in a chain
a chain is only as good as its weakest link
and then a wire wouldn't transmit
a cut in it so in the same way
given that churches have an element of corruption
because we're human so there's always a small
element sometimes it can be large
sometimes it can be smaller
it's a wonderful question
a very necessary question
because
take the case of a bishop
there are two things here
there is a bishop
properly so called
and as I told you that cannot exist
without the chain of transmission
in any way you can create a bishop
so there is a bishop
but in addition
there is a human being
with all the frailty
of a human being
and it is certainly possible
for a bishop
to be an absolute
role
it's possible and this happened many many times
you can be sure of that
but the point is that
even though
both things
exist in one and the same
man they are utterly different
as a bishop
as wicked as he may be
he still can
confect the sacraments
he can make another bishop
he can say
mass he can forgive sins
he can do everything that is
in the power of the bishop
you know in fish
we talk about bio accumulation
like plastic or mercury
they bio accumulate the more that you eat it
and the more that those eat that
why can't we have something similar
where the sins of a bishop
rather than the sanctity being passed down
in the same way we have original sin
we can have a bio accumulation of sin
to a bishop our current day bishops
or that somewhere down the line a line was cut
because the sin was of sufficient critical points
God
was a critical question
is not
what is conceivable
but what is actual
and
for
thousands of years now
the western church and in the eastern churches
they agree perfectly
in these fundamental matters
so
both the roman
church and the eastern churches
agree
100%
that
there is
a spiritual line
so that means there is
an ontological difference
between a bishop and
an ordinary person
this is an ontological difference
it's like the difference between having electricity
and being able to
turn on the light and not having it
and this is not a matter of
belief or faith
it's a matter of fact
and at the same time it is also
and equally true
that every bishop is also
a human being
and
it can very well happen
and has happened innumerable times
that this human being
is very unworthy
now let me say this
war unto him
who is
because the higher you rise
the deeper you
may fall
and if a bishop
commits sins
his punishment will be much worse
than if
you and I do that
but we have to
understand the categorical
ontological difference
between
say a priest
or a bishop
or a bride
and an ordinary person
on the other
the ordinary person may be as pious
as any man can be
he may be erudite
a model of perfection
but if he's not a bishop
he can't
make a priest
and if he's not a priest
he cannot confess to sacraments
it's as simple as that
and every bit is
as simple as this analogy
about electricity
so this is a fact
unfortunately this fact
has been forgotten
and there's been a lot of confusion
because all sorts of people
have founded
churches and given religious
instruction
who were simply not qualified
and this is why the world
is full of all sorts of groups
that have partly
the truth of Christ
and partly they don't
have misconceptions
so this is a reality
you cannot deny
Speaking about lines that go back
do you have any issues with evolution
versus intelligent design
do you have any thoughts there?
Oh absolutely
evolution is a heresy
it's a fundamentally
false doctrine
there's no actual
scientific evidence
whatsoever
about evolution
and as I keep
writing in my various articles
since
1998
evolution has been
mathematically
disproved
it is impossible
and that can be proved
rigorously and it has been proved
but even so
I think it's ultimately due to
satanic forces
evolution is so to speak
the pseudo-religious
cradle of our civilization
So this may be one of those
coins that can be misinterpreted
so what specifically about
evolution do you not agree
with is it that we share
common ancestor with a different species
or that we all came from a single celled
organism?
Well fundamentally
what I object to in
evolution
and why I think that it is basically
satanic teaching
satanic is always inverting
putting God down
and Satan up
it's a complete inversion
and evolution is a complete
inversion
because
instead of recognizing
being comes from above
from what I call the
eternal plane
and thus from God because
who puts that eternal plane
in there that is the creative act
Platonism is very clear about this
and of course the Vedic teaching
is also very clear about this
but
in reality
the entire universe
I'm just gesturing
the entire universe
is descending from that
eternal from that center
point of the cosmic icon
and the
doctrine of evolution
puts it completely
it puts the world upside down
particles, quantum
particles as I
we talked about that earlier this afternoon
and I pointed out to you
that quantum particles
as quantum particles
don't exist
whatever existence
whatever reality
they have
they obtain in one of two ways
it's always through
contact with the corporeal entity
and there are two ways
in which this actually happens
in the corporeal entity
that defines the quantum system
quantum systems don't just
grow on trees
I mean
every physicist if he wants to study a quantum system
he has to
set up equipment which in effect
produces that quantum system
so the quantum systems don't grow on trees
they are in a certain
sense man-made
which means
that the
the impetus comes
from the opposite
direction that our physicists
think it comes from
it comes from
the center of the cosmic icon
it comes from the avitronil
realm because it was
known since the days of Plato
and Pythagoras that
that's where all being
comes from
these are absolute statements
is being a synonymous with consciousness
or is being much greater or does consciousness
separate like as one is two percent
of the other?
I've just finished an article
on consciousness
and in fact I added
a very essential section
this morning so this is all
very recent but
the central point about
consciousness is
that
it
definitely derives
not just from the avitronil realm
but
from God himself
and this is where I quote
a Vedic
statement
namely
that the fundamental
principle is what
is called in
a new panichad
Sat-chid-ananda
so sat is being
chid is consciousness
and ananda
is bliss
as three
nomen day
names of God
which are Vedic and
and
and it is
from this
divine trinity
sat-chid-ananda
that the creation
comes and this is why
the creation is
tripartite
because these three parts
the
avitronil
the psychic and the corporeal
are manifestations
respectively
of sat-chid-ananda
and
in my paper
I have to explain that
because at first hearing you don't
you don't grasp how
ananda
which means bliss
is in any way associated
with the corporeal world
in fact
you might very well
conceive the opposite
that this is a veil of tears
and it's a place where there is
least ananda of all
well I
go into all these issues very carefully
and I hope I'm making
a very plausible argument
so the point is
that consciousness
we have it all wrong
and not just
the
the gross materialist
but also the people who think
they are spiritualists or what have you
the point is
one way or another
we all try to
explain or understand
consciousness from below
the outright
materialist says ah-ha
it all comes from quantum particles
if you have enough of them
aggregating in
suitable ways
there is consciousness
but pardon me for saying
though this is nonsense
this is utter sheer nonsense
there's not a speck of truth
in that and in fact
it's a complete inversion
because there's only one
place where consciousness
can actually originate
and that's in God himself
and we have
a Vedic source which tells us
so one of the
most profound
nomen day
in the Vedic tradition is
satchitananda
satchitananda is a name of God
and it's a name
which tells us something about
the nature of God
and interestingly enough
it's triadic
God is in a sense
the same time
you find the same thing in Christianity
but in a very very different way
Christianity speaks
of the
the Trinity yes
it also sees God as
a
triad, a triplicity
but let's leave that out of the picture
because it's completely different from the Vedic
not at all
of the country in a sense
as I've already said in a way
polar opposites
so in order to understand
cosmology
in a
Platonist cosmology
you have to start
with the Vedic
nomen day
the key is
unquestionably
the
revealed name satchitananda
this is not a human
invention that comes from God
and it is the oldest
name of God
because the Vedic tradition
is the oldest tradition in the world
by long shot
even as Christianity
is so to speak the last
I think there are in essence
only these two traditions
and then there are many in-betweens
but I think
so far as bona fide
manifestations
manifestations from God himself
you have the Vedic
and you have the Christic
I don't think there's anything else
on that level
and they are polar opposites
and
however
to understand cosmology
you have to go back to the Vedic
the Vedic and the
the Platonist
are one and the same
there's a little technical difference
as I said
the
Platonic
involves the idea of
geometry in a way which
you know where find in the Vedas
but apart from this
the Vedic and the
Platonist are interchangeable
and so
if you want to understand cosmology
ontologically
there's no other way
you can get it from the Vedas
you can get it from Plato
in either case
you get the tripartite cosmos
and this is
the way you are going to understand
cosmology
and once you have seen that
you
recognize at the glance
that the modern
scientific way
I say scientific because it's not really
scientific at all
but all of our scientists
think that way so it's scientific
it's the
scientific way is the
polar opposite of the
Vedic or Platonist
where the Vedic and Platonist
sees
being
or irreducible
wholeness which is the same thing
as originating
on the eternal plane
and actually
beyond that it originates
in the tripartite
divinity
the
scientific things
that comes from quantum particles
if you have enough of these non-existent
things you will have consciousness
this is nonsense
complete nonsense
and
I want to use
what little energy I have left
to get this
message across this is nonsense
there's no evidence for it
and theoretically
it doesn't make sense
excuse me
in fact
I was
in telephone
connection with
Bill Demsky
just before Christmas
just so you know the Demsky arguments
rely on something called the
no-free lunch theorems or at least one of them
and Wolpart, David Wolpart
is the creator of the no-free lunch theorems
and he had this major criticism of Demsky's work
saying that this misuses my theorems
and it's not rigorous he has a whole
blog post about it so I could
set up if Demsky wants like I've done
two podcasts with Wolpart
and organize a conversation between them
well
I have looked
at Demsky's theorem very carefully
in fact
his is the only
bit of mathematics that I ever
put into any of my books
in one of my books
there's a chapter on
Demsky's stuff and
actually goes through the main
step of his theory it's
very simple really
the mathematics is very simple
and I think there's
absolutely not a shred of
doubt that it is
a completely rigorous
mathematical
theorem and if
people disagree
it's just because
evolution
is against their religion
I mean excuse me
evolution is part of their religion
is what I wanted to say
and so it's a kind of
religious grounds that they
attack Demsky
and I'm not surprised at all
I've seen enough
to realize
that our
religious
convictions whether it's true
religion or false religion
they're equally strong
they're equally definitive
so my own
conviction is
that Bill Demsky's theorem
is a bona fide
mathematical theorem
as good as any other
mathematical theorem
and
it does prove
that
deterministic
random and stochastic
processes cannot produce
complex specified information
that is you can bank on that
that's
like the Pythagorean theorem
it simply is
and if people don't like it
it's their problem
and it does
rigorously
disprove evolution
it's pattern-dried
and it's easy to see because
you couldn't have seen it before
the discovery of DNA
but with the discovery of
DNA we realize
that the simplest
living organism
contains in every one of
its cells
what might be popularly
characterized as tons
of
complex specified information
and that's clear
and therefore
these tons of complex specified
information could not
have been put there by
either deterministic
or random
or a combination of the two
that is stochastic process
this is crystal clear
and if even
you know well known
scientists
object
no psychological grounds
not on mathematical
and one can very well understand
that they would object
because
if you realize
that evolution is impossible
then at one stroke
our entire
scientific well done
is kaput
instantly
and it would
surprise me enormously
if
under these conditions
you will not find very erudite
very famous celebrated
men who will oppose
that tooth and nail
and incidentally
I know Odebski fairly well
enough to realize
that he has personally
suffered terribly
because
he's a
mathematician
who happened to prove this incredible
theorem
and then people like Steven Meyer
and so on realized the importance
of it and founded something
called the what is it
intelligent
design institute
and they have lots of money
and they're very prestigious
and
so
Demski became
a celebrity on account of that
and
since
the intelligent design movement
their main
tenet is
that evolution is wrong
that
intelligent design
is producing all these
biological
phenomena
now obviously
since they have so to speak become
very visible
the opposition has also been
very visible and very audible
and so
there has been a tremendous
attack
upon the
intelligent
design people and especially
Bill Demski
and there has been personal attacks
and you know Demski is a very
good man
he's a little childlike
and so on which is perhaps
why God gave him that insight
you know
there's a goodness there and a
devotion to God
which is natural not sectarian
or anything like that
so at a certain point
Bill Demski couldn't
take it anymore
because his personal life
was attacked
so he sort of withdrew
and
then I
I happened to get in touch
with him before Christmas
I think I took the initiative
if I called him and we had
a nice conversation
and I was happy to hear
that he is back in action
as it were
because in fact he was just
on his way to a conference
in Europe someplace
so he's back active
representing
a
intelligent
design institute
and
in fact
I told him a little bit
about my work
and so forth and he was interested
and
he wants to visit me one of these days
I hope so because
he's a very very good man
I'm not taking a side here
but in defense of David Walpert
I don't believe he is a proponent
of evolution
I think he's actually a critic of it
he thinks it's incomplete
so his grounds for disliking the
application of the no free lunch
theorems I don't think come from that
David Walpert also has the monotheism
theorem I don't know if you know about that
but it says that if there's a god
there could be only one god
and he mathematically shows this
I have a podcast on that
but anyway I'm not terribly convinced
all our criticisms for anything
come from emotional appeals
because we're deeply emotional people
anyhow let's put that aside
and I'll just wrap with a couple questions
which actually come from a friend of mine
who's watched so much of your work
and is a huge fan his name is Matthew Wyden
he asks
Wyden is wrong
a being
has nothing to do with
process
process ontology is
whiter than a student
so
my own
outlook towards
whiter this in a sense mixed
I owe him a great deal
because he opened my eyes
to bifurcation
and the absolute
absurdity
of our
artistic well done song
so we're totally
in agreement on that
but I'm a Platonist
right down to the bone
and Whitehead certainly is not
even though he's very sympathetic
to Plato and in fact
in this book which I read
when I was 14
he says that
all subsequent
philosophy of footnotes
to Plato
was very respectful of Platonism
but he was not
actually in his philosophy
a Platonist
there's no way of
squaring his process theology
with Platonism
and so I can very well understand
that somebody
who is a process
theologist and sort of following
Whitehead in that
part of his teaching
might have reservations
about the Dempsey
theorem
Well, I think St. Maximus
was basically right
there is
in Christianity
a tradition
let's see what is it called
it corresponds
to
Advaitha Vedanta
it corresponds
to
Advaitha Vedanta
it corresponds
to
Advaitha Vedanta
in the sense that
it is very
it emphasizes the transcendence
of God to an extreme
but there is also in Christianity
a tradition
which is based upon the
immanence of God
so God is both
absolutely transcendent
and absolutely imminent
whether we can grasp that
I have some mathematical questions
and one of them is
in differential geometry
there is some results by Radon and Moise
or the Radon-Moise Theoros
it says the amount of differentiable structures
that can be placed on
dimension 1, 2 and 3
is actually just 1 up to diffeomorphism
and then from 5, 6
and onward it's finite
it's large but it's still finite
but dimension 4
it's uncountably infinite
and infinite is uncountably infinite
I haven't heard many people talk about this
and I wonder if that's related
to space time being 4 dimensional
very interesting
you must realize
that I got
interested in
differential geometry
after I took my PhD
my doctoral dissertation
was simply a matter
of
an existence theorem
for solutions of differential equations
and a conversion
theorem for
some
process of
approximation
so it was very very classical
and then what happened was this
I
knew that my profession
was going to be a professor of mathematics
so I knew that I would have
to earn my living so to speak
by proving mathematical serums
now I didn't want
to go into any field
that other people had already
worked in
because I didn't want to
be obligated
to read
hundreds of papers in the literature
in other words to me mathematics was just
a job my main interest was
elsewhere so I
developed
a subject
in mathematics which when I
started was completely
unexplored
the theory of submersions
and I'll tell you what that is
if you have an
n dimensional
space and an
n plus p
dimensional larger space
and you have
a differentiable map
from the big space to the
little space which
is everywhere
of maximal rank
this is called a submersion
and what it does is
it slices the big manifold
we're talking differentiable manifold
we're slicing the big
manifold into p-dimensional
submaniforts
and
so this
defines a subject
and I think I was the first
mathematician to systematically
study submersions
and when I started
I was practically
the man who was
building it up from nothing
and I wrote
about 23 papers
on submersions
in each paper it made a contribution
so by the time
I was finished after
I don't know
it's 30 years
of being a professor of mathematics
by the time I was finished
the theory of submersions
was on the
record it became
a recognized
discipline in mathematics
and you know the funny thing is
I belong now
to something called academia
and whenever
my name is mentioned anywhere
and the journal literature
they
give me the actual quotation
and so by
as of this morning
during
the last year so
my name was mentioned
210 times
so that's one thing
but the interesting thing is
that
about
10%
of these mentions
go back
to my mathematical days
in other words
along with my recent books
and all of that
mention is made
so less frequently
of my articles
on
submersions so by now
submersions is a
mathematical discipline
which is of interest in universities
all over the world
so there are people
so my old papers
that go back 60 years ago
are being cited in the
mathematical literature because
submersions
as I say is one of the
accepted domains
of research now
John Bias who's a physicist
a mathematician he has a paper
on categories and smooth maps
and he references you
and then I saw that paper and it was
the Roms Theorem on General Spaces
yeah right
it's one of my 23 papers
anyhow
the point is
I looked at mathematics
as earning my living
in other words
my actual interest
was in Platonism
and Whitehead and so on and so forth
in philosophical
things but
we all have to earn our living and
it earned me a good
living
it didn't take much time
I had most of
my time was free
sir it's been a pleasure
it's been more than a pleasure thank you so much
for not only speaking with me for this long
but inviting me to your home
and inviting me out to dinner as well
which we'll get to shortly
thank you
well I can tell you frankly that
when I first heard about
you and due to our
friend Brian
and I began
to look you up on the internet
and see what you're all about
I became tremendously eager
to meet you
because I felt
that
we might really have
a lot to say to each other
and so far I feel
that I was on track
I mean
your background and mine
so different in many ways
still
have
common
interests
and in fact
I would say
that fundamentally
you and I
are very much interested in the same questions
we
come perhaps from
somewhat different directions
you know much more about what's really going on
in the technical world
I'm so happy that you came
and I'm looking forward to having another
couple of days
at least
to exchange ideas
and I'm very happy
that you have some Indian blogs
because
as you know
that ties to God for the Vedic tradition
well
something we can speak about later is that
generally in our culture
we don't have high regard for
virtually anything
yeah
isn't it true
okay
that was a far-reaching fantastic
conversation
thank you for watching for four hours now
this is a reminder that on Toe
on Theories of Everything
you'd like one is called Kurt plays everything
which is a video of me playing a video game
that envelops the themes of Toe
namely the consciousness philosophical
metaphysical themes also there's a part one
of a debate that I was
lucky enough to host with Bernardo Kastrup
Donald Hoffman and Susan Schneider
both are linked in the description
and there's so many more plans for the future
for instance we're going to be delving deep into
artificial intelligence we're going to be bringing
lectures actual lectures to the four
that's coming up shortly with the mind of machines
conference with Susan Schneider
also I just wanted to thank you for
watching for listening your viewership
your financial support helps Toe
it wouldn't be Toe wouldn't exist without
your viewership slash your sponsorship
slash your support you may not know it
but it's a tremendous tremendous
amount of work behind the scenes actually there's
an entire video on that called the day in the life
and I'll link that somewhere here as well
as well as in the description every dollar donated
over the patreon help support this channel
that's patreon.com
slash curt jimungle c-u-r-t-j-a-i-m-u-n-g-a-l
and again links every link that said it's
in the description thank you so much
every dollar every comment
every like every subscribe every
Twitter share helps tremendously
thank you thank you so much and take care
I also wanted to give a shout out to
Brian who helped set up this interview
and of course one last thank you to
my friend Wolfgang Smith
the podcast is now concluded
thank you for watching if you haven't subscribed
or clicked on that like button now would
be a great time to do so as each
subscribe and like helps
YouTube push this content to more people
also I recently found out that external
links count plenty toward the
algorithm which means that when you
share on Twitter on Facebook
on Reddit etc it shows
YouTube that people are talking about this
outside of YouTube which in turn
greatly aids the distribution on YouTube
as well if you'd like to support more conversations
like this then do consider visiting
theoriesofeverything.org
again it's support from the sponsors
and you that allow me to work on TOE
full time you get early
access to ad free audio episodes there
as well every dollar helps far more
than you may think either way your
viewership is generosity enough thank
you
you
