To really understand the power of economic prosperity and the ideas and institutions that can propel mankind into prosperity, I'd like to start with a simple black and white photo.
Well, it's not so simple. It's a satellite photo. It turns out that a picture taken from outer space can show just how much prosperity matters.
Specifically, it's an image of the Korean Peninsula at night. What it shows is dramatic. South Korea is just bathed in light.
There are bright areas across the ROK, or Republic of Korea, areas where headlights and street lamps and electric lights are burning away.
This is visual evidence of a prosperous society enjoying the benefits of modern technology and modern infrastructure.
North Korea, by contrast, is enveloped in darkness from the demilitarized zone in the south all the way up to the Yalu River in the north.
All across the Democratic People's Republic of North Korea, there is exactly one point of light representing the capital city of Pyongyang.
Now, in context, this contrast should not be too surprising. South Korea produces approximately 20 times as much electricity as North Korea and consumes approximately 24 times as much as North Korea.
And this is only the most obvious difference between the quality of life in the two nations. Consider these statistics, for example.
North Korea's per capita income, in other words, its average income per person, is $1800. South Korea's per capita income is $31,700, or more than 17 times that of the north.
South Korea has more than 50 million cell phones, which is approximately 115 times as many cell phones as exist in North Korea.
Infant mortality in North Korea is 6 times as high as it is in South Korea.
And for another visible sign of the prosperity gap between the two countries, consider that the average South Korean male is approximately 3 inches taller than the average North Korean male,
and with a lifespan that is on average a decade longer. That's entirely due to better nutrition and health care in the south.
So by any possible metric you can use, South Korea is vastly more prosperous than North Korea.
Now, the reason this is also extraordinary is that there is actually not a whole lot that differentiates North Koreans from South Koreans.
After all, they share a common language, an identical ethnicity, a common geography, near-identical climates, a shared cultural heritage, and, up to 1945, the exact same history.
So what makes the two countries look like polar opposites now?
The primary difference is what happened after 1945. North Korea became a communist state under a dictatorial leader, Kim Il-sung.
Now he enacted a series of policies similar to what other communist leaders have done in the past.
He established a monopoly of political power through the Communist Party, or in his case the Korean Workers' Party.
He abolished all private markets and made all business enterprises state-owned.
He nationalized all land and collectivized agriculture.
And furthermore, he announced five-year plans for how to promote economic growth.
Now Kim then pursued a few additional policies that even other communist dictators hadn't thought about doing.
For example, Kim developed and emphasized a philosophy of Juche, which emphasized self-reliance.
Essentially, North Korea tried to develop an economy that didn't need to rely all that much on the outside world.
Kim Il-sung also set up his own personal dynasty.
He passed control of North Korea to his son Kim Jong-il, who took over in 1994 after Kim Il-sung's death.
And when Kim Jong-il passed away in 2011, he in turn passed control of the country to his son Kim Jong-un.
Now South Korea's post-1945 history is very different, although at first glance it doesn't look that way.
See, South Korea also had an authoritarian government for about four decades after independence.
And for the first decades of its existence, South Korea was led by a weak and corrupt dictator.
In 1961, there was a military coup led by Park Chung-hee.
Park soon announced his own five-year plan for economic development.
Now so far, South Korea's story doesn't sound all that different from North Korea's.
What Park did then, however, was somewhat different from what Kim Il-sung did in the North.
You see, Park's five-year plan focused on ensuring private sector businesses could gain access to credit.
South Korea also devalued its currency to promote exports as a way of boosting growth.
Hodes on imports were eased, making it easier for producers to obtain the necessary raw materials for industry.
And foreign direct investment was strongly encouraged, even from former adversaries like Japan.
South Korea is now a liberal democracy and a member of the G20,
that group of 20 major economies that collectively accounts for 80% of global economic output.
Now I could tell similar, though somewhat less stark stories,
showing the gaps in prosperity for, let's say, the city of Nogales, which straddles Mexico in the United States,
or East and West Germany during the days of the Cold War,
or Haiti and the Dominican Republic, which share the island of Hispaniola.
All of these cases are what we might call natural experiments,
instances in which history allowed only one or two factors to vary in otherwise similar areas,
kind of like studies of identical twins in medical research.
In these cases, there were minimal differences in religion, culture, history, or geography between the two areas.
The key variation was in how economic and political institutions were organized.
In other words, if you want to explain the wide gaps in prosperity between, say,
North and South Korea or East and West Germany during the Cold War,
you need to look at their respective economic and political institutions.
For our purposes, that observation is going to be something of a fulcrum.
In this course, we're going to address a very important question.
What are the right foundations and what are the wrong foundations for fostering economic prosperity?
Now, we have 24 lectures to ponder that question.
But if the story of the two Koreas suggests anything,
it is that economic and political institutions are going to be crucial to the answer.
Before we get to the answer, we can't take for granted that everyone agrees on what we're talking about
when we talk about prosperity.
Before we delve into the role of institutions, let's define our terms.
What exactly is prosperity?
If you're listening to me right now,
it probably means that you've taken care of, let's say, the bare necessities of life,
things like food, clothing, shelter, or transportation.
You probably also have resources that will help you address the long-term necessities in life,
things like insurance, or savings in case of emergency,
or savings for retirement, individual retirement accounts, and so forth.
In other words, you possess prosperity.
You can afford to purchase goods and services other than necessities, goods like this course.
We'll be discussing prosperity at three different levels,
the individual, the national, and the global levels.
What I just described is individual prosperity,
whether you can afford things other than the necessities of life.
The mark of national prosperity is when the broad mass of society,
in other words, a strong majority or supermajority,
can afford to consume goods and services other than the commodities necessary for survival.
Global prosperity exists when a strong majority of the human race
possesses the necessary affluence to satisfy more than their basic needs.
Now, if you consider prosperity at any of these three levels from a historical perspective,
perhaps the most important fact to realize is this.
Economic prosperity has been exceedingly rare.
In fact, if I had to sum up the economic history of the world
with one graph or one image, I'd use a hockey stick.
Let the long, flat part of the stick represent the state of human prosperity
from the beginning of modern civilization to some time around the year 1800.
During that period, there was almost no improvement whatsoever
in per capita income or mass prosperity.
After 1800 comes the short part of the hockey stick.
That's when economic growth really took off,
and with it, something approximating mass prosperity.
In fact, even today, there has never been a moment in world history
when anything like global prosperity existed.
In today's world, it is generally believed that a country with a per capita income
of $10,000 per person or more is, roughly speaking, middle income status.
In other words, that's the stage in which a middle class really does develop in a country.
According to the CIA World Factbook,
close to half of all countries are at that level of per capita income,
which is great, but that means that half are not.
Now, granted, this is a dramatic improvement over conditions that existed even 20 years ago,
but it does illustrate that even today, prosperity is beyond the reach of many, many nations.
And in fact, for most of world history, prosperity was also beyond the reach
of all but a few individuals.
Only beginning in 1800, does anything like mass individual prosperity
begin to emerge within a few countries in northwest Europe.
And again, even today, more than 2 billion people in the world
live on less than $2 a day.
Now, the rarity of affluence is a tough concept to grasp
in a world where it seems like everyone around you has a smartphone.
There are actually a lot of statistics that one can use to support the argument
that prosperity is rare and recent, but the easiest one to use is life expectancy.
More prosperous societies and more prosperous individuals
tend to live longer because of better health infrastructures
and greater access to food and medicine.
So what does life expectancy tell us about prosperity?
Well, during the classical era of Greece and Rome,
the average life expectancy in the world was only 35 years.
Diseases like tuberculosis, smallpox and scarlet fever
or just simple basic malnutrition killed a sizable fraction of the population.
By the age of Shakespeare, around 1600,
average life expectancy had only increased to 40 years.
Cholera and other plagues were still in existence.
Juliet was not yet 14 years old when she met Romeo in Shakespeare's tragedy,
but since she had already lived a third of her expected life by that point,
it was not unreasonable for the two lovers to plan a life together.
Though the story took place in 1300 in Verona,
the same facts of life would have been true for Shakespeare's audience as well.
Only in 1900 did average life expectancy in the developed world break 70 years of age.
That's an astonishing increase from even 100 years prior, much less Shakespeare's time.
But it also reflects the recent vintage of economic prosperity.
Now, if life expectancy does not convince you that prosperity is a recent phenomenon,
perhaps some pictures of women will.
You see, the ways in which great artists depicted beauty and prosperity throughout the ages
can actually be quite revealing.
Paintings during the Rococo and Baroque eras
were really the first to display prosperous women in society,
in no small part because it was wealthy families
that could afford to commission such paintings from great artists.
And how were they portrayed?
Voluptuous, because their household was prosperous enough
to be able to eat a prodigious amount of food.
These women were also portrayed as relatively pale
because they were wealthy enough to avoid having to work outside in the fields.
Basically, the beauty standards then were designed to signal
that the truly prosperous enjoyed something very rare, material abundance.
In contrast, the default assumption in the current era
is that most people have ample amounts of food and shelter.
Indeed, the very affluent in today's society
use very different aesthetic signals to try to communicate their prosperity to others.
See, what matters now is how thin and how tone someone is
because that demonstrates that one can afford the time to work out extensively.
And indeed, rather than being pale, being tan or bronzed
is apparently the sign of a high level of affluence
because that signal is being prosperous enough to take vacations
or to enjoy leisure, or simply put, to not spend too much time indoors.
Basically, beauty standards today are designed to signal
that prosperity equals the ability to afford leisure
rather than just simple abundance.
Nevertheless, a large number of people can attain these modern aesthetic standards.
This was not the case during the Baroque era.
It was simply too rare for anyone to be able to eat enough
to qualify for a sitting with Peter Paul Rubens.
Similarly, when writers discussed material prosperity,
it usually carried a warning that it was fleeting and a sign of decadence.
For example, Tacitus, the great Roman general,
warned that even great generals grow insolent in prosperity.
Victor Hugo noted that adversity makes men and prosperity makes monsters.
And Mark Twain wrote a friend in a letter that
prosperity is the surest breeder of insolence I know.
Now, these aphorisms might be true,
but they're also particularly convenient to hold during times when prosperity is rare.
So going forward, you should understand, again,
that prosperity is a very rare and very recent phenomenon
compared to most of human history.
Now, when talking about who is prosperous and who is not,
there are a lot of myths about who is prosperous or why they got that way.
We will be addressing a lot of these throughout our lectures,
but it is worth taking on some of the most important myths right now
and basically weighing how much credibility we should offer them.
Let's consider China.
Public opinion polls in advanced industrialized countries
show a strong belief that China is the most powerful economy in the world.
And indeed, according to the International Monetary Fund,
China's GDP is expected to overtake the United States's GDP
by the year 2020 and therefore become the largest economy in the world.
Political campaigns across the developed world talk about China
like it is a true economic menace.
Now, China is politically powerful,
but we need to be careful not to confuse a powerful economy with a prosperous nation.
Between 1980 and 2011, China averaged near double-digit economic growth.
Despite growing at such an astonishing rate, however,
it would be a gross exaggeration to call it a prosperous nation.
To see this, all we need to do is look at various rankings.
China's per capita income ranks 120th among sovereign jurisdictions.
Just below Jamaica, with a per capita income of about $8,400 in 2011.
Now, the United States, by contrast, is the 11th richest nation
with a per capita income of $48,000.
The United Nations uses a different measure of prosperity
called the Human Development Index
that includes factors other than income like health and education.
We'll talk about this in the next lecture.
And according to the 2010 United Nations Human Development Indicators,
China is the 89th most prosperous country,
just below the Dominican Republic and Turkmenistan.
The United States, by contrast, ranks fourth.
Finally, the Legatum Institute,
a London-based public policy organization,
has tried to develop a measure of prosperity
that also goes beyond income and goes beyond health and education
to include other factors such as governance, the environment, and social trust.
Now, I sit on the Board of Advisors for Legatum,
so I know a little bit about its internal workings.
And according to the 2012 rankings,
China is only the 55th most prosperous country,
just behind the country of Belarus.
The United States, on the other hand, is 12th.
So despite the many misconceptions about China,
a quick look at the data shows that the Middle Kingdom is still a developing country.
It's a rapidly growing one, to be sure,
but it is not nearly as prosperous as the United States
or other advanced industrialized democracies.
Now, if you only read headlines,
I can see why you would think China is prosperous.
The point of this course, however, is to go beyond the headlines
and get at some deeper truths and dispel some common myths about what causes prosperity.
Just as there are misperceptions about China's relative prosperity,
there are many myths about how and why individuals and countries achieve affluence.
Now, a lot of these myths might contain a kernel of truth or two.
Very often, however, they rely on stereotypes, caricatures,
or badly outdated social science.
These myths need to be cleared away, kind of like sagebrush.
So we're going to go through a few of them
before we talk about the actual foundations of economic prosperity.
Let's go to the first myth.
This one argues that people can entirely control their own destiny,
pick themselves up by their bootstraps,
and achieve prosperity entirely on their own.
Now, what are the facts?
As we'll see a number of times throughout this course,
national and global conditions matter.
For some individuals in some places,
the macro situation will simply squelch whatever abilities they might otherwise use
to rise above their circumstances.
Now, obviously, individual factors matter a great deal,
but sometimes structural factors outside of the individual's control
matter a great deal more.
Let's get to another myth.
This one says that physical factors, things like geography or climate,
are what determine national levels of prosperity.
This is certainly what a lot of people conclude
after reading Jared Diamond's great book, Guns, Germs, and Steel.
Now, what about the facts?
There's no doubt that some locations are more hospitable to prosperity than others.
Countries with access to seaports, for example,
usually do better than countries in more remote areas of the globe.
That said, this is a vastly exaggerated claim.
There's a long-held adage, for example,
that people don't work hard in tropical climates.
Well, this is simply a canard.
And if you really don't believe this,
you should go to Singapore, which is a tropical climate,
and see how hard people work there.
Let's address another bigger myth,
that culture is what really matters in determining prosperity.
Now, in July 2012, the Republican nominee for president,
Mitt Romney, gave a speech where he tried to explain why Israel
was so much wealthier than the Palestinians living in the West Bank.
In his answer, he used a point and cited and quoted
former Harvard professor, David Landis.
And David Landis said, culture makes all the difference.
The idea here is that Israelis have a more entrepreneurial,
dynamic economy because of their values and beliefs.
Now, let's get to the facts.
Simply put, culture is a very poor explanation
for the differences in prosperity between Israelis and Palestinians.
Now, I've been to Jerusalem, and I've been to Ramallah,
and I've seen with my very own eyes
what every Middle East expert worth a damn tells me,
which is that Palestinians are just as entrepreneurial as Israelis.
Furthermore, every international development agency
that has examined the Palestinian economy
has given the same two reasons for why the occupied territories
are not as affluent as Israel.
The first is that Palestinian political and economic institutions
suffer from much greater levels of corruption
and much lower adherence to the rule of law.
The second and far more important reason
is that Israel has placed such prohibitive restrictions
on the ability of Palestinian entrepreneurs to import
and export from the rest of the world
that it stunts the overall rate of economic growth.
As we shall see in several later lectures,
there are other things that are far more important
that determine national prosperity than culture.
And indeed, a lot of cultures that now seem quite comfortable
with the foundations of economic prosperity
were once thought to be very hostile to those foundations,
only a century ago.
In fact, until very recently,
a lot of experts believe that capitalism
could simply not coexist with the Confucian values of Chinese culture.
Clearly, that's wrong.
Let's address another myth.
This one states that prosperity, once achieved, is self-sustaining.
The fact here is that unfortunately,
this is wrong at the individual, national, and global levels.
For individuals, there are many possible pitfalls
that can turn a prosperous person into a pauper.
At the national level,
North Korea is merely one of the more extreme examples
of an urbanized, literate society that moved dramatically backwards.
For example, and we'll talk about this in a fascinating case
later in a later lecture,
recent archaeology has demonstrated
that Easter Island had a relatively developed society
before completely depleting the island's resources.
Moreover, the most advanced society in the world in the year 1500 was China.
By 1975, however, it was one of the world's most impoverished societies.
And similarly, Argentina had one of the highest per capita incomes
in the entire world just a century ago.
Now, according to the 2010 World Bank data,
Argentina ranked 54th in the world in GDP per capita,
and the Argentine government has also defaulted on its foreign debts in the last decade.
At the global level, there have been numerous shocks to the system
that in the end led to net reductions in prosperity for a period of time.
Plagues and epidemics have devastated the global economy,
from the black plague in the 14th century onwards to the influenza epidemic of 1919.
Financial crises have led to long-lasting reversals as well.
The Great Depression of the 1930s led to a significant drop in overall economic output in the world,
and unfortunately the Great Recession caused by the 2008 financial crisis
also created a large dent in prosperity.
Let's address another myth.
That to understand the foundations of economic prosperity,
all one needs to do is get a solid grounding in economics.
Here, the facts are that even economists will acknowledge this is not true.
Economic historian Deirdre McCloskey recently wrote a book
about the origins of the Industrial Revolution called Bourgeois Dignity.
The subtitle of her book was Why Economics Can't Explain the Modern World.
As she puts it in the book, economists are very good at explaining resource allocation,
but one of the things they can't explain on their own is the explosion of prosperity over the last two centuries.
Economics is important, and we'll be talking a lot about how markets can and should function to promote prosperity.
However, economic institutions rest on a foundation of political and social institutions.
Without a better understanding of domestic and international political economy,
there is no way one could predict which economic institutions will prevail
or whether any given economic system will be sustainable over time.
And now let's get to the final myth, that there are simple solutions for how to promote prosperity.
And the fact is, speaking on behalf of all experts on prosperity,
let me assure you that this is not true.
Now some of the answers I'll talk to you about are in fact pretty simple,
but a lot of the answers I'll be providing you are pretty complex.
And some of the answers we have yet to discover, we simply aren't sure in some cases.
We know many important things, but we also know there are still a lot of mysteries out there
and our understanding changes over time.
To see what I mean, let's think about North and South Korea again.
Today it is manifestly obvious that the South is vastly more prosperous than the North.
Indeed, between the years 1972 and 2002, South Korea went from having a similar per capita income level to the North
to having five times the per capita income of the DPRK.
In the 21st century, the superiority of South Korea's institutions seemed clear.
But if we go back to 1970, then the picture would have looked much fuzzier.
You see, for the first 25 years of their existence, North and South Korea showed remarkably similar growth patterns
in terms of relative prosperity as measured by per capita income.
This was true even though their economic and political institutions started diverging in 1948
and then started diverging even more in the 1960s.
So what's the lesson? Well, what looks obvious now did not look so obvious 40 years ago.
It would have been very difficult, if not impossible, for someone in 1970 to confidently predict
the enormous gap that has opened up between the two nations over the past few decades.
Professors are not very good at demonstrating modesty, so I'm going to apologize in advance
if I sound certain and confident about everything.
Trust me, I'm not.
And by the way, if you hear anyone else say that they have the easy answer to promoting prosperity,
let me assure you that they don't.
So today, we've cleared away a lot of sagebrush.
There is a background assumption that I've been making, however, that prosperity is a good thing.
Prosperity makes you happier.
Is that actually true? Let's tackle that question in our next lecture.
