Just before the Soviet Union broke up, in 1990, the German firm Deutsche Bank analyzed
the economic fortunes of all fifteen of the republics to gauge what their chances would
be for the future.
One of the republics that they thought would do well was the Republic of Ukraine.
It had a well-educated workforce, a lot of heavy industry, and was an agricultural bread
basket.
Despite these predictions, Ukraine's economy did not take off.
In fact, if anything, it was quite the reverse.
By 1999, its GDP was less than 40% of its output in 1991.
By 2012, of the 15 ex-Soviet republics, Ukraine was only the ninth-most prosperous as measured
by per capita income, and it had to be in an IMF lending program because it was about
to default on its foreign debts.
I lived in Ukraine in 1993 and 1994 and could tell it was not moving forward in terms of
prosperity.
Why do Ukraine turn out differently than expected?
In the previous lecture, we talked about the sources of prosperity for both developing
and developed countries, eliminating counterproductive policies, expanding the opportunities for
market activity, greater levels of capital investment, and laying the groundwork for
innovative activity.
While there might be some disagreement on the margins, most economists would not dispute
these drivers for development.
Why didn't Ukraine simply implement the right policies?
In fact, let's ask an even more basic question.
Why doesn't every country do this?
If the necessary economic foundations and economic recipes for prosperity are clear, why aren't
they implemented universally?
The answer comes when we realize the enormous capacity of the state to get things wrong.
Indeed, the foundations of economic prosperity lie in politics as much as economics, and
the incentive of politicians are not nearly as clear-cut as they are in economics.
Today we're going to look at some of the barriers politicians create that get in the way of
national prosperity, whether they create these barriers intentionally or unintentionally.
But before we get to the political perils of prosperity, we need to dismiss some of
the myths about why countries can't achieve prosperity.
We talked about this in the first lecture, but we need to address it a little more in
depth now.
Now, these tend to fall into three kinds of arguments.
The first is culture.
It is often argued that some countries or some civilizations have cultures, which we'll
define here as having common sets of values, beliefs, and traditions that are simply not
congenial to modern liberal capitalism.
For example, it is often frequently observed that Islam forbids the charging of interest
when loans are made.
And as we've seen from previous lectures, without credit, without making loans and charging
interest, modern economies can't function.
Similarly, it is often argued that the concept of private property is anathema to myriad
indigenous cultures in North America and Africa.
And this explains why these cultures have not prospered.
A second myth relates to geography.
An old saw of geographers and sociologists is that rapid economic growth is impossible
in tropical weather conditions, because the people who live in those countries have little
incentive to work hard in such lovely places to live.
The major centers of the Industrial Revolution, by contrast, share roughly the same latitude
on the globe and the same kind of temperate climate.
In Guns, Germs, and Steel, Jared Diamond popularized the notion that the reason Europe dominated
the rest of the globe, starting in the 16th century, was that its geography enabled the
preconditions for technological and political development.
Finally, there's the myth that prosperity can be intractively blocked by national history.
It is no secret that Western Europe colonized most of the rest of the globe, starting in
the 15th century and not ending until the 20th century.
This colonization destroyed indigenous institutions and borders, making it next to impossible for
these countries to prosper.
Indeed, some of these countries, such as Afghanistan or Somalia, were colonized so badly that
there is still no functioning government in these places.
The problem with these explanations is that while some of them explain a small amount
of what's going on, by and large they do not hold up to empirical scrutiny.
Let's start with culture, because that's probably the most popular one.
This was popularized by the great sociologist Max Weber over a century ago, when he wrote
The Protestant Ethic in the Spirit of Capitalism.
In that book, he argued that Europeans, because they thrived with a Protestant work ethic,
were able to make the most out of the capitalist economy.
What's less talked about nowadays is that Max Weber also wrote another book called The
Religion of China.
In that book, he argued that capitalism could not thrive in that country, because Confucianism
dampened intensity of belief, thereby muting the drive for self-enrichment.
Now, today that argument sounds pretty foolish, but at the time that Weber wrote it, China
was pretty poor, so it seemed to make sense.
The point is that cultures that might seem to have promoted poverty in the past might
also be equally capable of promoting prosperity.
Similarly, a closer look at history reveals that Islamic traders have prospered throughout
history, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa.
In the 21st century, it seems like every emirate in the Gulf is trying to develop a
financial hub, which suggests that Islam is not the impediment to finance that some people
claim.
Culture is not a serious barrier to economic development.
And going back to the Ukraine, culture certainly doesn't explain what happened there.
And the evidence for this is the Ukrainian diaspora.
There are large pockets of ethnic Ukrainians that live in both the United States and Canada.
Compared to other Eastern European immigrants, these communities have very strongly preserved
the culture of their old country.
Yet by and large, in terms of their performance, in terms of per capita income, they have nevertheless
prospered in the new world.
So even with the same culture, they're doing much better in a different country.
So culture clearly can't be the answer.
Geography doesn't matter all that much either.
Scholars like Jared Diamond or William McNeil are correct to point out that the origins
of prosperity are certainly in temperate climates.
However, there are a lot of countries in the temperate zone, and not all of them began
the ascent to prosperity at the same time.
Geography, for example, can't explain why Western Europe became much more prosperous,
much more quickly, than Eastern Europe or the rest of Eurasia, even though those regions
had just the same kind of temperates up.
Furthermore, a glance at the most rapidly growing economies in the world today shows
that many of them are located in tropical climates.
Think about Singapore, India, or Brazil.
And, to go back to Ukraine, geography certainly doesn't explain Ukraine's lack of prosperity.
As I noted before, Ukraine's geography and climate were ideal.
It had a rich agricultural bread basket and plenty of deep water ports.
Similarly, history matters, but not nearly as much as people think.
If it really did determine everything, then in fact there should be strong evidence of
path dependence, history impinging on what happens today.
There should be a strong relationship between the most prosperous countries, let's say
in the year 1500, and the most prosperous nations today.
In fact, there is no such correlation.
To put it simply, the conditions of the past do play a role, and often a very important
one, but they are not necessarily the key barrier to prosperity in the future.
Now, to be sure, there are ways in which these kinds of traditional factors could theoretically
influence prosperity in a negative way.
For example, ethnic heterogeneity is often correlated with the lack of necessary public
investments.
So in other words, in countries that have large polyglot populations, the government
often invests less in social welfare.
But while this is true in general, it overlooks countries like Switzerland, Canada, and the
United States, all of which have ethnically heterogeneous populations, or linguistically
heterogeneous populations, but have nevertheless surmounted this problem.
So even if these factors matter, they're pretty far from decisive.
So now that we've dismissed some of these exaggerated barriers to national prosperity,
let's spend the rest of this lecture identifying and discussing some of the more significant
roadblocks to prosperity.
For the engines of prosperity to function properly, the state has to provide certain public
goods that enhance growth and refrain from certain public bads that retard economic growth.
Let's consider each of these in turn.
We'll start with the public goods.
The overwhelming majority of Adam Smith's wealth of nations was devoted to explaining
why the free market works exceptionally well.
Even Smith, however, in that book acknowledged that there were certain functions that governments
needed to perform.
Smith's first role for the state was to provide for the common defense.
Some individuals can prosper even without security.
Remember, as I talked about in a previous lecture, there are always destructive and
unproductive paths to wealth.
As a society, however, security is a necessary condition for economies to survive and thrive.
The more that individuals have to fear the threat of armed attack, the more distorted
their investment decisions become.
A more uncertain future means there's less incentive to make long-term investments now.
Greater insecurity also provides a greater incentive to invest in private security, which
diverts capital away from more productive uses, like, let's say, factory equipment.
After common defense, Smith's second state function was to provide an exact administration
of justice.
Businesses needed to be able to enforce property rights, arbitrate disputes, and promote civic
trust.
Without strong property rights, the incentive to save and invest declines dramatically.
Without arbitration, or the legal system is a recourse for being cheated, businesses
and financiers will be reluctant to extend credit.
Now, those sorts of structures are really nearly the backstops for trust, which we've
talked about before.
In high-trust societies, economic actors are less risk-averse.
Smith's final state function, his third one, was to provide public works, which we can
think of as public goods.
Now, we've talked about public goods before, but I want to spend a little more time about
it right now.
Public goods have two qualities that make them distinct from private goods.
The first is non-rivalry.
The consumption of the good by one individual does not prevent the consumption of that same
good by any other individual.
So let's take a fish.
A fish is a rival good.
If I eat that fish, no one else can consume it.
On the other hand, the knowledge of how to catch a fish is non-rival.
If I learn how to fish, it doesn't stop anyone else from consuming that same knowledge.
Similarly, basic scientific research develops knowledge that can be consumed by those who
want to build on it for applied research.
If I learn advanced particle physics, it's not like I've consumed knowledge that can't
be consumed by others.
Now, the second quality of public goods is non-excludability, which says that it's technologically
or politically impossible to exclude the benefits of the good to a particular group
of individuals, even if those individuals don't contribute to paying for the good.
A good example of a non-excludable good is the eradication or immunization against disease.
Let's say I'm one of those people that believe that vaccines cause autism.
They don't, but let's say I believe that.
Even if I don't get immunized against a disease because I believe that, I am far less likely
to contract the disease if everyone else around me receives such immunizations.
Because then, they're less likely to get the disease, which means I'm extremely less
likely to get the disease from them.
It reduces the chances of me catching it, even though I haven't contributed to the public
good by getting immunized.
Most goods are purely private.
A few are purely public, and many goods have qualities of both.
Take roads, for example.
Most roads are non-excludable because anyone can drive on them.
Tolls can make roads somewhat excludable, however.
Roads are also not purely non-rival.
Too many people driving on a road creates traffic jams, so roads are a partially non-rival
and partially non-excludable good.
The important fact about public goods is that they are under provided if left to the free
market.
Why?
Because these goods are both non-rival and non-excludable, there is a free rider problem.
The whole point of public goods is that anyone can consume them, regardless of whether you've
paid for them or not.
So if you have a chance to free ride off of someone else's procurement of that good,
you will very likely do so.
Anyone who tries to sell a public good, like a private good, will lose a lot of customers
to free riding.
This depresses the overall output of the good to a suboptimal level.
The most common solution to the free rider problem is for the state to provide public
goods and then compel payment through taxes and fees.
So for countries to stay on the course of prosperity, the state needs to provide certain
public goods that can act as a foundation on which individuals can then pursue their
own ends.
This sounds simple, but there is no guarantee that the state will actually provide these
crucial public goods.
Bear in mind that states do not have the noblest of historical origins.
Traditionally, states have functioned as protection rackets, specializing in destructive forms
of amassing wealth, such as plundering and pillaging other territories or expropriating
resources from citizens.
This kind of state rewards the kind of destructive entrepreneurship I talked about in an earlier
lecture.
More recently, states have also engaged in various rent seeking activities, such as granting
monopolies to favored political interests.
This kind of state rewards the kind of unproductive entrepreneurship I talked about in an earlier
lecture at the expense of productive entrepreneurship.
So now we've identified one potential barrier to national prosperity.
A failure to provide necessary public goods will ultimately slow down a national economy
and retard investment and innovation.
A failure to provide public goods is an example of a government not doing enough.
But very often, the problem with government is not that it's doing too little, but that
it's doing too much.
There is a long list of bad policies, we'll call them public bads rather than public goods,
that states can and have pursued that block and imperil national prosperity.
In some cases, these actions are done for venal reasons.
In other cases, for noble but misguided reasons, regardless, the effect is the same.
These public bads lower prosperity.
So let's turn now to examine some of these serious public bads.
The first is over taxation.
All individuals need an incentive to work, presumably that will reap the benefits of
whatever it is we'll do.
If governments have tax rates that are too high, then individuals have less of an incentive
to earn extra income, or potentially have an incentive to do so illegally, to avoid
paying taxes.
So after a certain point, higher tax rates will actually yield less income.
In the United States, for example, between 1950 and 1963, the highest marginal tax rate
was over 90%.
Once that tax rate was hit, people's incentive to work was severely limited.
After all, what's the incentive to earn more money if 90% of those extra earnings go to
the government?
The second public bad is excessive regulation.
The state has valid reasons to regulate economic activity, let's say protecting consumer health
or promoting environmental cleanliness, for example.
Over time, however, even justifiable reasons for regulation act as a barrier to entry for
new businesses.
Every regulation that a firm needs to comply with is an added cost to that business doing
what it wants to do.
The more regulated a national economy is, the more cost to affirm in the form of compliance
and legal fees.
In terms of overall national prosperity, the result of high regulatory barriers is a world
of very few large firms that know how to comply with existing regulations, stifling new business
growth.
This helps to explain why new business creation in the United States far exceeds the pace
of new business creation in, let's say, the European Union, which has greater regulations.
Now let's turn to the third public bad, bad macroeconomic policies.
All economies experience business cycles of rapid growth and recessions.
Growth that is too rapid leads to inflation, which undercuts prosperity in the long run
by debasing the value of money.
Inflation leads to greater unemployment, which clearly has a negative effect on national
prosperity.
Governments use macroeconomic policy to tamp down inflation and boost employment.
There are two kinds of macroeconomic policies that governments tend to use.
The first is fiscal policy.
Fiscal policy is when the government spends more to prime the pump of the national economy
or restrict spending to cool the economy off.
Fiscal policy is when the central bank expands or contracts the supply of money to raise
or lower interest rates, which in turn affects investment decisions.
So if, for example, the central bank reduces the money supply and raises interest rates,
that makes it costlier to invest, which thereby reduces economic growth.
In theory, governments pursue expansionary fiscal and monetary policies during recessions
and contractionary policies during boom times.
In practice, however, governments have made numerous mistakes over the years trying to
manage the business cycle.
One of the reasons that the Great Depression was so severe was bad U.S. macroeconomic policy.
The Federal Reserve failed to increase the money supply after the Great Depression started,
which caused real interest rates to rise, which in turn curtailed business activity.
As for fiscal policy, the Hoover administration, once the stock market crash took place, tried
to balance the budget in the wake of it.
That was actually a contractionary policy during a moment when the economy was contracting
already.
These macroeconomic policies helped to turn that stock market crash into the worst downturn
in American economic history.
At the end of the 1960s, by contrast, the Johnson administration was overseeing a booming economy
that had reached its capacity.
But between prosecuting the Vietnam War and implementing Johnson's Great Society programs,
Johnson wound up pursuing an expansionary fiscal policy during a time when the economy
was already booming.
Furthermore, the Federal Reserve, in response to Johnson's pressure, also pursued an expansionary
monetary policy.
The result eventually forced the United States off the gold standard and ushered in a decade
of high inflation.
This is one of the big answers for why Ukraine did so badly after independence in 1991.
When I moved there in 1993, the currency was called the coupon, and it was convertible
to the dollar at about 400 coupons to the dollar.
When I left less than a year later, the coupon's exchange rate was approximately 55,000 to
the dollar, and eventually a year later, it was 150,000 to the dollar.
That's hyperinflation.
Governments might also manipulate macroeconomic policies to ensure favorable economic conditions
prior to critical political decisions.
This is referred to as the political business cycle.
The problem comes when the result of this manipulation is a more serious downturn.
So, for example, prior to Mexico's 1994 election, the government increased its spending to ensure
the ruling party would be reelected.
This spending was hidden, however, and as the government's finances were revealed, it
triggered a serious financial crisis.
To get admitted into the Eurozone, Greece actually hired Goldman Sachs to manipulate
its government finances to conceal its debts, a fact that eventually it started paying the
Piper for after 2008.
Let's go to the fourth public bad, protectionism.
There is a strong temptation to create jobs by protecting industries that are not competitive
in the global marketplace.
Trade liberalization creates costs that are concentrated in uncompetitive sectors.
If those sectors go out of business, both owners and workers in that sector are hurt.
Protecting that sector can preserve those jobs, but at a higher price for consuming those
goods for the rest of consumers.
Now, governments do have a security incentive to protect what they think of as strategic
sectors, but they will also always have a political incentive to claim that lots of sectors are
strategic.
So during the Cold War, for example, the United States passed the 1954 National Wool Act,
which offered generous subsidies to stimulate wool production in the United States.
Now they did this in part because the Defense Department wanted a guaranteed supply for its
uniforms.
They wanted wool uniforms.
But even after synthetic substitutes were discovered, the wool subsidy persisted until
well after the end of the Cold War.
Let's get to the fifth public bad, distorted investment decisions.
The government is generally expected to invest in necessary public works like roads, bridges,
and ports.
But governments will also have an incentive to create industrial policies that reward
sectors believed to be very promising.
On occasion, these kinds of industrial policies can be successful, and we'll talk about those
cases a few lectures from now.
In general, however, industrial policies are far more likely to fail than succeed.
Why is that?
Because these kinds of industrial policies rely on the premise that governments will
know better than markets which sectors or firms should survive and thrive.
Inevitably, if a state thinks about subsidizing particular sectors or firms, other sectors
or firms will lobby the government for similar consideration.
Furthermore, politicians and bureaucrats who promote particular sectors will be extremely
reluctant to admit failure if these sectors don't pan out.
Instead, they will in all likelihood try to claim that what looks like a failure is actually
a success and therefore deserves more support.
The result of bad industrial policy decisions can be a lot of wasted money.
The French and British governments, for example, poured billions of dollars into the development
of a supersonic passenger jet, and they succeeded.
And the Concorde was generally recognized to be a technological marvel, traveling at
speeds of Mach 2 or higher, and cutting down the length of time it would take to fly from
New York to London from, let's say, six hours to three.
Unfortunately, the cost of development was high, the fuel demands were even higher,
and the sonic booms created by the planes created complaints about noise pollution.
As a result, only 14 planes were ever made for commercial service, and all of those planes
were decommissioned by the year 2003.
The United States is hardly immune to this kind of industrial policy mistake.
The U.S. government offered the firm Cylindra more than half a billion dollars in loan guarantees,
betting that its innovative solar cell technology would make clean energy more economically
viable.
In actuality, a drop in the price of silicon made conventional solar cells more competitive,
and Cylindra declared bankruptcy almost two years to the day after receiving government
funds.
Let's go back to Ukraine.
Massive government subsidies were used to prop up uncompetitive coal mining and large-scale
steel production.
You of these factories and mines were actually efficient, and as a result of this industrial
policy, Ukraine's economy sagged.
And finally, is an interesting correlation.
If you look at the tallest buildings in the world, you will often find government hubris
close behind.
Malaysia built the Petronas Towers in Kuala Lumpur, and soon afterwards, its economy suffered
because of the Asian financial crisis.
The city of Dubai built the Burj Khalifa, which is the tallest building in the world.
Dubai, however, very quickly went bankrupt.
Let's go to the last public bet, which is war.
The final government misstep is going to war for non-essential reasons.
States that lose wars tend to be economically much worse off than before the war started.
Even states that win wars often pay enormous costs to win.
Now, there's certainly a logic to using force to preserve national security, but many of
the uses of force over the years have been for other reasons.
States experiencing rapid growth and a relative rise in power will often act in a more aggressive
manner.
This can lead to decisions to enter wars that drain their economies dry.
Both Russia and Germany were rapidly rising powers at the start of the First World War.
By the end of it, both countries were defeated, stripped of territory, and suffered calamitous
economic downturns.
States sometimes choose to go to war as a distraction.
Unpopular governments will launch diversionary wars in the hopes of distracting a rest of
population without nationalism.
In 1982, for example, Argentina invaded the Falkland Islands because the military junta
in power was losing popularity fast.
The takeover led to a short burst of public support for the junta, but losing the war
meant the end of the regime and the beginning of a lost decade of economic growth.
Stepping back, there are lots of ways for governments to stimulate prosperity, but there
are even more ways for governments to retard prosperity.
How do governments avoid making mistakes?
That will be the topic of our next lecture.
