By now, you should be pretty well acquainted with the formula for the foundations of economic
prosperity.
The key is getting the right economic institutions and incentives in place.
Examples like well-defined property rights, well-developed capital markets, the provision
of public goods, and the avoidance of public bids.
In turn, you should also be familiar with the connection between economic institutions
and political institutions.
Economic institutions can't thrive without well-structured political institutions.
As a general rule, broadly representative political institutions are far more likely
to provide broad-based public goods than more narrowly representative political institutions.
We also know that the prosperity engine has really kicked in the high gear over the last
two centuries, turning significant parts of the globe, Europe, North America, the Pacific
Rim, and small pockets elsewhere, into the developed world as we know it.
A map of which countries belong to the OECD, the Organization of Economic Cooperation and
Development, makes this very visually clear, except for Australia, New Zealand, and Chile.
They are all located in either North America, Europe, or Northeast Asia.
We have also focused the past few lectures on the challenge that the developing world
has in becoming developed, assuming that this is the greatest challenge to maintaining prosperity.
But what about nations in the developed world, however?
Is it safe to assume that they will continue to be the primary drivers of the prosperity
engine moving forward?
Developed countries have significant advantages over the developing world in maintaining a
high level of prosperity.
By definition, developed countries are far more capital rich than developing countries.
And of course, as we learned in our fourth lecture, individuals are always more productive
when they can exploit more capital.
This means the productivity of almost every worker in the developed world is automatically
higher than that of individuals living in the developing world.
And productivity is the key to prosperity.
Furthermore, with one exception, Singapore, all developed countries are representative
constitutional democracies.
And even Singapore has an extremely strong rule of law.
This means that their governments have a more powerful incentive to provide the necessary
public goods to promote growth and prosperity.
And this is particularly important for the developed world because of the overwhelming
importance of innovation as the engine for economic growth.
The infrastructure that has to be in place for innovation to thrive requires an entire
panoply of public goods, things like the promotion of basic scientific research, investments
in higher education, well-developed rational intellectual property rights, and so forth.
So everything's fine in the developed world, right?
Not exactly.
As societies become developed, there are certain socioeconomic and sociopolitical changes that
create new impediments to sustaining economic growth.
These problems are somewhat different from those of the developing world, but trust me,
there are still problems.
After a country becomes developed, there are four big challenges that it must confront
to maintain high levels of national prosperity.
The first is a possible decline in innovation.
The second is a demographic slowdown.
The third is a shift in the economy away from income maximization.
And the last one is a surprising paradox that comes with political stability.
We're going to look at each of these challenges in turn and then discuss what governments
have been doing to try to avoid falling into these traps.
So the most important thing a developed country must do is maintain high levels of innovation.
Developed countries are operating at the technological frontier.
Innovation plays a far more significant role in stimulating economic growth in these countries.
As we said before, most econometric studies show it accounts for between 60 to 85 percent
of total economic growth in these countries.
When we think about innovation, we think about Thomas Edison in his lab or Hewlett and Packard
in their garage, but the nature of scientific innovation and technological innovation has
changed pretty radically.
Because technological innovation requires significant upfront expenditures, the fixed costs for
R&D are quite large.
With such large fixed costs, large firms are the primary actors with an incentive to engage
in this kind of activity.
Not surprising, more than 80 percent of corporate research and development, in other words,
innovation, is done by large firms, defined here as those employing more than 500 people.
This is according to the U.S. National Science Foundation study.
Now the great economist Joseph Schumpeter, among others, worried about the long-term
implications of this trend in innovation, in his classic book Capitalism, Socialism,
and Democracy.
Schumpeter argued the following.
He was worried that large corporations stop being hungry for profits after a while, because
their very size, the very massive size, ensures their continued existence.
Instead, these kinds of corporations trend towards more bureaucratic, risk-averse behavior.
This is an ethos that does not necessarily promise a lot of radical innovations.
More generally, Schumpeter worried that developed societies would develop social norms that
are the very opposite of the spirit of creative destruction that Schumpeter believed was so
crucial for innovation and entrepreneurship to continue unabated.
Now you'll remember that we encountered this notion of creative destruction in earlier
lectures.
It involves the development of new inventions and innovations that lead to new increases
in productivity and economic growth.
That's the creative part.
The destructive part is that such innovations also cause disruptions that disadvantage certain
sectors of the economy and often cause widespread social change.
Think about the ways in the past decade that individuals have adapted to things like smartphones
or the internet.
Innovation requires talent, risk-taking, and the rewards that come with successful entrepreneurship.
What Schumpeter foresaw was the possibility that in developed economies, societal mores
and norms would shift in a way to depress the incentives for innovation.
In particular, Schumpeter worried that talented people would disdain entering business, scientific,
and engineering fields because they were somehow seen as less rewarding than other professions.
Schumpeter was also worried that intellectuals and cultural elites would reject the capitalist
values of the businessman and the entrepreneur.
So has this happened?
To some extent, yes.
The political scientist Ron Engelhardt has looked at the World Values Survey that we've
mentioned in previous lectures.
Based on five rounds of those surveys, he concludes that his countries have become more developed,
more of their population has embraced what he calls post-materialist values, caring less
about maximizing income and more about maximizing the non-economic aspects of well-being.
Furthermore, Engelhardt has found that these post-materialist values are concentrated among
the better educated segments of the population, exactly the intellectual and cultural elites
that Schumpeter worried about.
There are three powerful counters to this.
The first is that small businesses have taken up a greater share of R&D activities since
the start of the 21st century.
This suggests that Schumpeter's belief that large corporations would be responsible for
all innovation were wrong.
There are areas of innovation, such as in Silicon Valley, where startups can still survive
and thrive.
The corporatization of innovation is not a universal phenomenon.
Second, there are certain kinds of financial innovation that have actually prevented corporations
from becoming bureaucratized.
The idea behind private equity firms, for example, is that a corporation's current management
is not making the best use of its assets.
Private equity takeovers and the fear of such takeovers have forced corporations to act
in a more risk-loving manner, which means embracing more innovation.
And third, cultural skepticism towards capitalism and the advanced democracies has occasionally
increased.
But by and large, there is broad public acceptance of the free market.
The stagflation era of the 1970s, in which economies experienced simultaneously low or
negative levels of economic growth but high levels of inflation, discredited excessive
state intervention in the free market, which led to a renaissance in the capitalist idea.
With the end of the Cold War, which discredited centrally planned economies once and for all,
that pretty much entrenched capitalism as the only economic paradigm for the foreseeable
future.
It was in that moment that Francis Fukuyama wrote his famous essay, The End of History,
arguing that only liberal free market capitalism was really the proper economic model for
the future.
And furthermore, the data backs this up.
According to the Pew Global Attitude Survey, for example, more than two-thirds of respondents
in countries ranging from Brazil to China, Kenya to Nigeria, Germany and the United States,
or South Korea to Poland, agreed that people were better off in a free market economy.
These polls also took place after the 2008 financial crisis, when doubts about capitalism
should have been at their highest.
We will discuss fears of a technological slowdown in greater depth later on.
But for now, we can say that at a minimum, the societal demand for more innovations has
in no way subsided.
Now beyond the possible decline in innovation, there are three big changes that mature economies
go through that could affect the engine of prosperity.
One of the most predictable effects of the transition to a developed economy is that
there is a demographic slowdown.
Simply put, families have fewer children than they do in previous generations.
Why is this?
Well, as countries become more developed, infant and child mortality drops.
So parents begin to recognize that they don't need to procreate a larger family than what
they're intending.
Developed economies also become more educated, which allows for more sophisticated family
planning.
This holds with particular force as women become more educated.
More education for women means that they start having families later in life, that they have
more control over their own economic destiny, as well as a better understanding of the economic
costs and benefits of having children.
Also, because they tend to earn more money by becoming better educated, they don't necessarily
have to rely on a spouse and therefore comply with that spouse in terms of things like family
planning.
Developed countries are also more urbanized.
In contrast to rural families who can put their children to work on the land, children
in urban areas have fewer employment opportunities.
So a child is seen less as an investment vehicle and more as a cost.
This puts a limit on the number of children that a family might want for purely economic
reasons.
Now, at the same time that families are having fewer children, their parents are also living
longer.
Improvements in health care, social welfare and old age pensions all vastly improve the
life of the elderly.
Developed societies are also more urbanized and the elderly can live much more easily
in an urban area than in a rural one.
These changing demographics have a few negative effects on national prosperity.
Population growth slows dramatically and in some cases starts to shrink.
In southern Europe and in South Korea, birth rates are already below replacement level,
which is usually 2.1 children per family.
In Japan, the low birth rate is so acute that demographers estimate that the national population
will be half its current amount by the year 2100.
But we care about per capita income in this course, right?
So a decline in the population shouldn't matter.
So long as what's remaining of the population is still reasonably prosperous.
The problem is that this sharp shift in demographics creates a serious fiscal problem.
See, most public pension schemes work as pay-as-you-go mechanisms.
Pensions contributed this year by workers goes out in the form of pensions.
So this is how social security works in the United States, for example.
Individuals that make social security contributions right now are actually paying for the social
security benefits of current retirees.
Now this wasn't a problem when there were four or five workers per pensioners and most
pensioners were not expected to live more than a decade after they retired.
It is a problem, however, when it's closer to a one-to-one relationship between workers
and retirees, and older people can expect to live at least two decades after retirement.
According to the U.S. Social Security Administration, there were 8.5 workers for every Social Security
beneficiary in 1955.
By 2010, there were only 2.9 workers per beneficiary, and that number is expected to decline as
baby boomers start to retire.
And comparatively speaking, the United States is actually in much better demographic shape
than most other developed economies, due to things like immigration.
Without fixing the fiscal effects of the demographic slowdown, countries will threaten their long-run
growth opportunities with ballooning budget deficits and ballooning national debts.
They might also reduce their growth by lowering consumption through enforced savings.
So demographic shifts present a serious challenge to developed nations as they seek to maintain
prosperity.
And there's another shift that can cause problems as well.
As economies become more developed, societal preferences start to shift away from income
maximization.
Individuals begin to care more about the non-economic dimensions of prosperity.
Think of an economy as functioning according to Abraham Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs, which
we've discussed in a previous lecture.
At the base of Maslow's pyramid were material wants and needs, things like physiological
and safety needs, food, clothing, shelter, employment, and so forth.
Once those needs are sated, more complex psychological needs come into play.
Individuals equate a better life as being more than just about money.
The same process works with polities.
As countries become richer, they care less and less about maximizing economic growth
and more about dealing with other issues, issues like having a cleaner environment, protecting
human civil and political rights, taking care of consumer health and safety, dealing with
social welfare provisions, focusing more on economic security rather than maximizing economic
income.
Now there's pretty strong data to support this trend.
In terms of public opinion, as I mentioned a few minutes ago, the World Value Survey
confirms what societies think about this in the same way that Maslow predicted.
As countries and individuals become richer, they start to care more about post-materialist
values, such as greater political representation, labor rights, environmental protections, and
laws protecting consumer health and safety.
We also see this in terms of policy outputs.
Political scientists have observed a phenomenon called Wagner's Law.
Basically, as economies develop, the voting franchise gets expanded, or to use the term
we've talked about in these lectures, the selector it expands.
So in the United States, for example, the original voters at the time of the Constitution
consisted only of white landowners.
For time, however, the voting franchise expanded to include non-landowners, women, African-Americans,
and those between 18 and 21 years of age.
Now the interesting thing is that each time the voting franchise gets extended, so does
the role of the state in the economy.
Basically, politicians start trying to please these new blocks of voters by providing them
with public goods.
So as economies become more developed, there will be stronger societal preferences for
the stringent regulation of business, which, even if the regulation is implemented perfectly
and has a justifiable social purpose, will still act as a drag on the national economy.
The final change that presents a challenge to prosperity in the developed world is also
the most counterintuitive.
We'll call this the paradox of political stability.
Developed economies usually have far more stable and representative political institutions.
All else equal, this should be a contributing factor to rising prosperity, and it is.
Over the long term, however, stable governments can also create significant growth problems.
See, all polities have interest groups, organizations of individuals who share common but narrow
economic interests.
Economic interest groups come in all shapes and all sizes.
Sectoral interests, for example, care about what they produce.
So for example, sugar producers and workers in the United States do not want to make it
easier to import sugar from other countries, because foreign sugar producers are far more
competitive and thereby can charge a lower price.
It therefore lowers the price of domestic sugar producers and threatens their livelihood.
This by the way is why so many processed foods in the United States are made with high fructose
corn syrup rather than sugar.
Sugar is much more expensive in the United States than anywhere else.
Corn, on the other hand, tends to be cheap in no small part because there are large government
subsidies to corn growers, because corn producers are concentrated in Iowa, and presidential
candidates like to win the Iowa caucuses, so they tend to support those kinds of corn
subsidies.
Demographic interests will care about policies that affect their age group.
For example, the most powerful lobby in the United States hands down is the AARP, the
American Association of Retired Persons.
They lobby fiercely to make sure that benefits from social security and Medicare are not
cut in any way whatsoever.
Other developed countries also have equally powerful interest groups.
Think about rice producers in the Far East, for example, that fiercely resist imports
from the United States, or public sector unions in Europe that also fiercely resist rationalization
in those sectors.
These interest groups are actually difficult to create because of the free rider problem
that I've talked about before.
Each sugar producer, for example, has an incentive to do nothing while other sugar producers
lobby for protection.
That way the free rider gets the benefits of the policy without paying for it.
Now one of the factors that allows for the creation of interest groups over time is political
stability.
The more stable the government, the more time that organized interests have to coalesce.
And once interest groups are formed, if they successfully lobby the government for preferred
policies, they can perpetuate their existence for some time.
Democratically elected governments respond to interest group pressure because all politicians
want to get reelected and do not like alienating powerful and organized interests.
Once the government implements policies that the interest group wants, the policies themselves
give the interest group greater resources and a reputation for getting things done in
the government.
So think about the sugar producers.
If the sugar producers are able to implement barriers to sugar imports, that increases
their profits, and they can then use a portion of those profits to lobby for the government.
The interest group is therefore better entrenched to ensure that the status quo policies persist
over time.
The economist Mansar Olson argued in his book The Rise and Decline of Nations that societies
that are more politically stable will experience an ever-increasing number of interest groups
lobbying to influence policy.
As time passes, more interest groups will form and more interest groups will succeed at getting
their governments to implement distorted policies that reduce economic efficiency.
Any attempt at wholesale policy reform will come up against a tidal wave of special interests
who will ally with each other, it's often called log rolling, as a means of preserving
the status quo.
The only way for countries to break free from the grip of entrenched interests is to experience
a massive exogenous shock, some kind of war or revolution that completely scrambles existing
interest groups.
Olson therefore concluded that developed societies that experience generations of political stability
will eventually experience a growth slowdown as the accumulated weight of bad policies
kicks in.
Okay, now we've identified and discussed four challenges to prosperity in the developed
world.
A potential decline in innovation, demographic shifts, a trend away from income maximization,
and this counterintuitive paradox of political stability.
So how do developed societies cope with these challenges?
To be sure, some developed economies have felt these constraints more than others.
Some of the most prosperous societies, however, have been able to deal with these challenges.
And what's interesting is that different developed societies have handled these challenges in
different ways.
These different responses, interlocking sets of institutions that are deeply embedded at
the national level, depend upon what political scientists call the different varieties of
capitalism.
So one example of this are coordinated market economies, places like Germany or Sweden,
for example, or Japan, that believe that markets can function best when supplemented through
mediated, non-market methods of coordination.
These social democracies emphasize economic institutions that provide greater certainty
to citizens, things like the role of the state in providing generous welfare services, the
role of peak business associations and very large trade unions in establishing wages and
benefits at the national level.
Coordinated market economies have enacted a series of policies to enhance growth and
productivity, despite the challenges of being a mature economy.
So to handle the demographic shift, for example, a lot of coordinated market economies make
greater investments in child care services as a way of making it easier to have children.
And this policy has boosted, for example, the birth rate in Scandinavian countries.
They also engage in large investments in automation and robotics to compensate for fewer workers.
Japan has pursued this course with a vengeance.
Its Kura restaurant chain, for example, not only has conveyor belts to deliver sushi to
its patrons, it has robots who actually make the sushi in the first place.
To handle shifting societal preferences, coordinated market economies will incentivize innovation
in socially desirable areas, such as, let's say, clean energy.
And we'll try to enact bargains between large industrial associations and trade union
federations to keep wages down despite rising regulation.
At a cope with interest group pressures, coordinated market economies embrace globalization to
ensure that market forces are still powerful within the domestic economy.
It shouldn't be surprising, for example, that most of the smaller social democracies in
Europe have trade-to-GDP ratios that is close to 100%.
In the United States, by contrast, which is a very open global economy, it's more like
30%.
Coordinated market economies will also implement broad-based welfare policies that reduce the
need for targeted protections.
Financing in coordinated market economies is primarily carried out through large banks,
which are not as susceptible to interest group pressure.
And the weakness of coordinating market economies is handling the shifts in societal preferences.
These economies are far more likely to initiate stringent regulations to protect the environment
and labor rights, but as a result, tamp down on both economic growth and job creation in
the process.
All right, let's look at the other variety of capitalism.
We'll call liberal market economies.
These tend to dominate what's often referred to as the Anglosphere, the United States, Australia,
and New Zealand are primary examples of this.
Liberal market economies have responded in a different manner, but the results have also
been pretty effective.
Liberal market economies believe more strongly in the role of market forces to productively
allocate resources in society.
So to handle the demographic shift, liberal market economies have a much greater tolerance
and much more powerful cultural assimilation of migrants that compensate for the declining
birth rates in native-born citizens.
To handle shifting societal preferences, liberal market economies have renewed their
ideological emphasis on free enterprise.
Most of these economies have embraced laissez-faire economic policies, a new beginning in the
1980s onward.
Furthermore, liberal market economies also rely on the courts as a way to entrench these
property rights and buy-in-large this free market machine.
So even if there might be a societal shift, firms and entrepreneurs can use the court
system to preserve their ability to conduct business in a relatively unregulated manner.
To cope with interest group pressures, liberal market economies also embrace globalization
to ensure that market forces are still powerful within the domestic economy.
This translates into policies like lower barriers to trade and foreign investment and the greater
encouragement of immigration.
Financing in liberal market economies is primarily carried out through equity markets
and venture capital, which are also less susceptible to interest group pressure.
The weak spot in liberal market economies is allowing interest group pressures to distort
economic growth so that it favors a select few.
In the United States, for example, the tax code is riddled with tons of exceptions,
tax breaks and loopholes that enrich certain sectors.
Perhaps the most well-known example of this is also one of the most widely used.
It's the deduction for interest rate payments on home mortgages.
This is pretty obviously a subsidy to both the housing and the financial sectors.
So developed economies eventually encounter problems maintaining high rates of economic
growth.
Some of these problems, like a waning of innovative activity, are easy to handle.
Some of them, like the paradox of political stability, are harder to combat.
The advanced democracies have devised ways of counteracting the natural slowdowns that
occur in a net-matureing economy.
But these are imperfect.
How big of a problem is this, however?
Is it possible for prosperous countries to slip back into poverty?
These are the questions we'll be looking at next.
