In our last lecture, we talked about the significance of an economic superpower to provide the requisite
global public goods for prosperity.
Now, there's another reason that the existence and particular identity of a superpower is important, however.
A superpower also leads by example.
Less prosperous countries are constantly searching for successful formulas for boosting their own economic growth.
Naturally, the first place they will look to is the largest and most powerful states.
One reason why communism seemed so appealing to developing countries during the height of the Cold War
was that the Soviet blocs seemed to be able to generate astonishing rates of growth,
sometimes as much as 10% a year, and significant technical achievements,
things like the development of nuclear weapons and space exploration.
When the Soviet system imploded in the 1980s, so did the allure of communism.
Confident great powers will also proselytize their own virtues as a form of what political scientist Joseph Nye calls soft power.
In theory at least, the more that other countries mimic a great powers model for success,
the more that these countries will internally resemble that great power.
To make this more concrete, if more countries have the same domestic qualities as the United States,
then one would expect that these countries are more likely to agree with the United States about the way the world should work.
During the 1990s, the European model of the coordinated market economy that I talked about in a previous lecture
seemed to be competing with the more laissez-faire liberal market economy of the United States.
Now you'll remember that in a coordinated market economy, the market plays an important role,
but non-market mechanisms are also important in setting wages and in allocating capital.
As time has passed, however, the sluggish growth rates, sovereign debt crises,
and institutional sclerosis of the European Union has caused the coordinated market model to lose much of its appeal,
at least for the time being.
Right now, the United States and China are putting forward competing varieties of capitalism.
The American model is based on the so-called Washington Consensus,
which was dominant during the post-Cold War era, which we've talked about in a previous lecture.
But criticism of this approach has gotten louder through the years
and became particularly noisy after the 2008 financial crisis.
The Chinese model has been dubbed the Beijing Consensus.
The Beijing Consensus has garnered increasing attention over the past decade,
particularly since China's economy appears to have demonstrated considerable resilience
in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis and has been estimated by the IMF
to overtake the U.S. economy in terms of total gross domestic product by the year 2017.
Which of these models will do the better job of promoting global prosperity
and national prosperity in the developing world?
There is no easy answer to this question.
We need first to properly understand what these different models mean
and then examine their strengths and weaknesses.
I'd like to spend today's lecture doing exactly that.
So first, let's start with the Washington Consensus.
And again, let's give a brief history of it.
Now, as I noted in a previous lecture, the Washington Consensus was originally developed
and labeled in the 1980s.
It got its label from the economist John Williamson in 1989.
But the ideas actually have a much longer pedigree.
The foundation for the Washington Consensus was laid in the 1970s
by the very influential Chicago School of Economics.
So named because many of the economists that promoted it,
like Friedrich von Hayek, Milton Friedman, and George Stigler,
who developed this school of thought, were actually based at the University of Chicago.
The Chicago School argued that the state was playing too great a role in the developed and developing world.
Now, looking at the situation in the 1970s,
Chicago School economists contended that Keynesian macroeconomic policies
were responsible for stagflation, high levels of inflation, high levels of unemployment,
and declining levels of output and productivity.
The Chicago School advocated a far more restricted role for the state,
so less government regulation, far less government ownership of enterprises.
According to the Chicago School, for example, there is no good reason for the government to own a steel mill,
or even a post office.
The Chicago School also emphasized a monetary policy focused on keeping inflation low,
as opposed to a dual mandate that the Federal Reserve currently experiences
of trying to maximize both low inflation and full employment.
The Chicago School also advocated for lower taxes and lower overall levels of government spending.
And they pushed greater openness to the global economy.
Now, by the 1980s, this formula seemed to be working pretty well in the United States,
while other models seemed to be faltering pretty badly.
As I said before, the Soviet planned economy was completely disintegrating.
Latin America, as a result of the ISI model that I've talked about before, experienced a lost decade of growth.
And this model, because it emphasized protecting its domestic market
and providing government subsidies of manufacturing sectors,
that led to the debt crisis of the early 1980s.
By the end of the 1980s, there seemed to be no alternative to the U.S. model.
And as a result, development economists began to talk about the Washington consensus,
and scholars like Francis Fukuyama began to talk about the end of history.
So what exactly is the Washington consensus?
The Washington consensus focuses on three broad policy areas, as I said before.
The first is macroeconomic policy, the second is international economic policy,
and the third is microeconomic policy.
Now, in the macroeconomic area, the Washington consensus prescribes prudent policies,
things like fiscal discipline, keeping government budgets as close to balanced as possible.
This approach also recommends broad-based taxation,
essentially not using the tax system to distort incentives.
So, for example, tax credits that would reward green energy programs might sound great in the abstract,
but this rewards one kind of investment over another.
Chicago School of Economics generally thinks that the tax system should remain free of that kind of discrimination
to let the market determine which sectors should be supported and which ones shouldn't.
The Washington consensus also advocates for market-determined interest rates,
not discounting the charged interest rate to, let's say, favor sectors,
as takes place with a lot of industrial policies.
With respect to the international market, the Washington consensus favors the liberal policies,
things like trade liberalization and lowering tariffs,
and permitting inward flows of foreign direct investment and foreign portfolio investment.
Another term for this is capital account liberalization.
The idea here is simple.
If developing countries are starved for capital, then allow foreign investment,
either through the foreign ownership of local firms,
which would allow technology transfer and the spread of efficient managerial techniques,
or through portfolio investment, which should lower interest rates in the country.
Another international policy recommended by the Washington consensus
is competitive and stable exchange rates.
A stable exchange rate facilitates greater trade because exporters and importers
don't have to worry as much about profits disappearing due to gyrations in foreign exchange markets.
Developing countries need the value of their currency to be low enough to encourage exports,
but too low would make the economy completely export dependent.
Too high makes imports cheaper and would encourage overconsumption.
Finally, the Washington consensus promotes an approach that argues for the retreat of the state
from various microeconomic spheres.
So by this we mean fewer subsidies to particular sectors,
or for that matter, subsidies for consumption.
For example, many developing countries have food or energy subsidies for its urban citizens.
I talked about Iran a few lectures ago.
The Washington consensus would advocate the removal of these policies.
It would also advocate for the privatization of state-owned enterprises.
A lot of industries in the developing world were state-owned, and this can badly warp incentives.
The Washington consensus would advocate privatizing them and allowing for market forces to work.
They also advocate for deregulating the economy.
As I've said before, regulation can act as a barrier to entry for new firms,
reducing both competition and innovation.
For example, retail sectors in both Europe and Japan are far less efficient than in the United States,
because zoning requirements and other regulatory restrictions are far more onerous in those parts of the globe.
So the Washington consensus advocates for regulation that is only absolutely necessary.
Note that an implicit theme of the Washington consensus is its symbiosis with liberal democracy.
For markets to work, the rule of law needs to function.
And the Washington consensus favors a relative retreat of the state,
which is not something that most authoritarian governments are keen to do.
Now in theory, the successful implementation of Washington consensus policies should act as an incubator for democracy.
These policies should promote greater levels of affluence, and more affluence states tend to become more democratic.
Washington consensus policies also promote integration into the global economy.
And again, and as I've said before, more internationalized economies also tend to be more democratic.
So now that we understand the basic principles and policy preferences of the Washington consensus,
let's look at some of its strengths.
It seemed to take the best of the East Asian miracle,
the export promotion approach that we've talked about in prior lectures,
while jettisoning the crony capitalism.
As in East Asia, macroeconomic prudence and trade liberalization are emphasized,
but also less regulation and less of a state role.
The Washington consensus also rewards entrepreneurship and innovation,
and we know from previous lectures the importance of these traits to promoting prosperity.
And perhaps most important, the Washington consensus stresses exposure to the international economy,
which vastly improves the productivity in the tradeable sectors area.
Again, labor productivity is one of the absolute keys to prosperity.
Another aspect of the Washington consensus is that it advocates by relying on market mechanisms,
flexibility to economic shocks, like let's say oil crises or energy price shocks.
A deregulated economy can adjust quickly to those price shocks.
In an economy operating along Washington consensus lines,
prices react much more quickly to shifts in supply and demand,
which allows producers and consumers to alter their behavior more quickly.
So in contrast to a lot of the developing world, which used subsidies to keep energy prices low,
the U.S. economy became vastly more energy efficient following the oil shocks of the 1970s,
because the high cost of oil was reflected in higher gas and energy prices.
Similarly, it was the spike in energy prices after the Second Gulf War
that led to the innovations of shale gas and hydraulic fracturing taking off.
So the Washington consensus approach seemed to work for the United States itself during the 1980s and 1990s.
After stalling out in the 1970s, productivity growth picked up again by the late 1990s.
As William W. Lewis detailed in his book The Power of Productivity,
there was much more rapid incorporation of computer-fueled technological change
in the American retail sector than in Europe.
Furthermore, there was an improving fiscal picture.
By the year 2000, the United States was running budget surpluses.
And yet, notwithstanding all of these strengths, the Washington consensus is not without its weaknesses.
In the first place, as a recipe of policies, the Washington consensus is politically difficult to execute well.
Ending things like consumer and producer subsidies and executing privatization programs free of corruption
creates large categories of economic losers,
and those losers will lobby the government as a way to redress those losses.
Not even the United States has been able to do this.
The U.S. tax code is riddled with consumer subsidies,
like, let's say, tax breaks for mortgage interest and student debt.
The U.S. government also has a myriad number of producer subsidies as well,
like, let's say, the ethanol fuel requirements.
This functions as a massive subsidy for corn producers.
Another problem with the Washington consensus is that opening up a country's capital markets for foreign investment
without prudential regulation increases the likelihood of a banking crisis.
Countries that successfully implemented Washington consensus-style reforms
all experienced inward rushes of foreign capital,
and in some cases the access to cheap capital caused the exchange rate to appreciate,
and as the country's currency became more valuable,
its exports became much more expensive while imports became cheaper.
In other words, the inward rush of capital worsened the country's balance of trade,
which made it tougher to earn the foreign exchange necessary to pay the foreign creditors rushing in offering to loan money.
In most cases, the access to cheap credit encouraged property bubbles and banks making unwise loans.
And as a result, a lot of star pupils for the Washington consensus,
countries that implemented them pretty seriously, countries like Thailand or Argentina,
experienced truly brutal financial crises.
Furthermore, this model did not seem to work terribly well for the United States in the first decade of the 21st century,
and emphasis on tax cuts without a similar cut in government spending led to skyrocketing deficits.
Lacks regulation permitted the inflation of a property bubble that eventually triggered the 2008 financial crisis,
which we'll talk about a little bit later.
In the wake of the 2008 crisis, policy analysts and developing countries began to cast about for an alternative pathway to prosperity,
and this brings us to the second model, the Beijing Consensus.
Alright, let's offer a brief history of this.
Until the late 1970s, China's economy was truly a basket case,
paralyzed by the economic disaster of the Great Leap Forward and the political disaster of the Cultural Revolution.
Once Deng Chaoping came to power, he began to implement reforms that permitted market incentives to work,
first in agriculture and then industry.
This included cautiously opening the Chinese economy up to foreign trade and investment,
which led to accelerated growth in China in the 1980s.
Over the last 25 years, however, a number of events affected the Chinese leadership's attitude about the road to prosperity,
and it altered their policies a little bit.
The first crucial thing was the collapse of the Soviet bloc.
The Chinese leadership looked at Mikhail Gorbachev's efforts at Perestroika and concluded that he got it backwards.
Gorbachev tried to reform the political system first as a way of opening up space to reform the economic system.
The Chinese decided that the reverse was the better path to prosperity,
reform the economy to spur economic growth,
and then maybe, sometime down the road, political reform could begin.
The 1989 Tiananmen uprisings decided this point definitively.
Economic reforms would come first, political reforms maybe in the future.
Another event that affected China's approach to economic growth was the 1997 Asian financial crisis.
Now China was largely spared the turmoil created by the crisis,
but the Chinese leadership internalized the lessons they learned from witnessing how it played out,
and the most important lesson they learned was never to be in a position that requires going to the International Monetary Fund for help.
One of the reasons that Chinese began to build up such large reserves of U.S. dollars at the start of the new millennium
was that they were basically self-insuring against a crisis.
Another lesson that the Chinese learned was to be extremely wary about liberalizing its own financial sector.
What got the rest of the Pacific Rim into trouble was that capital could flow freely, leading to large foreign exchange debts.
The Chinese banking system, on the other hand, stayed state controlled.
China's currency remained in convertible,
which means that it is very difficult to legally exchange large amounts of the renminbi into other currencies.
This repressed China's financial sector, but also helped to shield it from global financial instability.
And finally, Chinese economic policy was profoundly affected by rising energy and commodity prices.
As China's economy grew, its appetite for raw materials and energy also grew.
Rising commodity prices over the decade of the 2000s, however,
provoked fears in Beijing that the Chinese economy was too dependent on suppliers that came via Western multinational corporations.
This led to a belief that only direct control over these raw materials would ensure a steady flow of energy and other precious commodities.
China's advantage as a developing country and as an authoritarian state
is that its firms could do business with resource-rich countries disdained by the West for human rights reasons.
Countries like Sudan, Zimbabwe, or Iran, for example.
From this historical context, the Beijing consensus seemed to emerge in China.
So now let's turn to the question, what exactly is the Beijing consensus?
Now here, let me offer a caveat.
It's worth noting that the person who coined the term Beijing consensus isn't Chinese.
His name is Joshua Cooper Ramo, and he's from the United States.
This makes describing the Beijing consensus a little trickier,
because the Chinese themselves haven't defined it nearly as clearly as John Williamson did for the Washington consensus.
Indeed, a Chinese scholar once joked to me that the one thing that the Washington consensus and the Beijing consensus have in common
is that they were both invented in Washington.
That said, China's developmental model seems to be based on a few principles derived from its recent history.
So let's talk about its key characteristics.
The first is state ownership of the commanding heights, but only the commanding heights of the economy.
So the state controls the financial sector through multiple levers.
The central bank, for example, in contrast to most advanced industrialized states, is not independent from political authorities.
You also see a lot of state-run development banks that can offer cheap financing to prefer development projects,
such as, let's say, infrastructure investments in roads, airports, and high-speed rail.
To manage rising levels of foreign exchange, sovereign wealth funds, government-run accounts that invest foreign exchange overseas,
are created to generate higher earnings and invest those resources strategically.
Furthermore, with access to cheap financing, national champions, these are large companies, either private or public,
that a country will often think of as the firm or particular sector that will be able to compete globally.
They can be created in both heavy industry and high-tech sectors.
Now, in addition to state control over the financial sector, another key feature of the Beijing consensus involves strategic investments abroad,
not just through sovereign wealth funds.
National oil companies are allowed to go to places under sanctioned by Western countries, like Iran, Sudan, and Myanmar.
A third feature of the Beijing consensus is its emphasis on technology transfer from inward foreign direct investment.
Now, as I said in a previous lecture, China's market is large enough so that foreign firms will do just about anything to establish a market presence.
This lets Beijing impose its own terms. It gives its leverage to guarantee technology transfer from multinational corporations.
As a side note, there's also lax intellectual property rights enforcement, which accelerates this trend.
China, as a net importer of intellectual property, benefits from the diffusion of pirated software and generic drugs,
because lax IPR enforcement makes these goods cheaper.
Finally, the Beijing consensus is characterized by the authoritarian control of the reins of political power, despite modest steps towards reform at the local level.
Now, it should be noted that although this model is called the Beijing consensus, other countries have undoubtedly pursued elements of this approach.
So, for example, we've certainly seen resource nationalism in places like Russia, Venezuela, Saudi Arabia, and other energy exporters.
Almost all of these exporters rely on state-owned national oil companies to manage production and extraction of these resources.
Sovereign wealth funds, as I've talked about before, have emerged across the Pacific Rim and in energy exporting countries.
And certainly authoritarian control has been embraced by a lot of countries with non-democratic leaderships.
So what are the strengths of the Beijing consensus?
Well, in China the past few decades look pretty impressive indeed.
China has experienced an average economic growth rate of approximately 10% for the last three decades.
This is simply unprecedented in world economic history.
In doing so, China has integrated itself into the global supply chain.
Remember the story of the iPhone from a previous lecture?
There's a lot of manufactured goods for which the final place of assembly is, in fact, China.
Lots of intermediate goods are produced elsewhere in the Pacific Rim and then shipped to China for final assembly and then exported to both Europe and the United States.
China is now the largest trading partner for a host of Pacific Rim countries.
Other evidence of the Beijing consensus seems to be working?
Aggressive investments into high-risk areas of the globe.
Chinese oil and raw material firms have developed contracts with a lot of countries that are under sanctioned by the West.
Because Western multinational corporations have been reluctant to invest in those countries due to the sanctions concerns,
China has been able to swoop in and take advantage of the lack of competition to get good access to raw materials.
Another data point presumably in favor of the Beijing consensus was China's robust response to the 2008 financial crisis.
Beijing quickly announced a $580 billion stimulus program,
which led to major amounts of infrastructure spending for high-speed rail, new airports, and building construction.
China laid an estimated 10,000 kilometers of high-speed railroad track between 2008 and 2012,
and China pushed through even more spending through its state-owned banks.
In 2009, Chinese banks extended loans of $12 trillion RMB, a 40% increase from 2008 prior to the financial crisis.
China also used its dollar reserves to loan money to a host of countries in Central Asia and Africa to promote greater trade.
The contrast between China's swift response to the crisis and the sluggish response by the United States did seem to be telling.
Now let's talk about the weaknesses of the Beijing consensus.
First of all, it's not entirely clear how much the Beijing consensus itself is responsible for China's spectacular growth.
There's a tendency to conflate the last few decades as some kind of uninterrupted growth pattern.
But a lot of economists argue that the key part was the first decade of liberalization.
During that first period, there was broad-based growth at the national and household level and in the rural and urban sectors.
But the parts of the Beijing consensus that analysts focus on now really took place in the more status period following the Tiananmen Square Massacre.
Host 1989, household income growth has declined from 11.1% in the 1980s to 5.4% since.
Rural areas that thrived in the 1980s experienced a marked slowdown in the 1990s.
It's not clear just how robust Chinese growth really is.
Now to be sure, one can easily witness the explosive growth of Chinese cities.
I've certainly experienced this personally when I visited Beijing or Shanghai.
But that said, Chinese statistics are very suspect.
See, regional authorities in China have an incentive to cook the books in terms of output numbers in order to advance their own political careers.
And sometimes the growth numbers don't match up with electricity figures.
You see, as a general rule, one would expect an increase in an economic output to be matched by a concomitant increase in electrical output.
Political scientist Jeremy Wallace found an interesting pattern, however.
During times of leadership turnover in China, regions often reported higher output figures without higher electrical consumption.
So to be clear, a lot of the Chinese growth is clearly real, but it might not be exactly as rapid as has been commonly stated in official figures.
Also, China's model is tailor-made for corruption.
Because the state controls access to credit, the businesses that have connections to the state will prosper.
In China, these are often known as the princelings.
These are the children of high-ranking Communist Party officials, and they have been caught in various corruption scandals.
For example, in 2012, Bo Xilai, the Communist Party boss of Chongqing, was stripped of his official posts because of corruption allegations.
The son of one of the longest-serving Chinese Communist Party officials, Bo was accused of using Chongqing police to arrest and torture private real estate developers
and trying to coerce them into selling their property holdings to Bo and his cronies at cut-rate prices.
China's lax regulation has also helped to create multiple disasters.
The most obvious is environmental damage.
The air quality in Beijing is simply atrocious because of smog.
If anyone ever goes there, you'll notice that about half the people walking around are wearing those little masks in order to avoid emphysema.
Some estimates place the environmental damage from air pollution, water pollution, and desertification in China at roughly 10% of its GDP.
Another problem with the Beijing consensus are the problems of the risk to health and safety.
For example, China's high-speed rail system has suffered from malfunctions and crashes due to rushed production, design flaws, and inadequate regulation.
A rash of health scandals involving Chinese pharmaceuticals being exported to the United States caused the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to clamp down on those drug imports.
The Beijing consensus might also be contributing to a financial bubble.
You see, a lot of China's loans were made with inflated property being used as collateral for those loans.
So if those prices of those real estate starts to fall, China's financial sector will be in very deep trouble.
Furthermore, a lot of this physical investment has been problematic.
There now exist things called ghost cities in China in which housing and infrastructure have been built, but no one wants to live in these places.
The city of Chenggong, for example, has more than 100,000 new but unoccupied apartments.
According to some estimates, the non-performing loans in Chinese banks are a ticking time bomb for the entire financial sector.
Finally, China's growth will have to slow down as it hits middle-income status.
This is just a law of economic gravity.
And another issue it's going to deal with is geopolitical blowback.
There's already anger in African countries over some of the investments made by Chinese state-owned companies.
Myanmar started opening up to the West in 2011 due to growing frustration at how Chinese foreign direct investment was practicing in Myanmar's area.
China might still be authoritarian, but it hasn't solved the issue of how to contain political dissent.
Rising anger at provincial elites for land seizures to accelerate development, for example.
This was crystallized by an outright revolt in the village of Wukong in December 2011.
Local villagers had been protesting what they saw as a crooked land deal brokered by local officials.
This led to the arrest and then the death while in custody of one of those village representatives.
The subsequent riots and protests so embarrassed the party that the provincial party leaders were all kicked out.
Wukong is simply the tip of the spear.
Strikes, protests and other signs of social discontent that have been on the rise.
China's netizens, people on the internet, are another source potentially of political pressure in the future.
So in conclusion, there is no consensus about either the Washington consensus or the Beijing consensus.
And to be fair, both countries know this.
The U.S. is now soft peddled as advocacy of its own model, and China has traditionally been pretty reticent about telling other countries how to grow.
Going forward, leaders will likely pick and choose among these different approaches to promoting prosperity to set their own political ends, and as circumstances change.
