The Moai, or statues that you see on Easter Island, are one of the biggest wonders on
the planet.
The statues themselves are massive, majestic constructions, surrounded by what appears
to be a completely barren wasteland.
They're not just a wonder, however.
They're also something of a mystery.
You see, when European explorers first encountered the residents at Easter Island, they couldn't
believe that the indigenous people were capable of erecting such awesome sculptures.
The locals only had, at that point, primitive canoes and seemed technologically incapable
of completing those kinds of tasks.
Now archaeological and anthropological research has confirmed that the indigenous people were
indeed quite capable of building the Moai.
What changed in the interim was less the technological abilities, but the environment
of Easter Island.
You see, a millennium earlier, Easter Island had been an island of subtropical force.
Over time, however, the residents, both in building those statues and in consuming more
resources generally, required more and more raw materials to fuel their endeavors.
You see, they eventually deforested the entire island, wiping out 21 different species of
tree and 24 different species of birds and animals that had relied on those trees.
After the deforestation, things got even worse.
In destroying the trees, the Easter Islanders became incapable of building ships that could
sail far from shore.
That drastically limited their ability to catch most fish, another key protein source.
The ensuring food scarcity led to mass starvation and worse.
Civil war broke out among the population and military leaders overthrew traditional chiefs.
By the time European explorers reached Easter Island in 1722, there were only 2,000 to 3,000
residents left.
Archaeologists estimate that the island supported 15,000 people at the peak of its civilization.
By the 19th century, the locals in their fighting engaged in Hurimua, or statue toppling, to
settle feuds.
Easter Island was only one example of a prosperous civilization that either devolved into poverty
or simply disappeared altogether.
There have been others, the Mayans in Central America who disappeared long before European
settlers came, the Anasazi in the American Southwest, and the North settlers in Greenland.
All of these cultures became unsustainable through a combination of environmental triggers
and human responses to those triggers.
This of course leads to the obvious question.
Can this happen on a planetary scale?
Or another way of thinking about this is, can short term prosperity lead to long term
environmental poverty?
See one of the themes that we've touched on in these lectures is about the distribution
of prosperity.
Now we ordinarily think about the distribution of wealth or resources among peoples who are
contemporaries.
In other words, they're living their lives at the same time.
There is another kind of distribution we need to think about however, between the present
and the future.
You see economics is all about the allocation of resources under a condition of scarcity.
If we try to maximize prosperity for people in the here and now however, are we sacrificing
prosperity in the future?
The parables of Easter Island and these other places that I talked about suggest that unless
prosperity is environmentally sustainable, then we are indeed making such sacrifices.
So why are there environmental challenges to global prosperity and how serious are they?
Environmental damage is a classic example of a negative externality.
Now externalities occur in market transactions where there are benefits or cost economic
activity that do not affect either the buyer or the seller.
Or to be more precise to use more economic language, externalities are the effects on
third parties from market transactions.
Now externalities can be positive or negative.
A positive environmental externality, for example, is when a neighbor plants a flower
garden adjacent to your property.
The market transaction in that instance is between the neighbor and the seller of the
flower bulbs in the fertilizer.
But you probably derive a positive benefit from seeing those flowers every day, even
though you didn't pay anything for them.
No one complains about positive externalities.
Negative externalities, on the other hand, are a real problem.
This frequently comes up when dealing with environmental effects.
For example, if a factory is producing goods but it's dumping its waste into a river,
a negative externality is created.
Both the consumers of those goods and the factory producers don't incur the cost of
the polluted water, neither do the factory owners.
The residents living downstream of that factory, however, will bear those costs.
For economists, externalities are a problem because the market price of the good in question
does not reflect all of the costs and benefits generated by producing that good.
The economic solution, therefore, is to ensure that the market price reflects all of the
externalities created by the manufacturer of that good.
In theory, economists say that externalities can be corrected through a number of different
ways.
The Nobel Prize-winning economist Ronald Koos argued that the assignment and enforcement
of property rights would solve the externality problem.
To see why, let's go back to the example of the factory polluting in the river.
Now, Koos argued that regardless of who got the property rights to that river, the problem
would be solved so long as those property rights were assigned to either the consumers
or to either the residents downstream or the factory owner.
If the property rights to the river were awarded to the downstream residents, then the factory
would have to pay them for the right to dump effluence into the river.
Those residents could either refuse to sell the right or assign a price such that the
money they collected for selling that right was greater than the loss in utility from
the pollution itself.
In assigning the property right, the market ensures that the costs of the environmental
externalities are reflected in the factory's production.
Now note, by the way, that this mechanism also works even if the property rights are
initially assigned to the factory owners.
In that instance, the residents could offer to pay the factory not to pollute.
It's then up to the factory to assign the proper market price for that right.
The key is that if property rights are well-defined and well-enforced, then market forces can
correct for externalities.
With a lot of environmental externalities, however, property rights are not or cannot
be well-defined.
So let's consider the example of immunization against disease.
When a person gets immunized, they benefit from it, but there is also a powerful positive
externality created for others.
If you're inoculated, then it means you're not going to pass on that disease to others.
So if I'm your neighbor, I would benefit greatly from you getting immunized.
The problem is that it's next to impossible to assign property rights to that kind of positive
externality.
Morally, it seems dubious for me to pay you to get an inoculation, because that would
imply that you have a right to infect me.
And if the property right not to get infected is mine, then that would imply that I could
compel you into getting an inoculation.
The whole assignment of property rights, in this case, seems ethically offensive.
The other way that externalities can be incorporated into market prices is through taxes and subsidies.
Goods and services that have clear negative externalities can be taxed so that their price
reflects all the costs of production.
So for example, one of the reasons that cigarettes have such high excise taxes is that these
goods are not just bad for the person who smokes, but they're bad for anyone who has
to inhale the secondary smoke, and that should get reflected in the price of the cigarettes.
Goods and services that have clear positive externalities can be subsidized so that their
price reflects all the costs of production and consumption.
We talked a lot about the positive externalities generated by education.
Not surprisingly, in the United States, there are a lot of tax deductions for paying for
education.
That's a subsidy.
For both solutions to externalities, however, there's a political problem, the distribution
of costs.
You see, the moment an externality is detected and either property rights are assigned or
taxes are imposed, some actors will face a greater burden of adjustment relative to
the status quo.
If property rights are assigned, then there's a significant distributional impact.
To go back to our example of the factory again, let's assume that the status quo is that
the factory is polluting and the residents are unhappy about it.
We know that either the factory or the residents will have to pay something, depending on who
is awarded the initial property rights.
While the final outcome does price in the cost of the pollution, the distribution of
costs and benefits depends fundamentally on who gets that initial property right.
If it's assigned to the factory, they'll be made better off.
To sign to the residents, then they'll be made better off.
There is no right or wrong answer on who gets that property right.
It's a distributional zero-sum situation.
In the case of taxes and subsidies, those who have to pay the tax will lobby the government
to minimize its effects.
Those seeking subsidies will similarly lobby to maximize the value of those subsidies.
So there are ways to deal with negative environmental externalities, but they are not perfect and
they are difficult to implement, particularly at the global level, where property rights
are not well-defined.
Now there are many environmental externalities that could have negative effects on prosperity.
One example would be overfishing.
The UN's Food and Agricultural Organization estimated that in 2008 more than a quarter
of all fisheries were being over-exploited, and another half of all fisheries were in
danger of being over-exploited.
In other words, too many large fish were being taken from the oceans too quickly, making
it next to impossible for the remaining fish to replenish their populations.
Now it's actually possible that those FAO estimates were actually too optimistic.
Chris Christopher Costello and Steve Gaines at the University of California, Santa Barbara
looked at a wider range of fisheries and found even higher rates of depletion in lesser
well-known fisheries.
The cost of overfishing to humans is actually pretty great because fish and other forms
of sea life are the principal means of protein for poor people in the developing world.
The World Bank estimates that the cost of overfishing between 1974 and 2008 amounted
to $2.2 trillion, and the ongoing damage will be more than $50 billion a year.
Overfishing is just one example of larger threats to biodiversity.
Biodiversity refers to the variation in animal and plant life in a particular ecosystem.
Economic development does threaten an entire species, including reducing biodiversity.
Now species go extinct naturally, but according to the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, man
accelerates the process of species extinction a thousandfold.
Between 1900 and 2000, for example, approximately half of the planet's wetlands were destroyed.
If current trends continue, then more than 10% of all natural wildlife areas would disappear
in the next 50 years, and more than 60% of all coral reefs, a source of a lot of different
kinds of life, would be destroyed.
Furthermore, this causes people to use remaining areas more intensively, which further reduces
biodiversity.
In 2007, the United Nations Environmental Program and the G8 Nations commissioned a project
called the Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity, headed by a former Deutsche Bank investment
banker.
To estimate the economic costs of the loss come from reduced biodiversity.
The net present value of continuing degradation of biodiversity runs into the trillions of
dollars.
The European Commission estimated that the economic costs of a loss of biodiversity on
land-based ecosystems alone would equal 7% of global economic output by the year 2050.
Truthfully, however, the biggest and most problematic environmental challenge to global
prosperity comes from climate change, so we'll focus on that one for the rest of this session.
Alright, let's start by talking about the science of climate change.
Let's be clear, greenhouse gases are necessary for life on Earth.
They help to keep heat from escaping the atmosphere and warm the planet enough to make it livable.
The build-up of too many greenhouse gases in the atmosphere is problematic, however.
This causes too much heat to be trapped on the planet, causing temperatures to rise to
the point where it affects the ability to live in certain areas on the globe.
Now, greenhouse gases are created by nature.
Water vapor, for example, is a greenhouse gas, but they're also man-made.
Carbon dioxide, for example, is by far the largest man-made contribution to greenhouse
gases.
Another example of a greenhouse gas is methane.
Now, methane is actually eight times more powerful per particle in its effect on global
warming, although there is far less methane in the atmosphere.
Now, there are other gases out there that are man-made, such as nitrous oxide and fluorinated
gases that also contribute to global warming.
Fortunately, they're less and less of an issue.
Now, greenhouse gases have a feedback effect.
The build-up of these gases in the atmosphere helps heat the Earth more.
That in turn creates more water vapor, which is another greenhouse gas.
That in turn heats the Earth up even more and so forth.
Now, political controversies about climate change aside.
Every serious study of this problem reaches the same three conclusions.
The first is that there has been a global warming of temperatures on the Earth for the
past 150 years, and that that warming has been particularly concentrated over the past
half century.
The second conclusion is that this warming is mostly anthropogenic, in other words, mostly
man-made.
And the third assumption is that if global warming continues unabated, the effects on
our way of life will be very, very bad.
The data for both temperature and greenhouse gas emissions are pretty incontrovertible.
Let's start with temperature.
In 2007, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, or IPCC, noted that the previous decade
had contained nine of the warmest years since surface temperatures had been recorded.
The years since 2007 have not gotten any cooler.
This reflects a more general trend in warming.
The IPCC estimated that average surface temperatures had increased by a one-degree increase in
Fahrenheit over the previous century.
The effects of global warming on sea levels and Arctic ice have also been significant.
Satellite data taken since 1978 shows that the Arctic ice cap is shrinking at the rate
of approximately 2.7 percent per decade, and with an over 5 percent degree Fahrenheit
rise in the Arctic over the past decade alone, the rate of melting ice is accelerated.
The melting ice and hotter temperatures have contributed to rising ocean levels.
Again, according to the IPCC, since 1961, sea levels have been rising in an average of
1.8 millimeters a year, and the annual average rise has increased by more than 70 percent
since 1993.
Now you see Berkeley physics professor Richard Mueller was a long-standing skeptic of climate
change science and founded the Berkeley Earth Surface Temperature Project to more rigorously
test the IPCC's conclusions.
In 2012, he reported his findings and concluded that the IPCC had actually underestimated
the effects of climate change.
His findings stated that in the past 50 years alone, the Earth's temperature had risen by
one and a half degrees Fahrenheit.
Mueller himself concluded, and I quote, that essentially all of this increase results from
the human emission of greenhouse gases.
Indeed, no one denies that greenhouse gas emissions have increased dramatically since
the Industrial Revolution.
CO2 emissions, carbon dioxide emissions, have been up by over 35 percent from their pre-industrial
era.
Methane output increased by close to 150 percent.
There's an unfortunate connection between prosperity and climate change.
You remember that in previous lectures, we represented economic history using a hockey
stick graph, where the long shaft of the stick represents all of human history up to the
Industrial Revolution, and then the steep part of the stick represents since the Industrial
Revolution.
Disturbingly, both temperatures and greenhouse gas data display the exact same hockey stick
graph that overall prosperity does.
In terms of either temperatures or greenhouse gas emissions, the levels stay pretty flat
for a long time and then start to rise beginning around 1850.
According to the U.S. Energy Information Administration, the largest sources of greenhouse
gas emissions are the very things that contribute to modern affluence and prosperity.
So for example, power emission represents 20 percent of all emissions, industrial manufacturing
16 percent, transportation accounts for 14 percent of all greenhouse gas emissions, and
residential life, housing, accounts for 10 percent.
So basically, modern life is responsible for about 60 percent of greenhouse gas emissions.
And as the advanced developing states of Brazil, China, and India starts to reach middle income
consumption levels and do things like buying cars, the rate of greenhouse gas emissions
will rise even further.
What happens if climate change continues unabated?
If the status quo on environmental policy persists and economic growth continues as
expected, the IPCC predicts a global temperature increase of more than 5 degrees Fahrenheit.
The problem is that anything over 3 degrees will have serious ecological effects.
Now some of these effects are actually good.
A lot more land, for example, in both Canada and Russia will be arable, and a lot of the
Arctic region's vast treasures of raw materials could be accessed.
Unfortunately most of these effects are bad, however.
The accelerated melting of polar ice caps will trigger a rise in sea levels.
That leads to a host of bad things.
One thing would be the disappearance of island states like the Maldives.
Indeed, the Maldives political leadership is so concerned about this that they actually
held an underwater cabinet meeting a few years ago to demonstrate what the future held for
that country.
You'd also see a devastation of most coastal areas.
According to Columbia University's Center for International Earth Science Information
Network, more than 40% of the world population lives within 100 kilometers of a coastline,
so a rising coastline could represent a threat to all of those people.
You'd also see things like the mass desertification of arable land, which would decrease food
resources.
Other potential effects would include an increase in unpredictable weather and extreme weather
events.
And finally, both rising temperatures and the massive forced migration that could come
from environmental and ecological changes will likely increase the possible spread of
infectious diseases and allow some diseases to thrive in areas where they couldn't have
thrived before.
So this seems like a pretty big deal.
Can global prosperity be environmentally sustainable?
Well, again, I'm a social scientist, so I'm going to give you a good news, bad news kind
of answer.
The good news is yes, prosperity can be environmentally sustainable.
There is increasing awareness that climate change is a serious policy issue and can only
be addressed at the global level.
A decade ago, the United States government was still disputing the science of man-made
climate change.
Now there is at least acknowledgment that there's a problem.
Earlier in this lecture, we talked about the options for dealing with economic externalities.
Among those options were taxes and subsidies, if this is a big if, but if the major economies
were able to agree on ways to tax greenhouse gas emissions and subsidize clean energy solutions
to a sufficient degree, that would moderate the rise in global warming and it would be
quite doable.
Duable does not mean cheap, however.
The Stern review, which was commissioned by the British government, estimated that the
cost of reducing the rise in global temperatures to an environmentally sustainable level would
be equivalent to 1% of global economic output, or about $1.5 trillion.
A few years later, however, Stern said the cost had doubled to 2% of global economic
output.
Now this is a substantial, but not unfeasible amount.
As technological innovation continues, the ability to develop alternative energies and
increase energy efficiency should increase as well, so that's the good news.
The bad news is that while solutions are possible, there is almost zero agreement about who will
bear the burden of payment.
Recall our discussion of the factory polluting the river and that even market-friendly solutions
to this problem have severe distributional effects.
When it comes to deciding who pays for fixing a negative externality, significant political
problems arise.
Now just think about how complicated the political problems are when you're talking about a
negative externality as vast as global warming.
And indeed, as evidence for this, the last few climate change summits have not gone well.
The most high-profile climate change summit in recent years was held in Copenhagen in
December 2009.
There was an interim agreement that was reached, but not by all of the parties, and it ended
with acrimonious finger pointing between the United States, the European Union, and China.
In fact, at present, the only binding international treaty on climate change is the Kyoto Protocol,
which mandated greenhouse gas emissions only from developed countries and yet hasn't been
ratified by the United States, Russia, or Canada.
Why is there no agreement?
Again, because the politics of climate change are nearly intractable.
The question is who will bear the burden of adjusting their economies to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions?
We know such steps are not inexpensive, so which countries should shoulder the burden?
Well, this depends on how you think about it.
If you use historical obligations, in other words, what's been done in the past and who's
to blame then, then it's an easy call.
The OECD economies are responsible for 75% of emitted greenhouse gases to date.
Countries like China and India point out, with some justification, that their ongoing
economic development should not be stymied because of past egregious behavior by the
West.
Now if one uses per capita greenhouse gas emissions, a similar picture emerges.
The developed world has far higher per capita emissions than the developing world.
Greenhouse gas emissions per person in the United States are 360% more than per capita
emissions in China, and 1,620% more than in India.
Among the world's major nations, the biggest per capita emitters of greenhouse gases are
the United States, Canada, and Australia.
However, there are two different metrics that suggest a different way of thinking.
If one looks at total national output of greenhouse gases, then the picture changes slightly.
China is now the world's largest and biggest greenhouse gas emitter.
And by 2030, China will be estimated to produce more than 80% more of greenhouse gas emissions
than the United States.
Similarly, India now has greater greenhouse gas emissions than Japan.
By 2030, its greenhouse gas emissions are expected to be double those of Japan.
The final metric, if one goes by greenhouse gas emissions per dollar of GDP, in other
words, how many pollutants are required to produce one dollar of value added in an economy,
a similar picture emerges.
The United States and Europe are the most efficient polluters by that metric, while China
and India use a lot more greenhouse gas per unit of output.
Although to be fair, one reason is that manufacturing might be more heavily concentrated in those
countries, and services which are thought to be less carbon-intensive are concentrated
in the developed world.
A final consideration is what a deadlocked outcome will look like from a bargaining perspective.
Which countries get hurt the most from unmitigated climate change?
Now here, most projections suggest that the developing world will bear a much greater
share of the adaptation costs than the developed world.
See, the majority of the approximately one billion citizens who live in low-level coastal
areas near an ocean, and in other words, that population that would be most threatened by
rising sea levels, are based in the developing world.
Also, recall from one of our previous lectures that the country's best equipped to cope with
natural disasters are the advanced industrialized democracies.
Logically, this means that the developing world faces far higher adaptation costs.
And this means that over time, it's the developing world that will feel greater pressure to reach
an agreement that improves upon the predicted status quo, and therefore they might have
to make more concessions than they want to right now.
In conclusion, the problem in dealing with climate change is that the costs of adjustment
are significant, and there is no agreement on the proper decision rule to distribute
the burden of adjustment.
There are valid decision rules that lead to widely disparate policy outcomes.
Author Jared Diamond has examined various societies that experienced environmental collapse.
The one constant he found across these societies was bad policy responses by the authorities.
And that is a distinct possibility with respect to climate change.
But my hunch is that as the effects of global warming become more evident, the advanced
developing world will have a greater incentive and a greater capacity to shoulder more of
the burden over time.
With clearer incentives and a bit of luck, the environmental challenge should be addressed
long before the Earth as a whole, faces the same fate as Easter Island.
