Hello and welcome to Imagine Belfast. I'm Alan Mabin and on this penultimate evening
of the 2023 Festival, it's our Festival of Ideas and Politics. What better way, what
better company could we have to spend it than with Noam Chomsky, renowned linguist, philosopher,
political activist and public intellectual and over the years a great friend to this
festival. Noam, you're very welcome back to Imagine Festival.
Thank you very much. Pleased to be with you.
I've been part of quite a few online conversations this week and one of the very common factors
is that there have been stacks of books behind the people. Now tonight you have plants rather
than books but in the past you might have had a good bookcase there. Do you fear that
in the world of screens and so on that words on paper are starting to become less common
by losing their value?
Certainly and there are good measures of it. So there have been studies when going on for
a long time. There have been studies of books that are assigned to young people in schools.
Turns out that even 20, 30 years ago there was a tendency to assign to the high school
students, 12th grade students that used books that used to be read in eighth grade. We get
students coming into the university who don't know how to write an essay. They've never
had that experience. Part of this is the effect of the so-called teaching to test movement
of the last 20 years, Bush, Obama and so on. Part of it is just the decline in reading
all together and it's getting worse. There was a study that just came out a couple days
ago of the, I think it's called Generation Z, the people who were born after 1997, high
school college students asking where do they get their so-called information? Almost none
look at the newspapers, almost none look at television. They didn't stop looking at Facebook
to old fashioned. They're getting their news from channels where kids are having fun dancing
around. Of course, that's having an effect. The social media have other effects. They're
tending to drive people into self-reinforcing bubbles. We're all subject to that. I am too.
When I pick up and start looking at things in the morning, I don't look at Breitbart.
I look at maybe Democracy Now or something like that and conversely, well, the media with all
their limitations have a certain amount of range of discussion and debate limited, but some not
the self-reinforcing bubbles and self-reinforcing is the crucial part. It means you don't get
anything but enhancing your own beliefs and prejudices. Reading is declining along with it.
When it comes to when you're working as an academic, there would be fewer of the journals
that are available on paper, more of them are online, fewer books available on paper. Are you
missing paper-based things? Do you soak in as much information when you're reading on a screen or
have you got used to it? Well, there are plenty of fine books available, but the question is,
do people access them? There's plenty of important information available on the screen. For example,
I can sit in the United States, I can read the foreign press. You learn a lot from it. How many
people do that? Virtually nobody. It's surprising if they even read the national press, let alone
the foreign press. You learn a lot. Recently, I learned about a pretty incredible scandal,
which is not reported here. This is called what aboutism? If you pardon it, I'll talk about the
real world. I'm not allowed to talk about that. Take the invasion of Iraq. There were enormous
atrocities. Some of the worst, most outlandish, outrageous atrocities were the destruction of
Fallujah. Recently, a couple months ago, the US Navy just commissioned its latest assault vessel.
It's called the USS Fallujah in commemoration of one of the most atrocious atrocities of the
worst crime of the 20th century. I didn't learn about it here. I learned about it in Al Jazeera,
where I could also read the reaction of the Iraqis to it, naturally outraged.
That information is available in principle, but you have to be motivated, stimulated,
educated enough to understand that you have to look at things that are available.
That's very rare, unfortunately. If the press and the media are still acting
as mediators between all that information out there and people who are kind of tuning into
either mass read or mass watch stuff, does the media and the press need to do more
to actually increase the range of stories that they tell, or is social media enough
that it's up to each of us to find out that information? Because not everybody is bothered
to wake up in the morning and even listen to the news. Never mind. Go and search it out.
Well, just talk about myself. The first thing I do in the morning when I get up is read the New
York Times and the Washington Post two national newspapers, two national newspapers. That's
important. There used to be lots of newspapers, so there were local high-quality newspapers.
I lived in Boston most of my life. Boston Globe was a pretty substantial paper, had some of the
best reporting, not only domestically, but also internationally, had the best coverage in the
country of the Central America Wars in the 1980s. Actually, the editor was personal friends. Some
of the reporters were gone. Now it's wire service and local news. Same with all over the country,
Detroit Free Press, San Francisco Chronicle, Los Angeles Times, Chicago Tribune,
the newspapers have radically constricted. What happened is that the business model
could not survive the internet. The business model for the media is basically advertising.
So the media are businesses that sell a product, you and me, to other businesses. It's their
central structure that collapsed with the shift of advertising to the internet. One major effect
is radical reduction of the available information in the press. It's had the same effect on the
major press as well. They've constricted. It takes me much less time to read the New York Times today
than it did 30 or 40 years ago because it's constrained, limited. Well, all these are serious
effects of basically the capitalist institutional structure, which imposes a certain constraint
on the nature of media. Could be changed by public media. Actually, they've declined too,
but it's not an issue in the United States because we don't have them. That's no BBC, no German
national television. The reason for that is a difference between the United States and other
state capitalist societies. The United States has a very powerful business class,
class conscience, constantly fighting a savage class war. This showed up with the media, showed
up with radio in the 1920s, early 30s. There were attempts to popular attempts, popular groups,
political groups, church groups, others to try to create national media, public media,
that would respond to interests of the general population was defeated by a corporate opinion
to turn it into private media. Same thing happened with television 20 years later.
A result in the United States is essentially no public media margin, even that is corporate funding.
That's lost. You have to find other means to try to get out of the institutional factors
based on particular forms of savage capitalism, state capitalism that are constraining the
means of information available. Now, they are there. You can go to the internet and find out
quite a lot. I just think that that's a special for a marginal part of the population, even among
the educated classes, very few do it. While we're talking about the media, can we talk about Fox News?
Can we talk about Dominion voting systems with their defamation case? There nearly seems to be
more written about Rupert Murdoch who's going to get married again than there is written about the
actual case and the arguments that are going on in court. Should we be surprised that actually
that certainly over on this side of the Atlantic, it's getting reported but just a little.
It's not a big story, whereas it could have big implications for Fox News. It could have big
implications for your next presidential election. I doubt that it'll have much one effect. First
of all, Fox News is not a news channel. It's an echo chamber for the far right.
You're familiar with that in England. The Murdoch system is not interested in providing
news to people. It's providing echo chambers for far right propaganda. Fox News is kind of
interesting. I look at it sometimes just to see how wild and extremely far right can be. It's kind
of amusing. Sometimes I actually tell you the truth. They're a little more open in some respects
than the major media. For example, personal experience. I've had interviews and discussion
on Fox News, not in the major media. That would be very, very rare. I suspect that this scandal,
the court case, will blow over somehow and they'll have the same role in the coming period of
political confrontations. Do you still value, even if you don't see it as a news channel,
do you still value it as part of the plurality of outlets telling the same stories in different
ways? Is it still valuable to have it there? Well, frankly, I don't see much value in having a
pure propaganda channel. You live in Russia. Yes, that's what you have, but I don't think we need it.
What we need is to strengthen, expand the actual media system. So, for example,
there were serious and other ways of public support. There aren't technical means to do that.
There are people actually working on it, like Robert Bobman Chesney,
who is a scholar at the University of Illinois. I'm just trying to reconstruct
significant local media system, also the level of national media. But the main point is, the main
goal is educating people to recognize that there are things you have to understand about the world,
and you're not going to find them from a limited, even a limited media system, certainly not from
social media. Now, this goes back to questions about what's happening to the whole social order.
Why aren't people getting together to look at these things? They used to. One reason is there
used to be something called unions, labor unions. Labor unions were not just ways of raising wages.
They were cultural educational institutions. Adult education was a core part of the union
programs. Unions are places where people could get together, discuss, study, cultural events,
Reagan and Thatcher or their advisors were very sensible when they launched the
neoliberal assault against the population. First move, destroy the unions, the one way that people
have to have to protect and defend themselves. That was very effective. New labor Clinton,
they gave their own support to it. Now it's pretty much
on the United States almost gone. Another modes of intercommunication, when people you get atomization,
isolation, easy prey to demagogues of the Trump variety, to fake news organizations like the
Murdoch media. People that don't have the means of self-defense that they had when they were
organized, could interact with one another, mutual support, solidarity, common goals and so on.
It's very interesting to see how powerful the efforts are to destroy this.
Just saw a remarkable case in England with the Corbyn phenomenon. Corbyn broke with this
long-term policy pursued by the Tory government and the Blair right new labor. What he did was
a real crime. He tried to create a labor party that would be a participatory party
and would respond to the needs and concerns of working people and the poor and it was very
successful. 2017, they were under his influence when the biggest victory they had, as far back as
you can imagine, the whole establishment came down on him like a ton of bricks from the right wing
over to the Guardian and have this. We cannot have an authentic political party
that will break with domination by a small elite committed to the rich and powerful.
You know what happened? It was charges of total fakery about anti-Semitism. It was all exposed.
You could read the extensive exposure and held to zero again, but even the Labor Party's own
commission looking into it exposed it as a fraud. No effect. Now, this is too important. We cannot
allow a development like that. That might lead to a functioning democratic society.
We don't want that. This is a society which must be in the hands of the rich and the powerful.
We are fighting a constant class war, no break from that. It's very striking. Something similar
happened in the United States, less extreme, with the Democratic party, the Clintonite party
moving along with the media to try to crush the Sanders phenomenon. It wasn't as extreme as in England,
but it had the effect of pretty much marginalizing the popular forces.
I suspect there are those who are members of the Labor Party in the UK who would dispute
your conclusion, but it does point to a difficulty when a party wants to change quickly,
when it wants to either go back to old values or new values. That seems a very difficult thing
for them to achieve. Is that going to be difficult for the Republican party to achieve if it wants
not to have Trump or if the Democrats want to reinvent? They don't seem terribly sure what
their ideology is at the moment. They're searching in terms of their policies. They're not selling
them well. I don't think that's the issue. It's very easy for a Republican to change. Let's take
the Republican Party in the United States. 2008, the Republican candidate for president was John
McCain. The most important issue in human affairs is the environmental crisis, which is going to
destroy organized human life on earth. That's the most important issue in history.
Well, 2008, the Republican Party did begin to move towards a small, limited climate program.
Not much, but something. McCain had a climate most part of the platform,
congressional Republicans were looking into things. The Koch brothers energy conglomerate,
huge conglomerate, which had been working for years to try to ensure that there was no interference
with their campaign to destroy organized human life on earth. When they, as soon as the Republican
Party began to shift immediately, they launched an enormous juggernaut intimidation, bribery,
threats, massive lobbying, asterisks, or asterisk organizations. The Republican Party turned on
a dime. They all turned total denialism. It's very easy to change a party's direction if you have
massive capital working for savage class war, plenty of other cases. So the issue is not
difficulty of changing. The problem was the kind of change that Corbyn was trying to bring about,
a change to a labor party that would be a participatory party and concerned with the needs
of its constituents. And even worse than that, what was their success? Couldn't be tolerated.
Yes, there are people in Cure Starmer's party who will object to what I'm saying, but I'm afraid
it's the truth. When it comes to the next presidential election on your side of the Atlantic,
can America cope with another four years of Trump or another four years of Biden?
Well, the Republican Party really shouldn't be called a party anymore. I'd prefer the terms used by
the political analysts of the conservative American Enterprise Institute who refer to it as a radical
insurgency that has abandoned parliamentary politics. That's pretty accurate. If you look at
international rankings of attitudes and so on, the Republican Party, if you want to call it that,
ranks alongside the far-right parties in Europe with neo-fascist origins. And they've totally
abandoned parliamentary politics. All you have to do is look at their programs. It's not even a joke.
Program is block anything, anything that might harm profit and power of the very rich in the
corporate sector. But right at the moment, sometimes it's almost comical, right at the moment,
now that they've taken over the House, lead program, prevent the internal revenues
service from checking tax cheats. That's their main program. Who are the tax cheats? Working people
who file their income tax, rich and powerful, who have a battery of corporate lawyers who figure
out a way not to pay taxes. The top program prevent the internet internally IRS from investigating
them. Take a look at Trump's legislative programs. One achievement, a massive tax cut for the very
rich in the corporate sector, stabbing everyone else in the back. Lead, a top issue for the
Republican Party is don't touch the tax cut. The Biden administration came in with a
moderately decent, not enough, but some kind of climate program. Actually,
pretty significant advance over earlier ones, which is not saying much. Cut back point by point,
step by step, by 100% Republican opposition. Not a single Republican would break ranks to say,
let's do something about a climate problem which they know perfectly well has come and destroyed
human civilization. Well, that's not a political party.
You mentioned earlier in terms of social media and the bubbles and that we naturally end up in
hearing more of what we already believe. Why can that not be weaponized by those who want change?
Because you could argue either with unions and that there are ways of people online
finding kindred spirits, lobbying, kind of building up power, or you could say in terms of
challenging political parties around climate change. Why are those tools that are free and
available not being weaponized by those who want to actually challenge those with power,
those with corporate interests? Why is there not a grassroots revolution? What stops that?
Well, it's not so easy to form a grassroots movement. You're against concentrated
state and private power. When you try to do it, take a look at what happened to Corbyn.
Take a look at what happened to the Republican Party when it started to veer slightly towards
environment. Take a look at what's happened to the labor movement.
Not for, in fact, you can ask yourself another question. Take a look at what happened. Take
the United States, which is the leading in the lead in the neoliberal assault against the world,
against the population. Well, there's measures of what's happened. The Miranda Corporation,
very respectable quasi-governmental research corporation, did a study of the
general economic effects of the neoliberal period. Over 40 years, they found,
they studied what they called a lightly transfer of wealth, highway robbery to be more exact,
transfer of wealth from the working class and the middle class, lower 90% of the population
transferred to the top 1%, $50 trillion in 40 years. That's very effective class war.
Well, you have concentrated economic power on one side, largely controlling the state. You have
general population on the other side when there are efforts to make some moves. Concentrated power
comes down on them very hard for the unions, Corbyn efforts, Sanders efforts, Lyman.
You can fight against it. Over the centuries, there's been many victories. We don't have slavery.
We don't have a few laws. There are victories, but they're hard to win. You have to recall,
remember that those with, go back to Adam Smith at the beginning of the early days of the
capitalist industrial revolution. I was an astute observer. He pointed out that in all ages,
the masters of mankind pursue their vile maxim, all for ourselves, nothing for anyone else.
Well, that was in the early stages. Now it's much more organized and controlled and so on,
but the vile maxim still prevails, and you can see its consequences. You can fight against it.
There have been victories, lots of victories even in recent years, but it's a struggle,
and you're not going to win unless you recognize what the nature of the struggle is.
Another threat might be cyber war. We've mentioned a few threats in the last few minutes.
One of the speakers at the festival yesterday talked about the possibility that China might
try and invade Taiwan. He suggested that militarily that could probably be defended,
but the consequence would be that China might unleash a cyber war on the west
that we couldn't defend against. Does that technological war worry you? Is that on your list
of things that are challenging humanity along with nuclear power and climate change and ordinary
war and so on? Well, we have to bear in mind that the world's major propaganda system in the United
States, which also has an enormous effect on Britain, largely the satellite of the United
States by now, one of its main themes is you have to hate China, critical, yellow peril,
so we have to be very worried about China invading Taiwan. Is there any sign of that?
There's some good point to build up of military in the area, exercises that are going very close
to airspace. Military exercises largely in response to US provocation. So when there is
a policy called the One China Policy, it's been in place for 50 years, was settled in the 1970s.
The policy is US and China agree that Taiwan is part of China and both agree to what was called
strategic ambiguity. We don't say it in words, but we agree that we will do nothing to disrupt
this program by threats to challenging. Who's been challenging it? China's not a saintly power,
there's plenty you can preserve. But in reality, in this case, it's the US that's been provoking it,
partly just militarily. The official US policy is quoting it to encircle China
with a ring of sentinel states with advanced weapons, advanced precision weapons aimed at China,
South Korea, Taiwan, Japan, Guam, Australia, all surrounding China to encircle and constrain it.
In the case of Taiwan, the US has been regularly breaking the strategic ambiguity.
So when House Speaker Nancy Pelosi went to Taiwan, that was saying we're breaking the
arrangements. China did respond, as you described, with naval maneuvers, to indicate that it can,
if it wants, blockade Taiwan. This has continued. Senate Foreign Relations Committee passed the
Taiwan Policy Act, which says that Taiwan has to be treated as a normal non-nado ally with normal
diplomatic relations, weapon systems, interoperability of weapons, and so on. China reacts by carrying
out symbolic actions in the region around China. Those are not the only naval actions.
There are others that you didn't mention, like RIMPAC, enormous naval operations run by the
United States and its allies threatening China. But we don't talk about that. Since we own and
run the world, what we do is fine. We have to worry about it. We have to concentrate on people
who are violating the rules we establish. Right now, the United States has openly, publicly
declared an economic war with China to try to prevent it from developing the advanced technologies
that we need for the modern age. It's not a secret. You read about it in the London Financial Times,
which describes it correctly as a war against China. China is reacting now by things like
the initiatives to bring Saudi Arabia and Iran together to overcome that conflict and to throw
wrench in U.S. policy of dominating the Middle East through an alliance of reactionary states
called the Abraham Accord, including Saudi Arabia as a central, not a literal, but
partner, aimed at U.S. enemy Iran. China is disrupting that to blow to U.S. and Israel.
So, yes, these things are happening in the world. But if we're within inside the U.S.
propaganda bubble, as Britain mostly is, then, of course, we have to hate China and talk about
all the terrible things that China might be doing, but not talk about what we're doing,
because that's quite proper and appropriate since we own the world.
You have spoken out, if we kind of move to Russia and Ukraine, you have spoken out
and cautioned against how people view NATO. You have, I think, kind of reminded people
that they need to look at NATO without kind of, without looking through rose-tinted glasses.
So they need to kind of be careful how they view Russia, but also careful how they view NATO.
And I think you've talked about the fact that kind of negotiation should be happening, that
the U.S. should be promoting peace negotiations and so on. Do you see any evidence of that?
And do you think a modern war could be ended through negotiation, rather than having one
winner and one loser? Right now, the positions of the opposing parties
are, look, irreconcilable on paper, but that's where diplomacy and negotiations enter.
You see if you can make moves towards overcoming it, and there are proposals.
An article in the current issue of the Monte Diplomatique by two Finnish diplomats talks about
means you could use. Well, right now, the United States has an official position,
and Britain, as a loyal satellite of the United States, simply repeats the position.
The position is, we must continue the war in order to severely weaken Russia.
That's the official U.S. position. Basically, the U.S. imposed it on NATO. NATO, incidentally,
is now a Pacific power. Of course, the United States, at the latest summit meeting,
determined that NATO must support the United States' confrontation with China and the Pacific.
But the U.S. position is perfectly explicit. No diplomacy until, because we must severely
weaken Russia. Now, if you look at it, the United States is getting a bargain.
Not a big secret. It's discussed in Chatham House by U.S. commentators. For a small portion
of the U.S. colossal military budget, it's severely degrading the military forces of its own
only military adversary. That's a bargain. The United States is getting another bargain.
Putin's invasion of Ukraine is, of course, criminal aggression.
Major war crime. Also, an act of criminal stupidity from his point of view. It gave the
United States its most welcome gift on a silver platter. Europe drove Europe into the pocket of
the United States. It was an alternative. Combination between Europe and the East. Very
natural. The continental Europe has a very effective industrial system, German-based
industrial system, complex system. It's based very heavily on the relations with their natural
commercial partner to the East. Russia doesn't have much of an economy. It's about at the level
of Mexico. It has rich resources, raw materials, not just oil, petroleum, but minerals, and so on.
It's a path to the China market, enormous China market. In fact, the major EU market.
One possibility for Putin was to accept efforts at accommodation, which were, in fact, presented
regularly, particularly by Emmanuel Macron, telephone conversations up to a couple of
days before the invasion. Not interested in wanting to drive Europe into the US pocket.
Well, for Europe, that's pretty serious. Europe, while the United States is gaining enormously
from the war, not just financially in terms of military power, but even geopolitically
with Europe now subordinated to it, Europe is facing a serious problem. Economist Magazine
points out that Europe is facing a kind of the industrialization, not just from its break,
from its commercial partners to the East, but even with regard to China. So part of the
US war against China is to compel other countries, European countries, to break their relations
with the China market. Pretty serious. Take a look at the Netherlands as the world's most advanced
lithographic industry, which produces essential parts for computer chips,
to semiconductors, and so on. The United States is ordering them, lose your main market, China.
Will they agree? We don't know. Ordering Samsung in South Korea to do the same thing.
You lose your main market, because we don't want China to develop. Same in Japan.
Will they accept it? Open question. Let's go back to crime. Just look at logic for a moment.
Either the war will be a stalemate and continue indefinitely, or it'll be settled.
Can't argue about that. That's logic. Well, if it's a stalemate, Ukraine is going to suffer
miserably. It's already being severely harmed to military forces,
badly harmed, economy severely harmed. Go on with the stalemate, it'll get much worse.
Russia will be harmed too, but too much more. Substantial society will probably survive it.
That's if there's a stalemate. Alternative to a stalemate, one of two possibilities.
Either one side capitulates, or there's a negotiated settlement. Well, Russia is not
going to capitulate. That's pretty clear. The alternative is a negotiated settlement,
diplomacy. Who's in favor of it? Who's against it? The United States and its British satellite
are against it. We must continue the war to weaken Russia. In fact, that happened dramatically
last March. There were negotiations underway between Ukraine and Russia under Turkish auspices.
Boris Johnson, who was then the prime minister, flew to Kyiv and informed the Ukrainians that
Britain and the United States don't think this is the time for negotiations. He was followed by
US Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin, the Western media don't cover this. It's not a proper topic
for them, but apparently he gave his usual message of no negotiations. Now I have to
continue with the war. Well, the negotiations crashed. We don't actually know the reasons
there's very little coverage, but that was probably part of it at least. But the US and Britain
persist in saying we must continue the war to weaken Russia. Now there is an official
version of this. It says we must continue the war so that Ukraine will be in a better negotiating
position. Does that make sense? Ukraine's going to be in a worse negotiation position,
suffering badly. So let's tell the truth. We have to fight the war, continue the war,
to weaken Russia, strengthen ourselves at the cost of everyone else, mainly Ukrainians.
Well, how does the world react to this? The world says we don't want it. Almost the entire world
opposes this position. Check back at the Munich Strategic Conference a couple of weeks ago,
the International Conference. The United States made every effort to try to bring
the global south into support for the US campaign in Ukraine. Nobody, not India,
not Indonesia, not long-time US allies like Colombia, Brazil. They all said no.
What they said is this is a proxy war between you and Russia. We don't have any part of it.
We're certainly not going to pay attention to the bombast that comes out of the British and
American media and propaganda system about fighting a noble war for democracy.
We've had enough experience with you to know what that means, hundreds of years of experience.
So keep your bombast and pretentiousness for yourselves. We're looking at the actual world.
We don't want to be part of this. We would like to see a diplomatic settlement that will end the
horrors before they get worse. Take continental Europe. There's a difference between a lead opinion
and public opinion. We have polls. These are free countries.
Polls show strong support for negotiation and diplomacy. The educated classes, the media say,
no, we have to go along with the US-British no negotiations policy. That's the way the world
is dividing up. Well, what does this mean for Ukraine? Just think through the logic and just
plain logic. Russia is not going to capitulate. Ukraine is not going to get in a better negotiating
position. Either there will be some kind of stalemate, which will be devastating for Ukraine,
very dangerous in other respects, arms, millions of people in the world because of
the curtailing of grain and fertilizer exports. Very significant threat of escalation to major war.
So far, Russia has not emulated the US-British war style of war.
President Biden, Janet Yellen, other officials have visited Kyiv. Do you remember anybody who
visited Baghdad when the US and Britain were pounding at the dust? Remember anybody? No.
In fact, the few peace volunteers who were there were ordered out of the country because the United
States and Britain were smashing it up properly. That's a difference. It might move to expand the
war to the US-British style, go after the jugular, destroy communications, destroy energy,
destroy transportation, destroy everything that allows the country to function, go after
Western Ukraine with a vengeance, attack supply routes, presumably leave you in the confrontation
with NATO. Then what happens? Now it's tanks. It's beginning with jet planes. Next will be a
further escalation. The Ukrainians are the ones who'll suffer most, but the rest of the world is
also facing a problem. Well, the Ukrainians make their own decisions. What they decide,
we should support. They have a right to defend themselves. But we have our own countries to
care about. We are responsible for US, British, Irish, German policy. People of the countries
are responsible for it. I'm in the United States. Should we support a policy that says,
let's continue to fight the war, no matter how devastating the effect in order to severely
weaken Russia? No, I don't think so. We should stop the campaign to block negotiations and diplomacy.
Can they succeed? You don't know unless they try. They'll try. Of course, they don't succeed.
If there were to be a negotiated settlement or to be negotiations, could the result ever be
just from a Ukrainian point of view? Is that just a moral?
Diplomatic settlements. Diplomatic settlements almost by definition are not just a diplomatic
settlement as one which all sides accept reluctantly because none of them get their
maximum objectives, but they see that as the best of the possible outcomes or at least the least
worse. That's the nature of diplomatic settlements. If you don't want that, let's escalate to total
destruction. Yeah. We've about 10 minutes left. I'm going to come to a couple of questions from
people who are watching in a minute, but maybe if we could look at, I suppose, the rise of the
algorithm, the rise of those things. We've touched on it with social media, but we have
news this week, I think, that in France for the Paris Olympics, facial recognition will be allowed
on a so-called temporary basis until the end of the Olympics. What is temporary often becomes
very permanent. We've also got things like chat GPT, the so-called artificial intelligence chatbot
that can take your question and go off and give you a bit of an answer. What do you think about
that kind of our reliance on machines to make decisions? If you like taking the human out of
the loop, is that a danger or is that just part of technology? It's part of just modernizing,
and every technology has its good sides and its bad sides. Do these things particularly worry you?
For example, there's some of the crazier proposals are that the systems of automatic
warning of missile attacks should be automated to death sentence. We've had 70 years of experience
of virtual, coming very close to terminal nuclear war because the systems that
of our design carefully sophisticated way to determine if there's some say enemy missile attack
have failed and human intervention was necessary to prevent the end termination of human life on
earth. It's going to get worse if you automate them further. What has saved us so far is human
intervention. Several, I don't have to go through the details, but there were several cases that
are well known where Russian officials just refused to accept the information that was coming in,
just didn't hand it on to the higher authorities. That's why we're alive. Hotlines are useful things
for humans to talk to each other. It wasn't even a hunt. It was just a middle level official saying
this can't be real. I'm not going to send it on. It was one during the Cuban Missile Crisis when
Russian submarines were under attack by US destroyers. They thought they'd lost contact with
central authorities, thought a war was on. Commander decided we might as well launch our
torpedoes, which happened to be nuclear tipped, would have ended everything because of the reaction.
One officer, Vasily Akhapov, decided to veto it. So we're now talking.
There was a case when Defense Secretary William Perry was almost on the phone,
called President Carter, to tell him that the sophisticated US warning systems that
detected a Russian attack, he had now a couple minutes to respond. He got a call from the
central official, the monitoring official, said we made a computer error. Hold it off.
You want to go into that kind of system? Okay. But let's not have a look. First of all, we're very
incredible. These are all human decisions. There's no technology forcing anything, nothing.
We have to remember that the propaganda and the hype about these systems vastly exceeds the reality.
You can read all sorts of excited articles in the newspapers, papers about
chatbot being surpassing human intelligence. Are they sentient? This is total nonsense.
This is basically high-tech plagiarism. You look into the nature of the systems,
they're designed in such a way that in principle, they can tell you absolutely nothing about
language, learning, cognition, and so on. They're doing something else. Nice toys, if you like.
But no constructive purpose that anyone can think of. But they are dangerous. There are already
cases. There was an article in the Washington Post a couple days ago about one case in which a
something like a chatbot system, which was combined with artificial image creation,
which is not that difficult these days, which was used for a major defamation project.
Well, we're going to see more and that more and more of that. These are wonderful techniques for
defamation, for disinformation. When bots get involved with powerful systems behind them,
like states can be a major danger. They should certainly be concerned about that.
But as far as taking over, doing all kind of scary things, that's us, not them.
I might be dealing with this quickly, but if a question comes in, you've mentioned
Washington Post, the New York Times, your morning routine of finding news from different places.
Algae Zero, you've mentioned a few times. A question in that says, what are some of the
important places that people might look for information that gives them a balance? Should
they be looking at Brit Parts and the Daily Mail and Fox News as well as what you might
see as more reputable, more impartial places? Or should they stick to kind of a set of places?
Is there a list you have in mind of places you enjoy finding out things?
There's no such thing as impartial. I'm not impartial. You're not impartial. You should
understand it. You should be honest. It says, here's my view of the world. Understand it.
Interpret what I'm saying on the basis of my own perception of how the world works.
That's what the newspapers should be doing. Not saying I'm unbiased and neutral because
they're not. Nobody is. Let's be honest about what we are. I try to be. You try to be.
Talk to an audience. I say, here's the way I view the world. You don't have to accept it.
Just see if it makes sense or not to you. Now, if you look at the media, if I was in,
I say London, if I went on to spend time in London, the first thing to do in the morning
is pick up half of these major newspapers. The media environment is different from the
United States. You have to read half a dozen newspapers to get some degree of coverage.
But you do. There's scariest journalism. Journalists themselves, especially correspondence
on the ground, do excellent work. Honest, courageous, and learn a lot from them.
Read the major media. Read the business press, which is often very illuminating.
There are biases on their face. No problem. But financial times are very revealing material.
And then look for things that are of particular interest to you. There's no algorithms for it.
Too much goes on in the world to know everything. But what you're interested in,
you think are important pursuers. But don't get caught up in self-reinforcing bubbles.
And assume that what the major media are presenting is an accurate picture of the world.
They're presenting it from a certain perspective, which is largely subordinate to powerful,
to concentrated power in the private system and in the state system, which are closely related,
of course, in state-connected societies. So understand the nature of the institutions
and take a careful look with a critical eye. Recognize that we're fine journalists,
trustworthy, and so on. That's the way it can proceed.
I'm going to paraphrase one last question here from someone.
You speak a lot. You're very generous with your time to different groups and different audiences.
The danger of talking a lot is that there's a lot on record of what you've said.
Do you often change your mind on topics and things that you once thought you had worked out
and then think, you know, I've learned more, actually, it's a bit more nuanced than that?
Or are there things that you do kind of swing around on over time?
Learn things over time.
You're human after all.
You have a critical open mind. You're constantly criticizing yourself.
Did I understand this correctly? Is there something I should look at?
I should say that I'm pretty conservative in that respect. So my major conception of how the world
works hasn't changed much since I was 15 years old. Actually, the first article I wrote back in
1939 was a warning about at a 10-year-old level. I don't suggest anybody read it.
What was a warning about the spread of fascism in Europe, which looked ominous at the time and
inexorable, still concerned about?
I think we're probably out of time. We've had an hour of your time this evening or
this afternoon for you. Noam Chomsky, you've been very generous with the festival over the years.
Thank you so much for dropping in again this year to help us think about ideas and politics.
For those who are watching at home, if you're in and about Belfast, tomorrow is the final day of
the festival. A few more events that you can kind of attend. If you're watching online,
if you click through to the YouTube channel for the festival, you can see some of the other
events we had this year and certainly a back catalogue of things over previous years,
including Noam Chomsky talking to William Crawley probably two years ago,
or maybe even a few years before that as well. But to close, thank you very much, sir, for your time.
Noam Chomsky, thank you and good night.
you
