I don't have any control over what happens ultimately, you know, that isn't God's hands.
The only thing I control is this little piece of real estate inside my own shoes.
There's a couple of things that every demagogue can use to manipulate people, and one of those
is fear, because it disables our capacity for critical thinking.
There's a 2013 poll that showed that 85% of Americans under 35% said they were proud of
the United States of America.
The same poll taken last month showed only 18%.
My initial bias about psychedelic drugs is, again, colored by my experience of being in
recovery for 40 years.
I would tell myself at 9 o'clock in the morning, I am never going to do that again, and at
4 o'clock in the afternoon, I'd be telling exactly what I said, and, you know, it was
like somebody else had stepped into my body and was now, you know, a new driver in the
truck.
Through a free market, you can't make yourself rich without making your neighbors rich and
without enriching your community.
You show me a polluter, or I'll show you a fat cat using political clout to escape the
discipline of the free market and force the public base production costs.
We have to be able to weather those difficulties without being crushed in our soul or without
being ultimately affected by it, and that's kind of the objective where we all want to
be spiritually, where we're indifferent to the personal consequences of everything that
we do, and that we live our lives for all higher purposes.
The vast majority of people in the audience are entrepreneurs, capitalists, love to get
your views on the environment and capitalism, because that's a topic that there's a lot
of debate on.
First of all, thank you so much for having me, and thanks for the reception.
I've been working as an environmental advocate and attorney for 40 years for my entire career,
but I started out as an attorney for commercial fishmen on the Hudson River, and we built
that organization.
They launched a patrol boat, they began, these were people who were capitalists.
They were small business people, and they saw their livelihoods being destroyed by pollution
on the river, and these were people who, the Hudson River commercial fishery is the oldest
in North America, it's 350 years old.
Many of the people I represent came from families that have been fishing the river continuously
since Dutch colonial times, it's a traditional gear of fishery they use.
The same fishing methods that were taught by the Algonquin Indians to the original Dutch
settlers of New Amsterdam and then passed down through the generations, and there was
nothing wrong with their business model, but the general electric company used political
clout in Albany to get permission to illegally dump PCBs into the river, rather than properly
disposing them, and it saved them money, it allowed them to out-compete the other producers
of capacitators and to win in the marketplace, but they had distorted the market signals
by cheating the market, and these fishermen knew that their problem was not their business
model, it was that we didn't have free market capitalism on the river, we had a kind of
corporate crony capitalism that was allowing polluters to use political clout to escape
the discipline of the free market.
One of the things I learned very early on was that we don't have to choose between good
environmental policy and good economic policy, in 100% of the cases, good economic policy
is identical to good environmental policy.
If we want to measure the economy, and this is how we ought to be measuring it, based
upon how it produces jobs and the dignity of jobs over the generations and how it preserves
the value of the assets of our community, if on the other hand we want to do what the
big polluters often want us to do, which is to treat the planet as if it were business
and liquidation, convert our natural resources to cash as quickly as possible, have a few
years of pollution-based prosperity, we can generate an instantaneous cash flow and the
illusion of a prosperous economy, but our children are going to pay for our joyride,
and they're going to pay for it with denuded landscapes, poor health, huge cleanup costs
that are going to amplify over time and they'll never be able to pay, and environmental injury
is deficit spending, it's a way of loading the cost of our generation's prosperity onto
the backs of our children.
My approach has always been colored by my experience, I worked for 40 years for the
commercial fishermen and I really kind of colored my worldview about the environment,
and if you can go back 35 or 40 years ago and look at speeches that I was giving back
then where people would ask me, what's the most important solution, most effective solution
to environmental pollution, and I always said the same thing, it's a free market, true
free market capitalism, because a free market, a true free market, promotes efficiency, and
efficiency means the elimination of waste, and pollution is waste, and a true free market
would require us to properly value our natural resources, and it's the undervaluation of
those resources that cause us to use them wastefully or recklessly, and a true free
market you can't make yourself rich without making your neighbors rich, and without enriching
your community.
What polluters do is they make themselves rich by making everybody else poor, they raise
standards of living for themselves by lowering quality of life for the rest of us, and they
do that by escaping the discipline of the free market.
You show me a polluter, I'll show you a subsidy, I'll show you a fat cat using political clout
to escape the discipline of the free market and force the public to pay its production
costs, and what I did as an environmental advocate, I really always considered myself
a free marketer, and I was going out into the marketplace to catch the cheaters and
to bring them to court and say to them, we're going to force you to internalize your costs
the same way that you internalize your profits, because as long as somebody can externalize
those costs, it distorts the marketplace, and none of us gets the advantages of the
efficiency, the prosperity, and the democracy that true free market capitalism offers our
country.
Okay, great, thank you.
Let me ask my team, make sure we put a timer up here so we know the time if we could, because
it's not on, thank you.
So I asked the audience to submit some questions, and I can't ask all of them, but one of them
was about psychedelics, and let me preface this by saying, you know that I've been in
recovery, you've been in recovery for 40 years, and I'm the first person in the world to have
before and after brain scans doing ibogaine and 5MEO-DMT, which I did in 2015 in Mexico,
and we took a film crew, and we filmed it, and then we did interviews with the doctor
that did the before and after brain scans and whatnot, and I've seen miraculous things
happen, but I'm also worried about the pharmaceutical industries like they're doing with everything,
co-opping it.
So what are your thoughts on psychedelics, because my viewpoint on it is in the field
of recovery, depression, mental illness, things like that.
I mean, my initial bias about psychedelic drugs is, again, colored by my experience
of being in recovery for 40 years and having gone to, I go to like nine meetings a week,
so 12-step meetings.
I've heard a lot of bad stories about people, you know, involvement with drugs and alcohol
and pharmaceutical drugs.
My bias is that I don't think that, in most cases, that we can fix things that are wrong
inside of us with things that are outside of us, with all the things that we reach for
when we feel discomfort, whether it's drugs or alcohol or sex or reckless behavior, where
particularly people who are prone to addiction are always looking for things outside of them
to fix, you know, to fill this empty hole that they have inside of them.
Having said that, I have seven kids and my wife in 2012 took her own life and left me
with six children.
And so all of those kids were at risk at the time and they all ended up doing really wonderful
things with their lives and they're in good relationships and they're, you know, outside
now of that, what I would call a risk level.
One of them was worrying to me because he never processed his mom's death in a way that
I could observe.
He seemed like a happy kid, he was always smiling.
He did get in a lot of fist fights and he was a, he became a boxer and he won a lot
of tournaments and then he became a hockey player and, but everything he did, it was
a little bit of violence though and it made me, it made me worried about him and he went
to a couple, about five years ago, he went, he was very self-contained.
We never talked about what was going on inside of him and he went to Patagonia to run a white,
to kayak a white water river that I kayaked for many, many years every year called the
Fute Le Faux and he went down there to do it with a friend and he had a five day wait
between the time that the, that his kayak trip was going to start and the time that
he arrived there and I had a friend who, oh, I knew a little bit of, just on a quaintance
down there who I, who had some land property down there and I asked this guy to put my son
up for a couple of days while he was waiting for his trip to start and that guy, the night
my son arrived there, he had, that guy said to him, I'm doing an ayahuasca trip tonight
and he said, God sent you boys to me because he was doing it with 20 poinche Indians and
he said, I was praying to God that he would send me a gringo to do this with and my, my,
my kid ended up doing this and he had this experience where after he drank the ayahuasca,
they gave them all a bucket and they gave him a sleeping bag and it was kind of in an
outdoor place with a fire and after he drank it, he felt himself sinking through all the
geological strata of the earth and he could look at all of, he told me he could look at
all the folds of stone and geology and he had a total understanding of all of the processes
that had laid them out for the aeons, he ended up being propelled out of the other side of
the earth and then floating through space for what he experienced as hundreds of years
and he would focus on a distant planet and be transported there and on each planet, he
would have an adventure at the end of the adventure, there would be a lesson, a moral
lesson that he would learn that he was supposed to remember. The last place, the last planet
he visited, he came into, his mother was there and she started passing through him in and
out of him again and again and every time she did that, he felt all these experiences
of forgiveness, of love, of understanding, of comprehension, of empathy and compassion
and when he came back from that trip, he was completely changed, he was very open about
talking about his feelings, he was on a real spiritual class, he was very, very openly
just happy all the time and he, the reason I really know that it changed him is he started
taking out the garbage and doing the dishes and he's done the dishes constantly without
ever being asked since then. He's a 24 year old kid, so you know that's a miracle. So
I had that open my mind to the possibility that there may be something that I didn't
understand or that was outside of my kind of bubble of prejudices and then I have a
friend who's an ABCL who had a severe PTSD and he went to Costa Rica and had the same
kind of experience and I had a couple of other friends who are in the NFL and they also had
severe brain injuries and depression, terrible, terrible depression and the same thing happened
and then I looked at Michael Pollan's documentary which I think is on Netflix and there's one
particularly poignant story, he goes through each of the psychedelics, a show for each one
and I think the third show is on the psilocybin and there's a kid on that show who had severe
OCD, he could not, he literally could not go out of his house. He had to do all of these rituals,
all the, he had to constantly clean his hands, he had to walk through the door 10 times or 20
times or 60 times and he had to do all these very repetitive rituals and it absolutely paralyzed him
and destroyed his life and he did one psilocybin trip and it was completely gone.
So, you know, my mind is open to the idea that, you know, there may be things that I don't know
about and that people ought to have the freedom and the liberty to experiment with these things.
I likely use said at the outset which is, you know, we know the capacity of the pharmaceutical
industry to come and capture this if they see that there's money in it and then to turn it
into something very, very bad and to promote it in ways that it shouldn't be promoted.
So, you know, my inclination and I haven't thought this through that much but my inclination would be
to make this available at least in therapeutic settings and maybe more generally but in ways
that would discourage the corporate control exploitation of it.
Yeah, absolutely. No, absolutely. And I mean,
we could, you know, I believe that addiction is a solution to pain and addiction works if you're
lonely, depressed, anxiety-ridden in the moment but the problem is it has this thing called
consequences that can destroy your life and make your life not work and I think we live in a culture
that we have the largest addiction crisis in human history right now. There's a lot of temptation,
there's a lot of pain, there's a lot of trauma. I think the last three to four years of the pandemic
has created more angst, more pain, more trauma that will last literally generations and I think
millions of lives have been destroyed as a result of it and one of the coping mechanisms
is addiction and I think anything that could help with that and I think psychedelics are one part
of that is beneficial. If you become president, what could you do or will you do to fix this issue?
Yeah, I mean, part of the, you know, addiction, like you say, it's a response to internal pain,
it's also a response to adamantization, to loneliness, a disconnection to disaffection
and, you know, and we're seeing that's now epidemic in this country where so many of us feel
that we're no longer connected to a community. It was a poll recently that showed that,
there's a 2013 poll that showed that when asked, 80, 85 percent of kids of Americans under 35
said they were proud of the United States of America. The same poll taken last month showed
only 18 percent. So they've lost faith in our country, they've lost hope for their own future,
they've lost a connection to community and now, you know, we're seeing the biggest cause of suicide
among Black youth today, I mean, of death among Black youth is suicide. We lost 106,000 kids last
year to fentanyl overdose or to other opioid overdoses. That's double the number of kids that
we lost in the 20 year Vietnam War. We're really in a crisis now. One of my program, my kind of
moonshot program or Peace Corps program to use metaphors from my uncle's administration will be
to start, to launch a string of healing centers around this country, particularly in rural areas
where people will go there and do regenerative farming, regenerative agriculture, grow good food,
healthy food and learn to live in communities again without screens, without cell phones.
And I've looked at these places for 40 years. The rehab industry in this country is,
I would say, somewhat predatory at this point, like many, many other industries, but
I had a relative who was in a lot of trouble and I started looking all over the world for places that
had a different model. And I found this place in Italy in Tuscany called San Padre Nano and it's a
500 acre farm. There's 2,000 kids who live there. It's absolutely free. The only thing they ask you
to commit to is to stay there for 5 years. 5 years? Listen, if it's a choice, a lot of kids today
are honest, they're actually going to die. And 5 years is like college. And if you can save somebody's
life, it takes time because you have to re-parent the person. You have to reorient them to live in a
completely different way. And they're taking people who are criminals, who are not only drug addicts,
but people who are headed for prison, headed for something very bad. They take them and they
transform them into good citizens. At that place, they have, it's completely self-supporting.
In Italy, you can do a check-off on your taxes to send $1, by approximately $1 on your taxes.
There's a little check-off to San Padre Nano. Most of their money comes from their industries,
so they have one of the best bakeries in Europe and they teach kids traditional baking skills.
They have an apparel center where they do weaving and they make accessories, fashion accessories,
so they make purses for De La Valle, for Prada, for Gucci, for these other big brands.
They have a vineyard, 500 acre vineyard, and they make some of the finest wine in Europe.
They have kennels and they have a wallpaper factory that makes this hand-painted wallpaper,
very, very traditional with traditional artisans. There's no cell phones allowed,
there's no screens, and the people live together in very, very tight kind of barracks. There's
six girls and my relative was a girl and she was put in with six girls who watched her every
move and if she did something selfish, if she did something dishonest, she was called on it,
and it taught her a new way of living in a community and when she came out,
she became very, very successful and not only in her business life but also her social life.
She was utterly transformed. Two days ago, I went to a place in Salt Lake City called the other side
that is modeled on San Pajagnano and they have now three city blocks full of buildings.
They have 300 convicts. They take people out of prison or they take people who are facing long
sentences and they interview them to see if they're suitable for the program. They bring them into
that program and they rehabilitate them and they have to make a two-year commitment.
It's absolutely free. Anybody can walk in the street and take advantage of it. They have the
biggest moving company in Salt Lake. They have the biggest storage company in Salt Lake.
They have a thrift store that is the size of two Walmart's. They have a construction firm
that is very, very successful and they teach the inmates how to be electricians, how to be
plumbers, all of these skills that they can use in the world. The guy who started it
was facing his fifth term in prison. He was facing a 29-year prison sentence
and he persuaded the judge to allow him to go to Delancey Street, which is a
therapeutic community in San Francisco. He ended up working there for eight years and then
coming out and starting this place. It was so inspiring going to this place and to the other
side and seeing what they'd done because it's a model that can be reproduced elsewhere.
I was in prison for the summer of 2001. I won a lawsuit against the Navy
in Puerto Rico for bombing the island of Viegas.
I did it. The judge, there was a corrupt judge who would not enforce my injunction.
The group, I was representing 10,000 people on the island and they asked me to do a civil
disobedience to go onto the live fire zone while the Navy was bombing and I was arrested.
They told me, I said, how long am I going to be in jail? They said, well, just probably a day,
but I ended up being the whole summer in maximum security prison. I had my son,
my youngest son, was born while I was in prison. The first time I saw him was on visitor's day.
In that prison, which is a federal prison, a much better than state prison,
there was no, I couldn't even go to an AA meeting. There was no opportunities for any of the people
who were living there to make their lives better and we need to do that better. We need to make
sure when people come out of prison, they're actually productive. The guy who was running
had to made that when he first started trying to place the convicts and businesses in Salt Lake
that nobody wanted them because they're ex-cons. Now they have such a good work record and such a
good reputation that he is a list of hundreds and hundreds of businesses on the wall who,
and they employ 100% of the people who leave and everybody in Salt Lake wants people from this
program because they're such responsible workers. Oh, it was inspiring to me to see that, you know,
the transfer of what I saw and said, Patrick, I don't know what happened in this country.
In A, the biggest industry in rural areas in our country are prisons. I want to change that and make
rehab and restoration of the feeling of community in this country, the skills of living in a community
to re-parent all of these kids who are lost today, an entire generation of kids who are lost,
give them the opportunity to go to places where they can learn to be productive members of society
and where they can get inspired again about their lives and regain hope in their lives.
I love that. I love that. It's great.
So you probably met him backstage. I don't know if he's out here, but we have Andre Norman who's
here who spent 14 years in maximum security prison and he became the number three gang leader.
He spent two years in solitary confinement and now this guy's like an absolute angel and just
helped so many people and he's in charge of a program which currently has 600,000 tablets in
prisons in the United States soon to be a million and we have genius network content. We have genius
recovery content from my foundation on those tablets. 25% of the world's prisoners are in the
United States who are the highest incarcerating country in the world. I believe it's between 80 to
90% of everyone that's arrested or thrown in jail or prison. Drugs and alcohol were involved.
40% of people that are incarcerated committed a violent crime, so that's a separate issue,
but 60% had not. So we are incarcerating a lot of addicts and when someone goes through recovery,
as you know, you can take people that were really lying, cheating, stealing, doing bad things and
they become these incredible, compassionate, caring humans and so I think there's something
to the whole process of healing and creating that environment. So yeah, I mean, we'll talk more
about that. So let me, I have some questions about tyranny and all that, but before we get to it,
cryptocurrency, Bitcoin, what are your thoughts on digital currency?
Yeah, I mean, I became a converter. I really didn't know anything about cryptocurrency. My kids all
know are entrepreneurial and are interested in business and they're all in that space. So they
were, you know, they had bought and sold cryptocurrencies and talked a lot about it,
but I was really just on the sideline listening to them. And then I saw what happened during the
pandemic, what happened in Toronto or in Ottawa to the strikers. Oh, Children's Health Defense,
which was the organization that I ran, started and ran, had embedded in the trucker's convoy
in Canada. We had a reporter embedded and we were helping them and we were, you know,
sending money and publicizing what they were doing and the truckers in Canada
were angry at the mandates and the truckers in Canada are very, very diverse group. A lot of them
are from African descent, a lot of them for Asian, Indian, Bangladesh, and then just white
people from all over Canada, but it's a very, very diverse group and they had started out
in BC and Alberta and they had then done a collective and made a bigger and bigger convoy
coming across the country. They wanted to meet with Justin Trudeau and talk to him about the
impact of the mandates on their businesses and on their lives. And Prime Minister Trudeau would
not meet with them and instead the, and it was, if you look at the videos of this protest in Ottawa,
it looks like wood stock. You know, they had cleanup crews that were picking up garbage,
they had crews that were passing out bottled water to people that were feeding the homeless
people and hungry people in Ottawa and there was a field, there was music and there was a lot of
joy. There was nothing nasty or me and spirited about it and it was portrayed that way by the,
by officials, government officials and to a large extent by the mainstream media.
But what they did in Canada is they used AI, they used facial recognition systems and they,
and they got the identities of the people who are participating in the protest
and they froze their bank accounts and this was shocking to me because none of them were
charged with the crime. They also took $15 million that we had helped raise for them on PayPal
and they persuaded PayPal to shut off their money so they couldn't access it.
And it occurred to me then that, you know, I talked to one of the strikers, the truckers,
now they couldn't buy diesel for their trucks, they couldn't buy food for their kids,
they couldn't pay their mortgages. I talked to one striker who said he was facing jail time
because he had mandatory alimony payments to his ex-wife and he could not pay them.
And it occurred to me then that, you know, that transactional freedom is as important as freedom
of expression. If you have freedom of expression under the First Amendment, you can say anything
you want about your government without consequence, but if the government then can shut off your
capacity to pay your rent, to buy food, you know, put you essentially on the sidewalk and paralyze
you, what does it matter if you have so-called freedom of expression and they don't have to
charge you with any crime? And I had actually, I had seen this happening, what's happening in China
where they have what they call programmable currencies, which is, you know, in China now
they use, your face is your credit card, so their facial recognition is so ubiquitous and so refined
and sophisticated that when you go to a store to pay, you don't use cash, you know, in many places,
you don't use any credit card, you just use your face to pay and there's, you know, you have a digital
account and on your digital account is other information, including your medical information,
including your social credit score. Oh, if you drop below a certain credit score, your capacity
to use your accounts now ends and they, for example, they have one system where if, and I'll give
you an example, if there is a, if the government declared a mask day and you're walking around
with your mask below your nostrils and you're seeing on facial recognition system, which knows
everybody, you're going to now lose social credit points or if you're too close to your girlfriend
on a, you know, on a social distance, you're not even told about it. You're going to lose social
credit and if you drop below a certain point, at some point, your, your credit, your facial credit
card stops working except in grocery stores that are within a certain radius of your home.
So you can't travel, you can't buy gas for your car, you can't buy an airplane ticket,
you can't go to a hotel, you're essentially under house arrest. If the government has the capacity
to do that to people, then it has the capacity, I mean, a government that can silence its, its
critics as a license for any kind of atrocity. And it is the top of a very, very slippery slope
or totalitarian rule. So, you know, I was, again, I was, I was struck at that point by
how important it was that we have transactional freedom. And during that period, you may remember
this, there were a lot of people in the federal government who were saying, we got to get rid
of paper currency. And in fact, in many nations like in Africa and Australia, etc., they were
taking away ATM machines. They were doing that on the pretense that paper currency passes germs.
So we have to get rid of it. Well, if we go to total digital currency, every transaction that you
have is not, is, is visible to the government, the corporations, it's taxable, it's, you know,
it's my, it, it, it, it can be monetized for profit by somebody. And you can't, you have no secrets
in your life. If you, you know, if you wanted to buy cigarettes or pornography or liquor or
whatever you want to do, stuff that you don't want to share with the world, you know, somebody's
going to know about that. And that's a very, very dangerous thing in a democracy. And, and so, you
know, I think it's really important that we keep paper currency number one at people of access to
Bitcoin and other currencies and that, and that we look very, very warily at central bank digital
currencies, which are, you know, which they're putting in place right now. And that is how they
did it in China. They started with the central bank digital currency and then they expanded its
reach to become any instrument for social control. And to me, that's very dangerous.
Well, well, thank you.
Tell me something that nobody in the world understands about you.
I don't know about that. I, you know, as you know, one of the things they say in recovery is that
you're as sick as your secrets. And, you know, I understood when I was, when I was getting sober,
that I could not afford to have any secrets. That doesn't mean that you tell the world everything
about yourself. But you have to tell somebody, there has to be somebody out there who knows
everything. And so I think, you know, I have that I have a number of people in my life
who, who, you know, who literally know everything about me, you know, and, and so, you know, and I
think that that's important for all of us. To speak to that, I'd like to get your viewpoint on, because
here you are running for president of the United States. You are openly talking about addiction
recovery, which I think is awesome. You're more focused on health than anyone else I know that is,
you know, running. So you're a great role model in that arena. And you are sick as your secrets.
I think that is a, it's true. It's actually at one of these genius network annual events in 2015,
where I openly just decided I'm just going to share everything. I talked about drug addiction,
sex addiction, work addiction, you name it. And it was one of the most freeing things that I did,
but I also had been going to 12 steps for many years. And what's the difference between how you
basically what you share and what you don't. There's secrecy and then there's privacy.
And there are trusted people. I always caution people not to make like a Facebook confessional,
where you just go and share it needs to be done and we're ready to do it. So
you can't be like an idiot. Right. Right. Right. Well, and some people do, it hurts.
Yeah. You have to make prudent judgments. And, you know, we're not, you know,
Jesus said you have to be gentle as lamb, but clever as snakes. And you know, you need to be,
you know, people, God gave us a brain to use it, to make good judgments with,
to make prudent judgments. And there's people that you tell everything to. And there's people
that you tell, you know, but you don't lie. Right. Well, you have a lot at risk for disclosure.
So when did you first start disclosing this to others? Because I think, you know, those
from the 12 step world always will mention that it's in the fourth step that you find
the cravings in the, in the, you know, we'll start to relieve when you share it with someone.
Yeah. I mean, I knew, you know, what kept me, I knew that I was an addict from when I was 15
years old. When I started, I started the year after my dad had killed, I started taking drugs.
And I progressed very, very quickly to heroin. And I was addicted for 14 years on and off. But
I always wanted to quit. Oh, I tried to earn this. I was basically, you know, I was, I was
living against conscious at that time. I knew that I did not want to be an addict. But, and I had
iron willpower in other parts of my life. I gave up candy for Lent when I was 13. And I didn't need
candy again till I was in college. And I gave up desserts the following year for Lent. And I never
had a dessert till I was in my freshman year of college when I was doing, you know, playing sports.
And, and I wanted to bulk up. And, but I felt like I could do anything with willpower. But
somehow this compulsion was utterly impervious to my willpower. And I would, you know, the most,
to me, the most demoralizing feature of addiction was my incapacity to keep contracts with myself.
I tell myself at nine o'clock in the morning, I am never going to do that again. And at four o'clock
in the afternoon, I'd be doing exactly what I said. And, you know, it was like somebody else had
stepped into my body and was now, you know, a new driver in the truck was now nothing to do with me.
And it was, it was baffling to me, just bewildering, why can't I control myself?
But I tried earnestly, sincerely, honestly for 14 years to stop and couldn't do it.
One of the things I'd never tried was 12 separate programs because of exactly what you said.
There was no way, given my background and my vulnerabilities, that I would step into a room
of strangers and start talking about what was happening in my life. And then, you know, I came
in in September of 1983. I was arrested. I was in the papers. So at that point, there was no
secret left. And I, you know, it was the best thing that happened to me because I was able, at that
point, to come in and, you know, take advantage of this program. But I knew from the beginning,
that, you know, if you're an addict, you are dishonest. You're going, you have to lie. You
can't, you know, you can't, you cannot, I don't think, I think it's impossible to be a drug addict
and not lie. And so, and I knew that dishonesty was associated with my addiction and that if I
did not become rigorously honest in every aspect of my life, that I was, I was going to fall back
in the addiction. And so, you know, I, I put a lot of effort into that. And it was, you know,
it was difficult. I remember one time I was in court. And, you know what, it's strange when
you're, when you, when you get, I wouldn't say I was a pathological liar, but I was habitual,
you know. And if you ask me, where did I get this shirt? I would not, the first,
the first thought in my head would not be, where did I get this shirt? It would be,
what can I say to put myself at some advantage in this relationship? I wasn't thinking, you know,
of the truth. And I had to break myself of those habits by when I caught myself saying something
dishonest to tell people right then, what I said to you just now is not per truth. And the pain
of doing that a couple of times was what, you know, allowed me to move. I remember reading very,
very early on about an obituary at C. S. Lewis, who was a great theologian who wrote the Narnia books
and, you know, and a brilliant novelist. But he wrote this obituary about a friend of his
where he described his friend as honest as the daylight. And I read that phrase and I was like,
wow, I wish, I wish that someday somebody would say that about me. And around that time, I was in
court, I was arguing in front of a federal judge in white planes. And he asked me a question,
I said something that was not true. And then I sat down and my opponent got up and it was something
that I could have never gotten exposed on or caught. It was only slightly an exaggeration.
But I sat down and it would have no consequence to me, could never have any consequence to me other
than just my conscience eating at me. And I sat down and I was like, you know, wow, that was not
true. The next time I got up, I said to the judge, I just want to say something what I said to you,
you know, was not true. And there was like this unsilenced in the courtroom, because nobody'd
ever heard a lawyer do that before. And then it just went on. And like, and but the pain of doing
that a couple of times, you will get on as you get struck on it as quickly because it's so agonizing
to give yourself up. That got me kind of a better habit of, you know, of being on it. And right now
it's critical, you know, from my I understand it's critical for my survival. So I'm married to
somebody who I don't think is ever told a lot in her life, you know, and she's an example.
She's a role model for me, but she has no impulse to it. It's like she has
she just I've never heard her say anything even slightly self promoting or dishonest or
distorted or even exaggeration. And she still manages to be very funny and very interesting.
Wow, that's awesome. Thank you. So let me my friend Alex Mandozian, who's here,
he sent this over to me via text, I don't know, maybe a month ago. And it's when it's a quote from
Thomas Jefferson. When the people fear their government, there's tyranny. When a government
fears its people, there's liberty. What are your thoughts on that? I think, you know, there are a
couple of what I would call alchemies of demagoguery. There are there are buttons that we all have
that are that were installed in us during the 20,000 generations that human beings
were wandering the African savanna and little groups and warlike groups fighting with other
groups defending themselves against, you know, lions and predators and trying to feed themselves.
And and a lot of our our hard wiring was installed during that key evolutionary period.
And, you know, we were following a small a powerful male leader and
doing what we were told and you had to have a unit cohesion and you had to behave like everybody
else because otherwise you wouldn't we're arguing with the leader all the time.
You had to do things and we're all have that programming internally. And so there's a couple
of things that every demagogue can use to manipulate people. And one of those is fear.
And because it disables our capacity for critical thinking. And during the, you know,
actually during the Great Depression, even before the war in 1932, Franklin Roosevelt
gave a speech where he said to the American public, the only thing we have to fear is fear
itself is after Wall Street crash. And what he was saying then was that he saw what was happening
in Europe, which was suffering from the same depression. And in Eastern Europe, in Russia,
and the Soviet Union, oh, democracy was collapsing everywhere because of the economic pressure.
And you were seeing the rise of tyrants on the right and tyrants on the left. And each one was
using fear. And the other alchemy of demagoguery, which is racism, point to minority groups and
saying they, you know, they did it to you, they're dangerous to you. So these are all things that
were installed on us, you know, during that multimillion-year period. And people can come and
exploit them today and disable our capacity for critical thinking. Oh, what Roosevelt was saying
is the fear is actually our enemy. If we have confidence, we can restore American capitalism.
At that point, 30% of the people in this country believe that capitalism had failed and that the
answer was communism. And 30% believe that capitalism had failed and that the answer was fascism.
And there was a small minority who still believed, you know, in democracy and free market capitalism.
And Roosevelt, through his strength of character, through his persuasion, through his
absolute indomitable calmness, was able to tell people, don't be scared, the fear is your enemy
because fear is going to be used by demagoguers like Father Coughlin at that time or Huey Long
or these other demagoguers who were trying to, you know, drum up anger and fear. And he said,
you know, that is the enemy. If we stay calm, we'll come out of this. And he was able to restore
American capitalism because of that. And it's an important lesson, you know, during COVID,
you had both Republican and Democratic governments that were using fear to manipulate people,
to tell us, do this, do that, and not, you know, they were telling us to do things that they knew
and we knew were wrong, to allow censorship of critics, to allow doctors to be silenced,
allow people who said they were injured to be silenced, to ask people who were standing up
for the children and saying, wait a minute, how can you keep kids out of school? They have no
vulnerability to COVID. Shut them up. And to silence everybody, silence, you know, where I was,
they were giving $1,000 tickets to surfers who were out on the ocean and telling them to go home
or disease. And even then, we knew, did not spread outdoors, but it spread at home when you're
locked up. And it was crazy what we were being told to do, but everybody was complying because
they were using fear. And to me, you know, my party, the Democratic Party, I said this, you know,
time and again, I said, you know, Roosevelt told us, don't use fear. And yet, the entire government
strategy at that time was just to scare the hell out of everybody. You remember, they had the COVID
death count every day on CNN, ticking like a time bomb that it was going to come and get you. And
everybody was put in this state of, you know, your neighbor is a biohazard. Don't go near them.
And, you know, and we were telling our kids, putting masks on our kids and telling them not to
go to, not to smile at their friends, not to hug their friends. And it was atomizing society
and fragmenting it and making it, you know, and that kind of society is very easy to manipulate.
You know, I'll tell you, can I do one other? There's a, there was a, another one of those
alchemies, one of those buttons, is our, our tendency from all those years we spent on the
Africans of Anna to follow a strong leader, a person of authority, particularly a male leader,
who will tell us what to do. So there's an experiment called that, you know, the CIA
financed a lot of studies during the 1950s and 1960s. And it's here to, to remind control studies,
to figure out how do you manipulate individuals to become a Manchurian candidate? How do you
manipulate whole societies in order to impose foreign control or totalitarian control?
The names of the program, the first ones were Operation Bluebird, Operation Hearty Choke.
And then the later ones were called MK, Naomi, MK Dietrich, MK Ultra. The MK stands for Mind Control.
And they were financing hundreds of studies in universities around the country by usually
sociologists or psychiatrists or social scientists to do different experiments with
psychedelic drugs, with torture, with sensory deprivation, with, with, you know, sound deprivation
for various forms of other psychiatric drugs, etc. One of those studies was a, was a guy called
Stanley Milgram, who was an associate professor at Yale. And he did a study where he recruited
about 60 people from all walks of life, students, professors, blacks, whites, business people.
Um, every kind of American. And he would bring them in and put them in a room where they had a dial
in front of them. And they were told if they turned that dial, it would give an electric pulse
to a person who was tied to a chair in the adjoining room. They couldn't see that person. And that
person was in fact an actor who was a confederate of Dr. Milgram's. But when they turned it up,
he would scream and struggle and plead and beg and cry. So, and Dr. Milgram would say,
turn it up, turn it down, turn it up, turn it down, turn it higher, turn it down, turn it higher.
And people who were part of that experiment, who were this, you know, the people who were there,
recruits the subject, a lot of them were weeping because they did not want to do it. And yet
Dr. Milgram was there in a lab coat with, you know, all of these badges on him and stuff. So,
he was this visible figure of authority. Sixty, you can look this up on Wikipedia, which you
should not believe for other, but I guess they're actually telling the truth. But if you, but 67%
of the people in that experiment turned it up to 250 folks where it was marked
potentially lethal. The good news is that 33% of the people got up and walked out.
So, there's a, there's a cadre of people who maintain their capacity for critical thinking,
even when all of these sort of atavistic stimuli are, are applied against them to disable that.
And, you know, that I think is our aim in a democracy is to try to be part of that group of
33% who can't be manipulated by fear and can't be manipulated by racism or anti-Semitism or,
you know, all of these other alchemies of demagoguery or authority figures. You know,
and my father told me a couple of weeks before he died, I had a conversation with him where he
said to me, people in authority lie. And, you know, that is something that is critical in a
democracy for the public to know our job, part of our job in democracy is to question everything.
You know, this phrase, trust the experts, it's not a thing. It's a, it certainly is not a feature
of democracy. It's not a feature of science. In science, you don't trust the experts. Never.
You know, I've sued five, I've had, what, over 500 cases. And in each one of them,
there was scientific controversy. There was experts on both sides when I sued Monsanto.
Monsanto came in with experts from Stanford, Harvard, and Yale. My wife, who's an actor,
came to court that day on the last day in their testimony. She watched these people and then
afterwards, and they were so convincing. She walked out and she said, why are you even troubling
this poor company to me? I would like wait till tomorrow. The next day, we had our experts from
Harvard, Stanford, and Yale, and the jury gave us $2.2 billion. They had heard both of them,
and they had to decide which expert is lying. And experts have their own prejudice,
they have their own biases, and their own ambitions, et cetera. And so it's not, you know,
trusting the experts is not a feature of science. It's not a feature of democracy. It's a feature
of religion and totalitarianism, but it's not something you do. Well, you know, we were all
told to do it, right? Again and again, trust the experts. And it's not, it's something that
should settle arms off. Yeah, so I want to ask you about the way that I view what has happened
during the pandemic was the biggest manipulation mindfuck that's ever I've ever seen in my life.
And the 66%, that's scary when you can be manipulated like that, which means there's a
lot of vulnerability out there. And so one of the things that led me into addiction was I was
raped and molested as a kid. And so I view what pharma and what a lot of these agencies did was
they, they raped the population. They raped the globe because rape is non consensual. It's
penetration without consent. And they did it with syringes. They did it with drugs. They did
it with massive manipulation and lots of money behind it. And it was just atrocious. And I feel
so sad for people that aren't in the position that myself and many people here that lost their jobs
that don't have a lot of financial resources and the people that ultimately whose lives were heard
and destroyed the most were people that were poor. And, and then everyone else, you know,
psychologically, there's so many things that happen. So if someone wants to get to get a vaccine,
okay, if you want to get a vaccine, but when it's forced upon you, when you're manipulated
into it, that's a whole nother level. And so I think there should be a hashtag that's something
like pharma rapes or something like that. Maybe that I don't know. But there's a part of me that's
like, you know, I really don't want to take the get angry and, you know, I mean, I love your
approach. You're very, you're very conscientious about not wanting to, you know, continue the
battles and the fighting between each other and trying to bring people together. And that's a,
that's a tough rope to, to walk. I mean, do you internally, are you just
pissed about this? Or you just like, you know, I just, I'm going to do what I can do. I mean,
how do you, what is your emotional state as you take on battles stronger than anyone that I've
seen at least in that department? I mean, this book, the real Anthony Fauci, Bill Gates, Big
Pharma and the Global War on Democracy and Public Health, which sold over a million copies
with zero features in mainstream media. You've got thousands of reviews, almost all five stars.
It's all cited. It's all documented. And when I hear people say, well, he's a kook. He doesn't
know what he's talking about. I mean, you put more data here, not just you, but all the top
doctors that have been, you know, just treated so horribly. I mean, their careers ruined. And
what do they get for it? They're just trying to help people. And so, you know, I guess my question
for you is with, this is still happening. And is that, I mean, out of all the reasons that you're,
you're running for president, I mean, what are the main ones? What would, what do you really hope to,
to do? I mean, you know, one of the reasons that this happened, you know, one of the reasons that,
that inspired me to run was I say this chronic disease epidemic in our country. And we have,
when my uncle was president, 6% of Americans had chronic disease. And, and today, and then by 1986,
11.8 had chronic disease. I 2006, 54% of kids had chronic disease. And we don't know what it is today
because at that point, NIH stopped publishing the data. They do not want us to see this happening.
And to me, it's the biggest thing that's happening right now. The cost of healthcare in this country,
the cost of the military, you know, which was supposed to go down to 200 billion a year after
the wall came down 1992, we were promised a piece of it. And it's now 1.3 trillion a year.
But the cost of healthcare is 4.3 trillion. And 93% of that is chronic disease.
These are new diseases, mostly. So what my chronic disease, there's basically four categories. There's
obesity when my uncle was president. 6% of American kids were obese today, 42%. And 75% are overweight.
They didn't, American kids did not suddenly become lazy. They're being poisoned, mass poisoned,
and by something. And we're all being lied to about it. And then neurological diseases,
all these diseases had suddenly appeared in the early 90s. ADD, ADHD, speech-related, language-related,
ticks, Tourette syndrome, narcolepsy, ASD, autism. None of us ever heard of these diseases when I was
a kid. I worked at the dead center of the battle for rights for people with intellectual disabilities.
My aunt, you know, Schreiber, started Special Olympics. I was working at it as a hugger and as
a coach. When I was eight years old, I worked for 200 hours. And I was saying, go home from the
Ritz-Arden when I was in high school, because this was part of our family DNA. And I never saw a kid
with autism, full-blown autism. The CDC's data say that in my generation today, today, right now,
autism in 69-year-old men, one in 10,000. And in our children, my children's generation, one in 34.
So what happened? Well, Congress said to EPA, what year did the autism epidemic begin?
EPA is a captive agency. It's captive by the oil industry, the coal industry, and the pesticide
industry. But it's not captive by pharma, because it doesn't regulate pharma. So they actually did
a real study. And they came back and said, 1989, it's a red line. That is the year the epidemic started.
Well, a lot of other chronic disease epidemics started at that time as well.
Allergies. I had 11 siblings, 70 cousins. I never knew anybody with a peanut allergy.
Nobody, prior to 1989, heard of peanut allergies. And now there's EpiPens in every classroom.
What happened? Something happened in 1989. And then eczema, nobody ever heard of eczema.
When I was a kid, now it's everywhere. It's all these allergies. It's anaphylaxis, asthma.
My brother had asthma. He was told by his doctor that there will never be a cure for asthma,
because it's so rare and nobody will ever study it. Well, today, one out of every black kids in
urban areas has asthma. And then the autoimmune disease, 120 autoimmune disease that we never
heard of, juvenile diabetes, lupus, rheumatoid arthritis, Crohn's disease, all of this stuff
that nobody ever heard of, and suddenly it's everywhere. And why is nobody asking, where is
it coming from? So the pharma is, of course, making money on it. That $4.3 trillion, the 93% of that,
that goes for $600 EpiPens, Albuterol inhalers, any seizure medications, insulin syringes,
they're cashing in on it. And NIH, right now, instead of doing science and asking the one question
they should be asking, where is it coming from? Instead, they have changed the purpose of that
agency to become an incubator for new pharmaceutical drugs, which they keep half of. Of the Moderna
vaccine, NIH owns half that vaccine. They get half the royalties. They're making tens of billions
of dollars on it. And there are six individuals at NIH who have marching rights to the patent,
who are each collecting $150,000 a year forever from that vaccine. And so these naturally, the
mercantile ambitions of the individual and the agency subsumed the regulatory function of those
agencies. And I'm going to end that. And I'm going to go over there during the first week.
I'm going to go over to Bethesda, my first week in office, and I'm going to get all of the big
wigs from NIH together. And I'm going to say, NIH gives away $42 billion a year, and it gives
it to 56,000 scientists, universities all over the country. And what they're doing now is mainly
developing pharmaceutical drugs to treat the chronic disease epidemic. And if anybody tries to
study, well, where's it coming from? They get a threat from NIH. Do not study that. And NIH can
bankrupt their college. NIH can bankrupt any medical school in the country simply by not giving the
$300 billion, $300 million a year that that medical skill is getting every year from NIH to study
cures, cures, and treatments for chronic disease. Oh, I'm going to go down there and I'm going to
say we're going to give infections, disease, a break, and drug development a break. And we're
going to, for the next eight years, we're going to figure out where's the chronic, why are our kids,
the sickest kids in the world, why do we have the highest chronic disease burden of any country in
the world? Why do we have the highest four times highest healthcare costs in the world and the worst
outcomes? Why are we 79th in the world behind Mongolia, Cuba, Nicaragua, Costa Rica in healthcare?
Why? Why did we have the highest body count from COVID on earth? We had 16% of the COVID deaths in
this country. We only have 4.2% of the global population. Why? Well, CDC said part of it is just
mismanagement. The other part is we have the highest chronic disease rate burden and COVID was killing
people with great CDC. The average American who died from COVID had 3.8 chronic diseases. So they
had diabetes, they had asthma, they had obesity, and one more. That's what was killing people.
It was not COVID. COVID pushed them off the cliff, but the chronic disease got them to the top of
the cliff with one foot over. So I'm going to go down there and I'm going to say we're going to
identify. There's a famous toxicologist in New York named Phil Landrigan. I have used him on many,
many cases. He's a genius and he's very careful now about hanging out with me because the association
could hurt his reputation. But Phil Landrigan has done a series of studies to say, yeah,
something happened in 1989 and what could it be? We know it's not genes. Genes don't cause
epidemics. Genes can provide a vulnerability, but you need an environmental toxin. So what was it?
What environmental toxins are there that are in the category of suspects? That became ubiquitous
around 1989. That affected every demographic from Cubans and Cubis game Miami to Inuit and Alaska.
And that impact boys on neurological injuries of 4 to 1 ratio to girls. What is there that
could be that? And he's come on with about 13 or 14 things that it could possibly be. One of those
is glyphosate from Roundup that fits that timeline perfectly. Another is atrazine, which is another
pesticide, which is now in 63% of the water systems in the country, neonicotoid pesticides.
Same thing. PFOAs and PFAS is the forever chemicals that were put around that timeline
in all of our furniture and all of our children's pajamas. They're flame retardants.
Wi-Fi radiation from cell phones. Ultra sound radiation. Some of these things to me are not
suspects, but they have to be treated as suspects so we can eliminate them. High fructose corn
syrup, which clearly is part of the explanation for the obesity and the diabetes epidemic.
So there's a small universe and we have all the data we need already to figure out who's doing it.
And what I'll do is I'll go down there and say that's what we're going to do and we're going to
find out. And then the vaccine schedule, which went in 1989, we went from three vaccines to
72 vaccines. The three vaccines I got as a kid, my kids got 72, mandated. And the big
change here was 1989. So that has to be a suspect too. So it's probably all of them or a large part
of them, our kids are now swimming around in a toxic soup and they're getting all of these
exposures that operate along the same biological pathways and they're probably cumulative. But
let's find out and then let's eliminate them. And you can say to me, well, even if you find out
it's a high fructose corn syrup, by the way, if you drink Coca-Cola, you should drink Mexican Coke
and other stuff at the high fructose. But let's say we find out it's high fructose corn syrup.
What can you do about it? There's million farmers who are tied in that industry. There's big industrial
BMS like Cargill and Un Santo and these huge players. You can never change it, but you can.
The same way that we did with Roundup. We got Roundup taken out of all home gardening because
once there's a certain critical mass of science, you can get past this threshold in the courts
called the Dalbert Threshold where you're allowed to take that case to a jury. If there's about
15 studies that say the same thing, you have animal studies, bench studies, human studies,
they also at some point the judge will say, yeah, you can take this case to a jury. There's not,
well, I'm going to create the science. And at that point, you don't need to change your regulations
because the plaintiff's bar will go out there and vindicate that product and get it off the
market for that purpose. So anyway, that's the long answer to your question.
So I've studied marketing and promotions most of my adult life and used that for business. And
also now with a genius recovery, my foundation, trying to get my objective there is to change
the global conversation about how people view and treat addicts with compassion instead of judgment
and find the best forms of treatment that have efficacy and share it with the world. And just
earlier today we announced we have a, we're going to launch a recovery kit to help people with that.
And so I think a lot about packaging and you've got so many studies and so much data and so much
research in your book, The Real Anthony Fauci that I communicated to Tony from Sky Horse
the publisher to create like cards and decks of all of the information in a shareable form,
kind of like an Eckertoll meditation deck or, you know, tarot cards. But with all of this data,
so that people can take it in sound bites, because they're, I'm constantly, I don't know how all of
this research that you have in here exists. And Anthony Fauci is still walking around a free man.
Like when Elon Musk said, arrest Anthony Fauci, what is going on? And I'd be curious of,
you know, some of these people that seem like the just ultimate James Bond villains,
that they just want to watch the world burn. And they, it's just crazy to me. So
how is someone like that who, and Bill Gates, I didn't have any idea just how behind, I mean,
I'd love for you, because here we are, a lot of people have probably no idea when they hear me,
Bill Gates, I met him in 2006 at All Things Digital. I used to admire him. I thought he was
this incredible businessman. And when you see what he's actually doing and what he's funding,
and there's so much of it, that it gets past the point of coincidence. I mean, this person has an
agenda, like what are some things I'd love for you to just rattle off some things about Bill Gates,
because you know so much about what he's doing and what he funds.
Yeah, I mean, one of the things that I do do in this book, first of all, that the book's been
through, I think probably about 15 to 20 editions, and in the first edition, and all of them,
I've note in the beginning that says, if you find a mistake in this book, we want to hear about it.
And we will then change it in subsequent editions. I don't want to be pushing information that is
wrong. Oh, you know, people accuse me, you know, including the government of passing on misinformation.
My organization has probably the best fact-checking resources in the country. We have a team of
350 PhD scientists, MD physicians, who are part of our scientific advisory team, and
including until he died recently, Luke Montanier won the Nobel Prize for discovering the HIV virus
in 1983. And none of these people would be part of our team if we were promoting misinformation.
In fact, you know, what we now know from the Twitter files is that when they were, when the
White House was telling Twitter to remove me and Instagram, which they did, Facebook actually
pushed back and said, what he's saying is actually true. It's not misinformation. And they had to
invent a new term called malinformation, which is information that is true, but it is nevertheless
inconvenient for the government. And so, you know, I invite people to find an error. There's 2,200
footnotes, and there's the new book that just comes out today, I think, on the Wuhan cover-up
as 3,300. What I never try to do is to look into Bill Gates' head, or to Anthony Fauci's head,
because I don't know what's going on there. I don't know why they made these decisions.
I can show these patterns of behavior that were tremendously cynical and self-interested.
And I can show that they knew or had reason to know the injuries that they were causing,
the faults in the science like Remdesivir, which Gates was one of the biggest owners of Gilead.
And we can document that Fauci knew that Remdesivir was going to kill people,
and that was going to kill more people than it helped. And that he changed the study, altered
the study outcomes three separate times to make it appear that it was effective, and then got that
approved as the only approved treatment for COVID. And it's probably one of the reasons we had the
highest death rate in this country. But I can show that again and again, but I don't look into his
head and say, here's what he was doing, he was thinking, because I don't know. And I only write
things that I can document. And so, you know, what I would urge people to do is read, you know,
a chapter or two and, you know, make a... I mean, yeah, read it. By the way, what we did here is we put
with each footnote, there's a QR code so that you can, on your phone, you can look up that study
right there while you're reading. You don't have to go someplace. I think it's the first
book that did that. And so, every study, all those 2,200 studies that are in there are quotes or
whatever. While you're reading the book, in real time, you can go to that study and look at the
source document. Yeah. And it is amazing. And what's even more is just how many copies of this
you sold, where there was so much attempts to... No PR, nothing was talking about it. And you
sold over a million copies. I think it's like a million and a half or something at this point.
All right. So, would you guys like to take a picture with Bobby in a little bit? Okay. We'll
do that quickly. So, let me ask you a couple more things. First off, I want to give you an
opportunity. What if I not asked you, or anything that you feel would be really useful for entrepreneurs
to hear? I mean, you are... You're running for president. I mean, this has got to be... You
grew up in a family, though. I mean, this has got to be one of the most stressful things,
but maybe it's just the environment you grew up in and you're built for this. I don't know.
I mean, I have not... I've been very... I felt very peaceful about this, what I'm doing. There's not
been any time weirdly since I've started... Since I launched this campaign that I've said,
I wish I hadn't done this or what the heck am I doing? I've had that experience with other stuff.
There's many times when I... In rock climbing or when I do a white water... A stretch of
sort of airy white water, there's a lot of times where I've said, why am I doing this?
But I've never had one of those moments with this. And my wife is happy. And I think my kids are
happy and proud of me. But what I tried to do is not project about things, but just to live one day
at a time to do my best and then to let the outcome is in God's hands. I had... I came out of the
environmental movement and I saw a lot of people who were... If you're in the environmental movement,
every victory that you have is temporary and every defeat is permanent. You destroy
extinguished species, you're not getting them back. You destroy a sacred piece of land and
pave it over and it's never coming back. And what I watched during those years was a lot of people
who were advocates, who were friends of mine, who just got soul crushed because they'd give their
lives to preserve a creek or resource or a piece of land. They'd see it destroyed and they would
just withdraw and go into isolation and lose hope. And I just said, I'm not going to ever let that
happen to me. I'm going to. I don't have any control over what happens ultimately. That is in God's
hands. The only thing I control is this little piece of real estate inside my own shoes.
That's the only thing I can control. And I can get up every day and say, reporting for duty, sir,
and then go forward and try to keep doing the next right thing, to make my bed, to put the water
in the ice tray before I put it in the freezer, to put the shopping cart back where the shopping
cart is supposed to go, to do the... Are you going out shopping right now? One at a time.
There's just a secret. And as long as I do that, I can be peaceful. And it makes... To me,
it gives me power because it makes me... Because I feel like I cannot be defeated. And no matter
what kind of blow that I get dealt, I'm going to get up again. And I'm going to fight because
I've detached from the outcomes. I don't have expectations. I try not to, so I'll never have
disappointments. And that, I think, it makes me a much more effective advocate for people.
I mean, you put out a video on Thanksgiving about gratitude that I thought was just absolutely
incredible. And I never really studied or followed politics that much. I would talk to my friends that
did prior to the pandemic happening. And then I really started... It was a giant wake-up call of,
wow, who's really running things? I have no idea who's actually running the country right now.
Certainly is not Joe Biden. But if not that this would ever happen, but if it did, if Joe Biden or
Donald Trump came to you and asked you for advice, what would you tell them? I would give them advice.
I'd say you should get out of this race. That's a great soundbite right there. That's really good.
Wow. So, you know, with all our flaws and the flaws of our founding fathers, I still believe
the great American experiment is worth fighting for. And you've, you're taking on one hell of a
battle here. And what sort of helper support do you need the most right now? Well, I mean, the
biggest, the most support we need right now is financial support. I have to get on that because
I'm not running at a political party. I have to get on the ballot in all 50 states. And that means
a million signatures, different configurations of signatures. On average, it's going to cost us
about $14 or $15 of signatures. So I need to raise $15 million. And you can do that
from big donors. If you get one big donor and I need that, you know, they can give to the super
pack, but the campaign itself has to do the ballot access. And so the top donation, the maximum
donation under federal law is $6,600. And they, and, you know, I need to raise in $6,600 increments,
I need to raise $15 million to do that. And then, you know, people who will volunteer,
go to kennedy24.com. And, you know, if you have anything, if you have resources, intellectual
resources, advice, whatever, I'd love to hear from you. But mainly right now, I need to,
I need to raise money for our ballot fight. Okay. Okay. I was having lunch with today,
with some of the group, and a woman had said to me about protection and why have you not been
granted security protection by the president? And this was put in place because your father was
assassinated, and you still have not gotten it, is what need, and she had mentioned, what can we
do to help with that? Who do you send an email to? What do you do to get you protection? Because
you're paying for your own security right now? Yeah, I mean, they used to, people can send,
you know, an email to the White House. You know what, as you said, the candidates,
I mean, historically, the candidates did not get secret service protection until they were,
until after the conventions. And then, when my dad was killed in 68, I was with him at that time,
they immediately provided secret service protection to all the other candidates, to George McGovern,
George Wallace, Hubert Humphrey, and Zeta, who were running at the same time. And then Congress
passed a law that said that every candidate, as long as they're there, they exceed a certain metric,
which I've exceeded for six months, is entitled to secret service protection 120 days
prior to the general election. But in practice, the president can provide it to anybody
on request. And I'm the first candidate in history who has requested it and not been provided. I've
had a number of credible death threats, including three break-ins at my house and, you know, a guy
who showed up trying to get to me in the green room prior to his speech in Los Angeles, who I,
you know, I have a security team that spotted him because he had fake U.S. Marshall badges,
a badge, he had fake Federal ID, and then he was carrying a lot of concealed weapons. He had two
shoulder holsters with full magazines, and then he had a lot of weapons in a backpack, including
laser scope, pistol, with full magazines, a lot of action magazines, guns and stuff.
My team detained him, held him for the police, he was trying to find me,
and the police then arrested him. He said that he wanted to find me for a job interview,
which, yeah, so then, but my uncle, Ted Kennedy, when he ran in 1980, he was given secret service
protection by President Carter, and they didn't like each other. They really had a lot of personal
antipathy toward each other, but my Carter gave him secret service protection 450 days out, and
Obama received it 450 days out. I think 30, maybe over 30 candidates have received it
before the 120 days. Jesse Jackson, Mitt Romney, almost anybody that you can name received it
early, so it's standard to provide it early, but I think they know that I have to, you know,
one out of every $3 that I raise is going to my security team, so I think the White House is playing
hardball and has decided that they're going to try to hurt me financially, which is not really
in the spirit of democracy, because when my father became Attorney General in 1961,
the first day at work, he called all of the upper staff of the Justice Department, and he said to
them, we have one rule. We're never going to politicize this agency. Whether you're a Republican
or Democrat, you're treated equally under the law, and I don't want to hear any even rumors
that people are giving favoritism to somebody who's Democrat. And that, you know, people believe in
the institutions of our country, because we've consistently had leaders who have respected that.
And in the last couple of years, we've seen this erosion, or a lot of the federal enforcement
agencies are being politicized. And I would say, you know, that it, you know, politicizing the
Secret Service is just, is not a good look. We're supposed to be the exemplary democracy in the
world, and to say that if people, if you don't like somebody's politics, if they're a political
threat, you're not going to give them protection is not, you know, it's just not good for our democracy.
Yeah, okay. What, what is the most significant or impactful life decision you think you've ever made?
Oh, I mean, you know, I'd have a hard time with that. I mean, my marriage is, is one.
My, I wouldn't say that I decided to have kids because it just happens, you know.
But I mean, this is one, you know, running is definitely running in this race is definitely
life changing. And how do you handle the criticism and the attacks on you? How do you process that?
You know, I, I process it by just because I, I was raised in a milieu where we all believe that we
would, you know, that our lives would somehow be consumed in some great controversy. And that
it would be a privilege for us if we were to be able to take a an important part in that. And,
you know, I've, I think I understood from when I was a kid that if you're going to do anything
important with your life, that people are going to attack you and that you're going to get criticism,
you're going to lose friends, you're going to lose relationships that there's going to be,
you know, there's going to be a hero's journey where you go through these tremendous hardships
where you go through the valley of death, you feel you're completely alone at some points. And that,
that, that's just, that's part of, if you didn't go through that, it would not be very important.
So I feel like, you know, whatever I go through is, is, is a privilege to be able to, you know,
to do something that's important. And it's just part of it. And then I also,
you know, I feel tremendously loved by, by my wife and by my children and by other my friends who
are important to me. And I feel like, you know, everybody else is kind of playing, we're all
walking through kind of a dream, right? And that, you know, life is a dream and that we have to treat
it like that. We have to treat it. We have to ultimately be indifferent to some of the,
to some of the defeats that we, that we suffer, some of the criticism, the injuries,
the wounds that we suffer. We have to get to a place where we're indifferent about it. There's a
famous, I don't know how famous it is, but it's a, it's a story about a monk who was, who, who's,
whose monastery was invaded by a warlord in China. All the other monks fled and that the warlord
approached this monk who was meditating and tried to talk to him and he ignored the warlord.
And finally, warlord gets irritated and he says to the monk, he says, don't you know that I could
run you through with my sword without blinking an eye? And the monk says to him, don't you know
that I could be run through with your sword without blinking an eye? And ultimately, that's kind of
the objective where we all want to be spiritually, where we're indifferent to the personal consequences
of everything that we do and that we live our lives for higher purposes. And, you know, the,
in the Buddhist tradition, the word nirvana means I'm putting out a fire and that means the fire
of ambition, of pride, of, of anger, of a desire. And all of these things that we're supposed to
view as just clouds that pass over us and that we take an interest in them, but ultimately are,
you know, indifferent and we all go through, you know, difficulties in our lives and we have to be
able to weather those difficulties without being crushed in our soul or without being ultimately
affected by it and just focus on what we do, you know, and what the choices that we actually get
to make. That's ultimately the only thing that's important. Thank you. We've got another evening
session, but thank you. Thank you very much. Robert F. Kennedy Jr., everyone, and thank you all very
much. Here's his book. Oh, picture over here. Let's do a picture. We'll do this with the book.
Thank you.
