Mathematics is power. Lecture 5. Cryptography. How is it safe to bank and buy on the internet?
I'm going to begin this lecture with a very brief history of some of the highlights over the first few thousand years of cryptography.
As I mentioned in the opening lecture, mathematics is a multi-thousand-year project where it's refined, improved,
but everything that was done, even if it's no longer relevant, is still true.
And sometimes, things that were thought to be useless, but true, persist around for decades or centuries,
and then someone picks them up and does something with them.
We'll see an example of that in this lecture, as well as discussions of how it is that cryptography helps keep our information safe
and make it safe for us to use the internet to buy things, bank, trade stocks, log in remotely, send emails,
and all kinds of other information age activities.
The biblical at-bash code is like folding the alphabet in half.
It appears in the Bible, the Old Testament, some of the prophets who were, at the time, minorities,
if you will, in the Roman Empire and other empires, Babylonian Empire,
were afraid that if they said all the things they wanted to say, if they were able to critique the leaders the way they wanted to critique them,
they were not living in open democratic societies, and they feared correctly that they might be imprisoned, tortured, killed,
all kinds of terrible things could happen.
So they wanted to be able to write certain things in code and not have them known to anyone who might read the manuscripts
or hear what it was they had to say.
The at-bash code is folding the alphabet in half, essentially.
Now, I'm not going to do it with Hebrew letters.
The English alphabet equivalent is A would transpose with Z, B would transpose with Y,
C with X, and so on, all the way to M, switching with N.
So if you had the whole alphabet written out in a line and you folded it in half between M and N,
and then just switched those letters with each other.
So let's try something easy.
The word math, M-A-T-H, would go to N-Z-G-S.
M goes to N, A goes to Z, T goes to G, and H goes to S.
Now, if you saw the word N-Z-G-S, you'd wonder what that was meant to be.
So they had to be fairly clever in how they employed the at-bash code to make sure that it was not transparently a coded message.
And they succeeded because the Old Testament is a remarkable document from thousands of years ago.
