The next historical cipher of note is Caesar's cipher, speaking of Nero-Caesar,
but this was his forebear Julius Caesar.
This was a famous situation where he wanted to send a secret message
and what he did was shift three letters down and cycle through.
So for the Caesar cipher, A became D, B became E, C became F, and so on,
all the way down to where X, which now has to go one below Z, goes back to A,
Y goes to B, and Z goes to C.
This is an easy trick once you're aware of it.
You know, you can memorize what the key is in a second.
Oh, I know, I just shift three letters.
But why would it work?
Again, if we try something easy on it,
math, M-A-T-H, goes to Q-D-W-K.
Let me say that again.
Math goes to Q-D-W-K.
At this point, if you're in a hostile circumstance with the Roman army 2,000 years ago,
and you intercept a message, you know it's a military message.
You know there's important information contained therein,
but you're not going to be able to read it if you don't know the secret.
You're going to just see this combination of letters, Q-D-W-K,
and think to yourself, what can that mean?
Now of course it means math, and math is the same as power,
but that wouldn't have helped you fighting Caesar.
Now one problem with the Caesar ciphers is there's only 25 variations.
And once someone else knows what the system is,
they're going to be able to easily decipher the messages too.
But thinking about the at-bash and Caesar cipher
led to the next major breakthrough in cryptography,
which was mono-alphabetic substitution.
The mono-alphabetic substitution began not long after the Caesar cipher worked,
and for this one, all letters go to any other.
So for at-bash, it was very programmatic.
We folded the alphabet in half.
For the Caesar cipher, it's also very programmatic.
If we imagine all the letters in a circle,
where A goes to B and all the way around to Z,
and then Z is next to A, one big circle of letters,
it's like just dialing it.
Three spaces, five spaces, however many.
For mono-alphabetic substitution, now A can go to any letter besides A.
B can go to any different letter besides B,
and so on all the way down to Z.
This is called a derangement.
A derangement is when you shuffle things around
and nothing returns to its original spot.
You could imagine a room full of people sitting down.
Every chair is taken, nobody is standing,
nobody is sitting in every chair.
It's intermission at a show.
They get up, everyone has forgotten what seat they were in,
nobody left anything behind, no ticket stubs,
and they all sit down again.
Now, it's quite possible that they sit in exactly the seat they started with.
Maybe everybody did, but maybe nobody sits in the same seat they started with.
That would be a derangement.
So we want to derange 26 letters.
The alphabet and have everything go to a different letter than it started at.
It's a complicated way to figure out how to calculate it.
The most popular way is using the principle of inclusion and exclusion.
But what's interesting and pertinent to us is how many possible ways there are
to derange the alphabet.
You might think it'd be a big number, and you'd be right.
The number is about 1.5 times 10 to the 26th.
Let's say that again.
That's 1.5 times 10 to the 26th.
That's the same as 1.5 followed by 25 zeros.
That's a huge number.
That's a number so big that a computer couldn't really even check out
all the different possibilities.
