Jumping forward to the next great innovation, to my mind, and there's a lot of other interesting variations on how to do mono-alphabetic substitution-like things but variate so that frequency attacks wouldn't work.
But my favorite, I think, perhaps because of the mathematics involved, came around the time of World War I, and they're called one-time pads.
Now one-time pads are randomly generated numbers.
Now, random is tricky, as we talked about before, because something that's random can have long stretches of order in it, so it becomes very difficult to tell whether something is orderly or random.
As we were talking about with coin flipping, if you toss a coin a hundred times, you do expect around 50 to be heads and 50 to be tails, but you would not expect it to just alternate head-tail, head-tail, head-tail, head-tail.
You'd find that very suspicious and surprising, even though it could happen.
In fact, if you apply probability analysis to 100 tosses, you would expect about three runs of five tails or five heads in a row, which might look also very odd, but it's normal.
In other words, you'd expect to see three times something like T-T-T-T, or H-H-H-H-H.
If you toss the coin 200 times, you'd expect to see runs of eight, eight heads or eight tails, so it can be very tricky to determine what's random, but going beyond that, you put out a pad with hundreds of random numbers on it,
and then you take your message, you use this idea from the geometry of turning letters to numbers, and as I indicated earlier, you want to add.
So now you have a pad of numbers randomly generated, and you have a message of letters turned into numbers.
What you do is add the letters turned into numbers with the numbers on the pad.
Now you have to do it in a highly specific way, but the interesting thing and something that will pop up a bit later in this lecture is you do it involving what's called modular arithmetic.
Modular arithmetic might sound a little bit complicated, and I suppose in some sense it is, but in another sense, it's much easier than normal arithmetic because the numbers can stay smaller.
I think of modular arithmetic as clock arithmetic.
Suppose I said to you, it's 10 o'clock in the morning, and I'd like to meet you for a maple oat nut scones six hours from now.
In the military, I might say I'll meet you at 1600 hours, but most people don't use military time.
So what do I do?
I don't say I'm going to meet you at 16, I go to 12, and then I start all over again.
So if it's 10 o'clock, and I say I'll meet you in six hours, that's really the same as saying that I'll meet you at four o'clock.
You've gone to 12, and you've started over again.
That's one way of thinking of modular arithmetic.
There's other ways that involve division and remainders, but let's just stick with the clocks for a moment.
So we do, for one-time pads, clock arithmetic on the random numbers plus the letters turned into numbers.
And when I transmit it now, because the numbers were randomly generated, there's no repetition, there's no meaningful frequency,
there's perfect chaos in it, the provably perfect entropy in it.
The person who receives the message also has the same one-time pad, and they too, now they don't add, they do the opposite of adding.
They subtract the same thing using modular arithmetic.
If we go back to the clock example, if it's four o'clock, you don't subtract six from four and end up with negative two,
you subtract six from four and end up with ten.
So that's essentially how it works.
And they're called one-time pads because you can use them only once.
It turns out that very skilled people at breaking codes, if you use the same pad over and over again,
they will begin to detect sort of overlaying frequencies upon frequencies,
and with very tricky and difficult analysis can break the message.
So one-time pad, you'd use it, you'd throw it away, the person would receive your message, decrypt it, throw theirs away too.
It never found widespread usage because of a bunch of problems.
First, it's hard to produce randomly generated numbers.
Second, people have to keep pads of numbers with them or hidden in their house,
and that's kind of suspicious and a little bit bulky.
And once they're all used, they're all gone and the person needs new random numbers.
Finally, it's a bit labor-intensive, and although one could be trained to do it relatively quickly,
it would be a slow process to encrypt and decrypt a message,
and if it was a military emergency or if a spy was in some kind of dire trouble, it would take a long time to do.
Nevertheless, even in the 1950s, some of the most important and deeply embedded Russian spies in America
were using one-time pads to communicate their secrets.
