Let's move on to World War Two. Widespread usage causes its own set of problems. For example,
the Enigma Machine. This was the German preferred method of encrypting and decrypting messages
for military secrets primarily. It was, in some sense, very effective because the Enigma Machine
was not terribly hard to produce, probably on the order of a radio or less, therefore not too
expensive. It scrambled things automatically and quickly, it transmitted them, and it automatically
and quickly unscrambled them. A person had to type in the the message they wanted to encrypt,
and when the message was received various lights would flash and the person would have to decrypt
it, but much faster than trying to add together numbers off of a random one-time pad. The Enigma
Machine is too complicated to explain much how it worked. There were different rotors and settings,
and it was very mechanical. It's worth going to the NSA Museum and outside of Baltimore. It's
right across the street from the actual NSA building Fort Mead, and there's all kinds of marvelous
cryptography devices in it, including an operating Enigma Machine. But the issue for us that I want
to talk about today is why didn't the Germans stop using the Enigma Machines? There was a certain
point when they had to believe that the Enigma Machines had been broken, that the codes were known,
that code books had fallen into enemy hands, that without knowing who it was or where it was,
Alan Turing, who we talked about regarding computation, came up with ways of cracking codes.
Why did they not stop using the Enigma Machines? Well, the reason is many fold, but one is they
would have needed something better. The Enigma was very efficient. However, not only would you
have to dream up a new machine, you would need to manufacture them in the thousands, and you'd
have to distribute them all over Europe, everywhere where there was a squad or a battalion or a unit
that had its own Enigma Machine. This is a non-trivial logistic problem, one that computers in the
modern era have been able to address and I'll get to. But the second example, very similar,
of widespread usage in its problems was the US Navy had code books during World War II. Every
ship carried at least some of the code books, and it's interesting to realize that ship to ship,
they all had to use the same code books, right? If you were on one ship and I was on another and
you wanted to send me a secret message, you'd use the same code book that I would use or someone
else would use to contact someone else. I'm sure there were different levels of secrecy and ever
more classified kinds of code books for perhaps ships that had admirals on versus ones that had
only captains or commanders, but every ship had to carry a code book. It was known by the Navy that
at some point the enemy had gotten their hands on the code books. Now although they encased them
and led and people were ordered to throw them overboard if their ship security was breached,
it was still the case that under some kinds of catastrophes code books could fall into the
hands of the enemy. Why didn't they just change the code book? Well now you have thousands of ships
all over the world. Do you have a warehouse of new code books already printed up? Do you have a
World War II version of overnight delivery that could just get all those code books out? Of course
not. So even though they knew it was compromised, the US Navy had to continue to use the same code
books. This is a terrible problem and both the enigma machines breaching and the US Navy code
book breaching led to various kinds of problems. Some of those problems began to be solved in the
mid-70s. Now at this point computers were around, communications networks all over the world were
much more widespread than before and one of the ideas that began to be feasible was that
rather than one standard code book that all the ships would have to use or that all people would
have to use, there could be highly specific keys that both people would possess. So
