All up till now I've been talking about both people have the same key, the same idea to encrypt a code and decrypt it.
Now if the method is known, the only thing that matters is the key.
Back to mono-alphabetic substitution, the key was whatever the pattern was to swap the letters.
With one-time pads, the key was whatever that pad of numbers was.
With a code book or the enigma machine, it's whatever the settings happen to be.
That was the key.
So what we need now is a way to be able to exchange keys at a distance if something goes wrong or is corrupted.
In the mid-1970s, in a huge conceptual breakthrough relying heavily on math,
Diffie Hellman, that's two people, came up with an idea for exchanging key that relied on some very sophisticated mathematics.
And their method has some problems, which I'll discuss in a moment.
But the idea was this, that for a normal key exchange, how things had been done in the past,
if you and I want to have secret traffic back and forth, we both need the same key.
Now how do we both get the same key?
I can't mail you the key and say, here's our new secret key, because if it's intercepted, somebody else will have our secret key.
I can't call you for the same reason.
I mean, we might be able to meet every so often and whisper each other a bunch of things that would turn into a secret key,
but then we'd have to write it down, or in some way, the key transmission,
both of us having the same secret key, would be very difficult.
Diffie Hellman came up with an idea where I could publicly, I could even print it in the newspaper,
shout it to the heavens, have a skyplane, write it out overhead, here's my half of the key.
You could do the same with your half, and you'd say, here's my half of the key.
And the amazing thing about it is, the way we could combine those two things would not be reproducible by someone else,
even if they tried to break it with a computer.
So, even though both of our parts were public, the end processes, we would both end up with the exact same private secret key,
so that if our key was compromised, we wouldn't have to send out new code books everywhere,
we wouldn't have to go through the rigmarole of making new enigma machines,
we would just have a different way, a very public way, of each of us saying our half of the new key,
but it wouldn't just be so simple as sticking it together, it's a nifty mathematical process.
In this case, the whole is greater than the sum of the two halves.
Now the problem with it is, what's called the man in the middle attack.
Using distant communications, someone could pretend to be me, and you might not know it, or vice versa.
They could insert themselves into the middle and fool both of us, so that person would have two keys,
one for you and one for me, and we would each think that we had the same key,
and the man in the middle would be intercepting all the messages.
So even though the Diffie-Hellman Key Exchange had this huge breakthrough of doing something publicly,
it did have this tremendous pitfall that you couldn't really do it and feel safe.
Within one year of the breakthrough of Diffie-Hellman, Revesh Shamir and Adler, RSA,
came up with a spin on the Diffie-Hellman Key Exchange that was revolutionary, no pun intended.
