Before I finish this lecture, I just want to mention the two other primary innovations of the 1970s and then this new millennium of ours.
In the 1970s, the DES, the data encryption system, was developed by IBM for the NSA, and it was deployed in 1977.
It was the standard method of encrypting documents and sending large amounts of data back and forth.
It required computers to use, and it worked even over the primitive computer networks.
It had a good 20-year run, not as good as the 800-year run of monoalphabetic substitution,
but in 1999, with a special computer that cost $150,000 to make, it was broken by a brute force attack.
A brute force attack means that all possible keys were tried to find out what kinds of messages were possible to get.
Brute force is also important because it helped the FBI and CIA and NSA to decrypt some terrorist messages found in Torah Bora.
Although they were encrypted and although they were in Arabic, the NSA ran them on all possible keys until they got sensible information,
and once they had the key, all the encrypted information was available for analysis.
After 1999 and the breaking of the DES, the NSA led for the first time ever an open competition to develop a new advanced encryption system,
the AES, that would be employed as a government and industry standard. That is what's currently used now.
The RSA is fantastic and the AES would not be nearly as useful without it, but if I'm Price Waterhouse and I want to send mountains and mountains of data somewhere,
it's just much slower to use the RSA system, so I want to do it fast.
And so the idea of the AES is that it would allow for fast, unbreakable, confusing dispersion of the information.
The RSA is used to switch the key back and forth between people sending the mountains of data, and then the AES, the advanced encryption system, is what's used to send it.
The nifty thing about the advanced encryption system before I end this lecture is that it uses a combination of polynomials, which we talked about,
and modular arithmetic, which we also talked about. It's got a very large and flexible key size, so a brute force attack is not possible,
nor any of the other sophisticated attacks that people tried on the DES.
The funny thing I suppose to end with is that simple cons like phishing and spam attacks so forth can undermine the power of these systems.
The power of mathematics in cryptography has been one of keeping secrets and allowing commerce to flourish.
It allows for military information to be kept secret as well.
Modern society, as we know and understand it, the age of information, the attempts to keep us secure, none of these could exist without the power of cryptography.
The next lecture will look at mathematical theories of fair division and game theory.
How can they be used to divide up invisible goods? How are they used in the modern business world and in elections?
How does voting theory speak to the kinds of choices and decisions that we have to make?
Mathematicians have analyzed this, and we will together in the next lecture.
This ends lecture five.
