Mathematics is Power, Lecture 6, Fair Division, Game Theory, and Voting Theory.
In this lecture, we'll first explore ideas of Fair Division of Goods,
and move from there to ideas of Game Theory and how it applies in the business world,
and then finish with Voting Theory.
These ideas are all intertwined, mathematics is deeply invested in them,
and you'll see some of the ways they may apply in your life.
Starting with methods and strategies for the Fair Division of Dividing Uniform Goods,
such as a uniform rectangular cake.
Probably the most obvious and time honored is, you cut and I'll choose.
If you have two kids together, or two people, and you have say, one cupcake,
or one rectangular cake where the frosting is uniformly applied,
the cake is the same throughout, then by far the fairest and most obvious way to do it is,
you cut, you make the break, break the cookie in half, and I'll choose.
So the person who's breaking it has obvious incentive to try to make it as equal as possible,
so that when the other person chooses it, that the pieces are as similar as can be.
So this works very well for two people, but what if there are three or more?
There are surely situations where more than two people will want to divide up the good.
One method is for a person to move the knife slowly up the rectangular cake,
and then as soon as one person thinks that it's at a third, they call out and get that piece.
So imagine now you have a rectangle, and a straight line is moving across it.
You and the other person who are not moving that line are watching it, watching it, watching it very carefully,
and as soon as you think it's at a third, you should say something,
because if you let it keep going, and the other person gets it,
then they're going to get a piece that you think is bigger than a third,
and that means when the other piece is cut, then you're going to get something smaller.
So as soon as you think it's a third, you're going to say something,
and you get that piece, or the first person who says something gets that piece.
Now we're back to one piece and two people, and you cut and I'll choose is what goes on.
If you have four people, the idea is the same.
As soon as it gets a quarter of the way across, or what one person thinks is a quarter,
that person calls out, they get that piece, now we're to the three person example, and so on.
That's a fairly straightforward and fair way of doing it.
Believe it or not, there are many research papers and even whole books devoted to these kinds of topics.
Mathematicians have come up with a variety of incredibly complicated,
but theoretically operational ways of trying to optimize this sort of division of goods.
And there are, of course, many other complications that can ensue.
For example, envy. You imagine the other person got the bigger piece.
You're not going to be happy any longer with yours, or a variation, buyer's remorse.
You got a piece, but for whatever reason you decide you're not happy with it anymore.
You don't necessarily think the other person got a better piece,
but there's just something wrong with the one you chose.
Now, it gets a lot more interesting mathematically and maybe in the real world
if the cake has, for example, frosting flowers in one corner.
I personally love frosting flowers and maybe you do too.
So it now can become impossible to cut the cake even approximately in half
because the goods are no longer uniformly distributed.
There's that one highly desirable corner.
This might be like beachfront property compared to two blocks in.
Even if they're the same plot of land under most circumstances,
most people would want the beachfront property.
So now how do you make it more fair?
The person with the beachfront property gets a smaller piece
when the person with the land that's further back gets a much larger?
The questions become much more convoluted and complex.
And again, there are hosts of papers and books written on the topic.
