But the real issue is indivisible goods. For example, inheritance of an estate by a group for brothers and sisters.
Liquid assets such as cash and bonds, stocks, what you will, are easily and fairly divisible.
If it's just cash, it's divided. If it's bonds or stocks, they have a well-set monetary value, done.
However, as a simple example, suppose the house has been in the family for a long time, maybe even centuries,
and not everyone wants to sell it. Maybe nobody wants to sell it. What can be done?
In the past, the way people got around this, and in some parts of the world, still,
the system of primogeniture that the entire estate goes to the oldest son held effect.
Now, that was grossly unfair to everyone besides the oldest brother,
but it did away in some sense with the problem of fair division.
There was no fair division. It was unfair division.
But back to that house that everybody in the family wants.
Now, there's a number of different ways it could be approached.
For example, it could agree to share it different times a year if it was a vacation home,
kind of like a timeshare condominium. But what if it was a principal residence?
What if it was a farm? You don't want to divide the farm field. That will change the value.
And besides, who's going to get the farm house?
If one of the brothers or sisters is so well off that they could afford to buy out everyone else's share,
and the other brothers and sisters were comfortable knowing that at least a family member was staying in it
and they got their fair share, perhaps that would be a solution.
But let's take a deeper look at a related problem.
Perhaps even more contentious, how can various items from the estate be split up?
For example, art that had hung on the wall that perhaps several different of the children enjoyed.
A china set that had been in grandparents. The dining room table that was a beautiful oak with mahogany inlay.
Jewelry. Personal effects. There are all manner of small, ill-liquid assets that might need to be divided.
And it's not so clear how to take care of it.
One might map out a decision structure where the oldest chooses first, the next oldest chooses second, and so forth.
But then a terrible dilemma might be set up.
People might want something desperately more than other things, and if it's taken, that's too bad.
Or they might be of differing values.
Or perhaps there's a blanket that you loved that your grandmother knit that you want,
but it has essentially no real world value, but maybe your brother wants it too, or your sister.
So all these kinds of things can create a real dilemma for people who want to split up in a state.
A mathematician named Canaster in the 1930s came up with a marvelously powerful and interesting way of trying to do this.
It's called the Canaster Method of Sealed Bids, and the details are unfortunately beyond the scope of this lecture.
But let's just try to take a quick look at how it goes, sort of.
All the assets to be divided are known.
And each person who has a stake in the division writes down a list of each asset and then what their personal valuation of that asset is.
So if, for example, it's the diamond ring of my mother who I want to be able to give to somebody, pass on myself,
or I always just loved the way it looked on her finger and made me happy, I might value that very high.
I might value it way more than market value, because that's the one thing of hers that I really want and makes me think of her now that she's gone.
And on the other hand, because I'm a mobile guy who doesn't really have a nice house myself, I'm subletting a small studio somewhere,
I just really have no use for the dining room furniture or the china set, so I would value them much lower than perhaps my sister would.
When everyone has made their list of valuations and sealed them in envelopes, and we really do need perfect security of information here,
but not so secure that we need to encrypt it using the methods talked about in the previous lecture,
a judge or an arbiter or the executor of the estate takes all the different sealed bids and compares them.
For each item, the highest bid, the highest valuation wins.
So if I really desperately wanted my mother's diamond ring, I would bid a number that I thought was very high for it.
If I have the high bid, then I win it.
But there's a catch. It can't be set up so that if I just bid a million dollars or ten million dollars,
or some fictitiously huge number for the item that I care about, that I automatically win it, and that's that.
Here's what happens. The winner pays a precisely calculated, not too complicated to figure out amount to the other bidders based on what their lower valuations were.
So if I valued her diamond ring at ten thousand dollars, because I really wanted it, even though I thought it was really only worth, say, five thousand,
and my brothers and sisters were all interested in it, but not necessarily so interested, so they bid between two thousand and six thousand for it.
There's now disparity between our valuations. And based on what they chose for it and what I chose for it,
I will get the diamond ring and I will pay them a certain amount of money based on the disparity.
When all is said and done, the beauty of the method, the power of the method is, I will get the ring and I will pay less for it by far than I value it.
But my siblings, my brothers and sisters who didn't care much about it, will get money from me for it, and it will be more than what their share of it in their mind would be.
So if there are five of us, let's just say, brothers and sisters, and my sister valued the ring at five thousand dollars, then her share of that would be a thousand.
I wouldn't pay her the full thousand, but I would pay her a sum of money that makes her feel like she got her fair values, that she got at least a thousand dollars for it,
but since I valued it at ten thousand dollars, you know, I value her share at two thousand dollars and I'm going to end up paying her less.
So, in fact, it's a case where everybody's a winner, assuming that there really is one person once at the most.
Of course, if you did really want that ring and bid only eight thousand dollars on it, thinking that would be sufficient, there could be problems there, too.
