How in this model of economic reality do the producers and consumers find a maximally good strategy where everybody's as happy as possible?
The simple answer is Nash Equilibria.
John Nash was a mathematician who came up with some ideas of this game theory.
It was captured a bit in the book and movie A Beautiful Mind that for any kind of certain game or thing seeable as a game,
there would be points where people are maximally happy and minimally unhappy.
That's called a Nash Equilibrium.
Let me give a little bit of the setup.
Each player understands the game and the strategies of the other players.
The equilibrium is achieved if a single person changed a strategy then the results would not be better.
So let me try saying that one again.
Suppose you have four or five people playing some kind of game and by game it can be an economic transaction,
it could be a military or political one, it could be an actual board game.
There will be a moment when things are best assuming that all the players know all the other players' strategies.
The point is best if one person changed their strategy, things would not improve.
If at any time a person could change their strategy and things would improve, then you're not at a Nash Equilibrium.
John Nash was one of the first mathematicians to win the Nobel Prize for proving that Nash Equilibria always exists and therefore in principle could be found.
One way in which these kinds of things are used is setting up fair as possible auctions and bidding.
Now let me describe a couple situations in which game theorists have helped use the idea of Nash Equilibria to set up fair as possible auctions and bidding.
Now for an auction there are several rules that we need to understand.
The first is that auction rules, the same auction rules, apply to any object that's being bid on.
The second is that auctions are anonymous so there's no hidden information or knowledge of motives or what a person may or may not bid on how you know what they might do.
So the auction rules apply to any object and auctions are anonymous.
Now there are a number of different kinds of auctions.
One is the sealed bid auction.
We talked about that a bit with Fair Division.
It goes to the highest bidder.
Another kind of auction is the English auction which is used most prominently by Sotheby's and Christie's in England but certainly seen in all kinds of movies, TV shows and books.
This is one where bids are solicited, people raise panels or nod or wink or phone in their bid.
The auctioneer keeps trying to get higher and higher prices, eventually says going, going, gone and slams a hammer, at least in movies and TV shows.
And it's sold for the highest price.
A Dutch auction is the opposite of an English auction.
It starts high, way over the valuation of the object and the auctioneer keeps lowering the price and lowering the price and lowering the price until one person first bids on it.
This is kind of like moving the knife across the rectangular cake until the first person decides that the piece is big enough.
These two kinds of auctions are very different.
The Dutch auction is called a first price auction because it's the first price, the highest price that someone is willing to pay for it.
In some sense then, from the seller side, this is the very best kind of auction because they get the highest price they can for their item.
By contrast, the English auction is a second price auction.
Here, bidders drop out until there are only two bidders and then one raises the other bidder and that person drops out.
So in an English auction, it's called a second price because it's basically just a little bit more than the second highest bidder would have paid.
So let's say that again.
In a Dutch auction, it's the highest possible price, so that's best for the seller.
In an English auction, it's the second highest price that anyone was willing to pay.
So in some sense, that's better for the buyer because at least they don't have to go to their maximal valuation.
