Robert Sapolsky got a degree in biological anthropology from Harvard. This was back in
the late 70s, lived in Kenya for a while to study non-human primates, earned his doctorate
in neuroendocrinology, which is hard for... What in the world is that? Can you just flesh it out
for the rest of us? Well, it's without an R after the D, so endo, neuroendocrinology. It's
studying the effects of the brain on hormones in the body and the effects of hormones on the brain.
And that could be about, for my money, totally boring stuff, like how much you're in your kidneys,
you're making, or it could be all about behavior and psychological states and actions. And so,
yeah, the body, brain, looping influences there. So you're not a dualist. The brain is the mind.
The mind is the brain. The brain is the body. It's all one. Yep. And there's no little me sitting
inside the brain that's made out of stuff other than brain cells. I was taught to, as I was a
believer for decades, a devout Christian, and I was taught to be afraid of people like you. I was,
don't listen because they think you're just a monkey, right? They want to make a monkey out of
you literally. And I spent so long not understanding, but more than that, being afraid. I was afraid to
be even around these ideas because I might become infected with evolution. Are some people, from
your perspective, more genetically, biologically wired to believe in gods and monsters? You think
I might have been more primed genetically to be and stay religious? Well, unfortunately,
my guess is a good clean experiment was not done on you, which is to control for the family you
were raised in. So to clone you and dump one version of you in the middle of some other culture,
clone another version that could have spent nine months in a different womb having a fetal
environment. So I don't know if it's genes. I don't know. The thing we say in the business is
it's gene environment interaction. It's every biological factor environment interaction. So
you can't tease them apart, but it's not by chance that you wound up being who you are. And
that each of us did. Is that essentially nature, nurture? Is that what we're talking about?
No, because you don't really have to choose anymore because each is interacting with the other.
You got genes that change how sensitive you are to nurture you've got so that at some point,
it doesn't make any sense to say, what does this gene do? What does it do in a particular
environment? What does this environment do? It depends on your genetic makeup.
Dr. John Waffey is a friend of mine. He's a computational neuroscientist. He wrote a book
called The Illusion of God's Presence. I'm sure I'm not going to do him justice, but I'm going to
try to distill his point that we are born helpless and we require a parental other
to provide for our every need. When we get older, according to Dr. Waffey, there are certain things,
I don't know, triggers that cause those same responses in us as adults. And this may explain
our desire to look up to a parental other in the heavens or elsewhere.
When you hear something like that, is there anything to it? What do you think?
Well, I think there's a lot to it. I would frame it much more broadly. We like all sorts of other
primates don't like risk a whole lot. We don't like ambiguity. We don't like a lack of clarity.
We don't like the possibilities that something happens and we will never know why it did.
And anxiety makes us more that way. And we have an incredibly powerful human tendency
to fill explanatory vacuums with explanations, no matter how dubious. And I think a great
example of this is studies. You take subjects and you sit them down and you say how important
is religion in your life and you get whatever answers you get. And in contrast, if for 20
minutes before these people had been sitting trying to solve some like Sudoku puzzle or something
that was unsolvable, it didn't have a solution. It was frustrating all of that. On the average,
people afterward rate themselves as being more religious. Uncertainty, novelty, ambiguity
brings out a very desperate need in us for explanation, no matter how implausible the
explanation is that we latch on to because it's comforting. I know you've debated the late
philosopher Daniel Dennett. He had said something and I made this note because I really wanted
your take. He was talking about religion coming out of an idea. So a lightning strike takes place
and I'm in, you know, I'm out on the African savannah and I say, well, it was the tree god
that made the strike happen. And so I begin to make that claim. Even those who disagree are
talking about it. It becomes part of the milieu, right? It becomes embedded in the cultural
conversation. And before you know it, there are shamans and imams or whoever and they're all
talking about, maybe they're preaching about the magical tree, that kind of thing. But he said that
religion exists only for itself, like the common cold might exist only for itself. And I tend to
think that religion was actually a bonding agent, a tribal bonding agent between non-kin,
meaning that it grouped us together, even if we weren't direct relatives, it solved problems,
it answered questions, filled blanks, alleviated fears. There was more utility. It didn't just
exist for itself. And it's kind of a broad question. Do you have any thoughts about that?
Yeah, I completely agree with that interpretation. And religion is a great social glue stated in
more evolutionary terms. We have evolved to want to pass on as many copies of our own genes as
possible. Some of the time we do that by cooperating with kin. Some of the time we do that by cooperating
with non-kin under sort of controlled circumstances, a reciprocity, all of that. What does religion do?
It induces something people in the business call a sense of pseudo kinship. You feel more related
to people than you actually are. And that fosters cooperation, that fosters unity,
what that often fosters is the flip side, pseudo speciation. The thems are so different from us,
they hardly even count as human. And that's a very effective thing. Great evolutionary biologist,
David Sloan Wilson, who is pushed for a very modern view of evolution playing out on lots of
different levels. And he's got this wonderful book, Darwin's Cathedral, where he analyzed the
emergence of Calvinist belief in Switzerland and a whole bunch of little religions were popping up
at the time and analyzed why they happened to be in the right place at the right time and the
right sort of belief system to promote pseudo kinship to a more effective and they're the ones
who won out. And to use an evolutionary metaphor, they drove the neighboring competing new religions
into extinction. So yeah, it is a fantastic sort of mechanism for getting people to feel
more connected to each other. We've been talking a lot about how I don't think most people attend
religious services or are part of a religion itself for reasons of theology. I tend to think
they're there for reasons of community. I mean, they own the Bible, but they don't know what's in
it. They know it's true, but they don't know what it says kind of thing. But I think beyond
that, it's more of like, I want to belong. I need a group. I need a tribe.
Totally agree. And something like that has an upside. There's a long literature showing that
religiosity can have some health benefits. And it takes a lot of work to tease out the fact that
religious people usually are less likely to be abusing substances. More importantly, religious
people typically get a social community. And that in and of itself is a wonderful source of
health protection. You see the same benefit for atheists who find humanist groups to feel
so that can have a blood plus side, that can have a downside, which is all sorts of studies
showing you look at somebody from a religion with some tradition of extremist violent
fundamentalism, like show me a religion that doesn't. And you try to look for the predictors of it
and studies that have been done show, ooh, how much do you believe in God? That's not a predictor
of like you're willing to become violently fundamentalist. How often do you pray? That's
not a predictor. How devoutly do you pray? How often do you go pray with a bunch of your
co-religionists? That's the predictor. How often do you go to the church, the mosque, the synagogue,
because that's a surrogate measure of how often are you in an echo chamber of people who are saying,
yeah, yeah, yeah, we're special, we're better, they're animals, they don't count. So that I think is
enormously informative of the potential toxicity of religious social support that one gets by being
religious. In grouping and out grouping, right, I guess the classic dilemma, which brings me to the
useful fiction claim that, well, you know, it's even if it's not true, it bonds people together,
it gives them a sense of purpose and hope. I mean, if we're looking at the sort of the
bumper sticker version of it, they say religion is good for us, even if it's not true. And I really
struggle with that, because if it's not, was it Bertrand Russell, he said, if it's true, we should
believe it. And if it's not true, we should not. How do you approach the useful fiction angle when
it comes to the benefits of religion? Well, useful fictions, religiosity, and to a lesser extent,
spirituality, religiosity, for example, is great at reducing anxiety. It provides answers in the
face of life's terrifying unknowns. And exactly as we were talking about, we yearn for attribution
at that point. So you find out, whoa, there is a purpose or even better, there is a purpose. And
it has something to do with people like you being better. And even best of all, you being better
and going through all those versions of that. But then the big problem is what religion is best at
when it comes to decreasing anxiety is decreasing anxieties that religion invented in the first
place. And what you see in terms of the kindnesses, the potential upsides of religiosity, and the power
of faith, for my money, there's nothing more destructive when it turns out that faith turns
out to be displaced. Having the carpet pulled out from under your feet does not constitute
psychological well-being. So they tell me I'm sick and then sell me the cure in so many cases.
You came out of orthodox Judaism and busted out of that mindset pretty early. You were a teenager,
is that correct? I was 14 when I had a tumultuous night of sturm and drunken and decided there's
no God and there's no free will in the universe. There's this big empty and different place and
it's been smooth sailing ever since then. So yeah, I dumped all of that when I was about 14.
Well, at least you got through the bar mitzvah where you got the presents. You got all the goodies
and then you had your epiphany. Exactly. When you say orthodox, please forgive the stereotype,
but we've done some talking about the ultra-orthodox. Was your family that family where they're
swinging the copper-roat chickens over their heads and not pushing elevator buttons on the Sabbath
and shit like that? I mean, was that the temperature or what? Close approximation of we were what's
called modern orthodox, which nonetheless has a lot of that. We had two sinks in the kitchen, one for
meat, one for dairy, two refrigerators. If you screwed up and infected a utensil with the wrong
kind, you buried it in the backyard for months so that it would be purified. You sure did not do
all sorts of things on Saturday that could be mistaken for work or anything muscular? Yeah.
So that whole song and dance and a whole ideology slash theology that went along with that.
It's interesting though to see so many secular Jews talking about religion. I don't even call it
a useful fiction in this case because an increasing number of people who are Jewish,
traditional Jewish people or cultural Jews rather, they say, well, they're either not sure about God
or they just don't buy it, but they love the culture. And I totally think that's great. We're
creatures of ritual, are we not? I mean, the music and the clothing and the structure of it all,
there's benefit to that, correct? Absolutely. And I deeply resent that circumstances of cultural
evolution and societal prejudices and all of that meant that the Renaissance had a whole
lot more really amazing Christian composers than there were Jewish ones. So they got the much
better music. But yeah, culture, a sense of belonging is very, very powerful and very galvanizing
and as a double edged sword for better or worse. But yeah, cultural aspects are great to bring along
as long as they are well selected. People are often surprised to hear that I say I support,
like if you want to have a secular religion, I mean, knock yourself out if you want to frame
community in that way. One thing about religions, they have had a long time to come up with pretty
effective models or frameworks for community, right? Yep. And not only because they've had
lots of adherents, so you get that many more good innovators and because just sheer numbers,
but there's an oomph, there's an emotional oomph. You make up some silly wedding vows where you're
citing, I don't know, Nelson Mandela and Taylor Swift or something and like that's great. But
there's a power knowing that you're doing a ritual that your parents and grandparents and great
grandparents all the way back were doing and maybe even died in some cases for the freedom to
do that all. Yeah, time gets a big power to it. Talking here with Dr. Robert Sapolsky,
this is a hot button you don't have to answer. I'm just going to toss it out there, okay?
So I came out of a, I mean, I used to be that guy. I was the Fox News Christian of the Ann
Colter reading Glenn Beck listening, you know, pro death penalty and suck it up, love it or
leave it, America kind of guy. You know, that's pray the gay away guy. I was essentially a Reagan
conservative, okay, even in my youth. And when I left Christianity, I went through a long
re-evaluation of what are my values? How do I feel about things like drugs and the death penalty
and immigration and the rest of the world and American exceptionalism, etc. And I came out
the other end and I was struck by how cruel many of my previous or at least myopic, but inadvertently
cruel. Sometimes positions were when I was a devout hardcore right winger. So I myself see
American conservatism, at least the frontline Republican party right now as kind of the culture
of the cruel. You want to touch that at all, Dr. Sapolsky? Yeah, the way I would reframe it is
it's the culture of people who have gotten a certain type of shitty deal in life. I mean,
there's among like snotty, elitist, academic types who love that evolution, all that.
There's like, ooh, look at the parts in the United States where people don't believe in
evolution. It's the American South and fundamentalism and like Yahooism and the temptation instead of
saying cruel in this case, just not educated and not critical thinking, all of that. And I think far
more importantly, you look at that part of the United States and that's the part that's been
most screwed over in lots of ways with the worst healthcare and the most toxic
mining going on. And the most, that's a part of the country of people who have gotten a pretty
crummy deal. And it's not surprising that an anger at thems is one consequence. It's not surprising
that a totally distorted sense that things used to be better when we were the culture that dominated
the country comes to the forefront. And it's not at all surprising that a pretty stoic, insular,
unempathic version of explaining the unexplainables and life pops out the other side as well.
Catherine Stewart, journalist and author, friend of mine calls it the knowledge economy. There
are simply some people who have not benefited from the knowledge economy. Would you phrase it that
way then? They just simply haven't been given the resources and they were kind of given a raw deal?
Yeah, all the above horrible leadership in many circumstances. Although, I don't know, a northern
state like Illinois has a proud tradition of sending its governors to prison for horrible
leadership. But nonetheless, the American South, the cultural things that got people there led to
a certain elevated rate of violence that is endemic to the South, the culture of honor, where the
people came from and what their backgrounds were in the British Isles when first being settled,
set things up for that. The fact that the South stumbled onto a collectivist type of crop cotton,
which instead of solving it with collectivism, they solved it with slavery, has made that a world
that is still trying to recover from its original sin and probably never will. Yeah, just all sorts
of things that set things up so that certain types of explanations, even if they're nonsensical,
and even if they are angry and exclusionary and vengeful, can provide comfort if you've been
challenged in certain ways. Yeah, but not to belabor this, speaking to primates,
isn't some of this just primitive? It's easier to hate than it is to love. It's easier to lash
out and tear down than it is to build. Those types of things. This idea that I want the world to look
like me because I'm a person of great insecurity and I need validation. There's a lot of stuff
there that's just, I don't necessarily in my mind think, well, you got the shaft. Sometimes I think
you're just a terrible person, but maybe I'm not giving them enough credit or at least giving the
story of their lives, their backstory enough credence. I don't know. Well, my gut certainly
pulls into that direction very readily and I've got no shortage of people who
challenge my personal rule that it makes no sense to hate anyone, but
people become who they are for reasons of that. No one winds up being, you know, Mother Teresa,
lover or not, by chance. Nobody winds up being Vladimir Putin by chance.
There's no such thing as someone who is just happens to be a rotten, damaging human or one
who just happens to be a wonderfully empathic. We're just the end products of circumstances
that made us who we are. For those who are listening to the audio version, Dr. Sapolsky's
dog, I'm a dog lover as well and mine will bark in any moment whenever someone's outside,
but if you hear the rattling of the leash, it is Dr. Sapolsky's not wearing chains or anything
like that. I know it sounds that way. Oh, just psychic ones. Let's talk about
political parties since we're in this realm. Is it true that conservatives have a lower
threshold for disgust? I think I'd read something along those lines. Is it true that
those who are liberal are more empathetic or is that just a lie? I tell myself because I want
to feel superior. Oh, it's a mixture of both the disgust threshold thing. I love that finding.
So first off, disgusting things, viscerally disgusting things disgust us and make us recoil
and make us over generalize what it is that's making us recoil. And fantastic study showing
this. You sit somebody down and they fill out a whole questionnaire about their political views,
their social politics, their geopolitical, their economic, whatever. And you see on the average
how people answer these questions. And if instead the person was sitting in a room
where unbeknownst to them, there was a completely disgusting smell in the room,
people become more socially conservative. Does nothing to your economic views,
nothing to your geopolitical people sit there and they become more likely to say,
oh, when those people do something that's different, it's not just different. It's disgusting.
It's wrong, wrong, wrong. And you find, for example, that across the political spectrum,
when people are made disgusted by stuff, they become more hostile to immigration or become
more hostile to gay marriage back when these studies were being done. That sort of thing.
So right off the bat, disgust is this fabulous stepping stone from sensory disgust to
moral disgust, emotional disgust, economic, ideological, all of that. So that's sort of a
backdrop with all of us. But what you see layered on top is on the average, and these are just
statistical, blah, blah, blah, on the average, social conservatives have a lower threshold for
disgust than do social progressives. What's this about? What's this about genes, environment,
fetal, whatever, you know, however you turned out to be, but show pictures to people of like
festering wounds crawling with maggots and things like that. And on the average, social
conservatives' stomachs lurch more than the average social progressive. On the average,
social conservatives have more cleaning products in their home, are more averse to
all sorts of germish sort of thing. And what's that about? Jonathan Haidt, New York University,
has done some wonderful research on sort of the psychological structure of progressive versus
conservative mindsets and purity, cleanliness, all of that is a much more emotionally salient thing
in the lives of your average social conservatives than social progressives. How did they become
that way? Because of genes and hormones and environment and culture and all that sort of
thing. But once you look at the world, and it is way easier to decide that there is disgusting
stuff out there, it is way easier to decide that those people are disgusting when they do that.
And in much the same way, for whatever genetic environmental, cultural, et cetera, reasons,
you wind up being somebody for whom ambiguity is frightening. You wind up being a social
conservative. If the future is an exciting place, that's one thing, if the future is terrifying
because it's unknown, you spend a lot of time thinking about how wherever you are needs to be
made great again, because it used to be wonderful. And I think that's where the roots of it are. So
yes, on the average, in the realm of social sort of political issues, on the average social
conservatives are have a lower threshold for disgust than do social progressives. And I think
that is so cool and interesting. I used to be that guy. I was proud of an accident of birth.
I'm proud to be American, even though it was really out of my hands and I hadn't even qualified it.
Like where do we land in terms of cost of living and crime rate and who's the most warlike and
quality of our healthcare. And I actually wrote about this a few years ago. I was just so absolutely
cocooned here in hashtag America. But as I spiraled out of right wing evangelicalism,
I more and more saw myself as citizen of the world. I guess that's kind of common, right?
As we see us all the human primates across the color culture, across borders, that's common,
correct? Yeah. And I think that provides one of the great sort of thought experiments for seeing
we're just the end product of stuff that came before that we had no control over.
You look at first generation immigrants on one or you look at people who are just a couple of
generations in my wife and you see kind of where randomness came in. Her folks got off the boat at
Ellis Island and they had enough money to get on a train that took them all the way out to Iowa
until they ran out of money. And they became like commie leftist cattle ranchers. And if they had
run out of money sooner, they would have wound up in Philadelphia or they would have wound up in
the Lower East Side and completely different cultures with that with my parents and grandparents
generation. If it's some juncture, some border guard had demanded their identity papers, which
had been forged to get out of there or something, they wouldn't have gotten it. And I could have
spent my whole life instead growing up thinking that like Vladimir Putin was a cool guy and those
Ukrainians are all neo-Nazis who were threatening just by the randomness of like who got on the
boat, which boat didn't sink, who was granted asylum, who inherited the family's wealth,
and who was the second son who decided to pick up and try the new world.
He wind up having completely different views. If somebody had missed a train connection back
when, I would have been like a Putin enthusiast or who knows what. Yeah, you get something like that
and you realize it's just the randomness of circumstance, environmental and biological.
I'd read that travel is one of the great cures for bigotry. It sounds like a meme,
I'm sure it's reductive, but I mean meeting other people, integrating with other cultures,
seeing the other as front and center, eye to eye, face to face, voice to voice,
would be I think an effective cure for othering people. Yes? No?
As long as you're not going there with the intent of missionizing them into being
second-class versions of us and, you know, doesn't take a whole lot of looking at the history of
colonialism to see that that was one big threat of it. But yeah, the more different things you
see in the world, the more you realize there's different ways of doing things and the more
you realize that nonetheless, like people in general love their kids and get googly eyed over
puppies and like being tickled and the commonalities there. Wonderful work by this historian of
science, Frank Sullaway looking at like the last 500 years history of science, scientific
controversies. Is the earth round or not? Do the continents move? Is there evolution? Is
phrenology for real? And looking at all of the scientific players and doing lots of research
on their family histories and stuff, trying to predict who were going to be the intellectual
radicals who embraced this new whatever and who would go to their grave saying this couldn't
possibly be. And there were a bunch of predictors. If you like hated your father, you were going to
wind up being an intellectual radical. If you thought he was a great guy, much the opposite. If you
were in first born, if you all sorts of other predictors and along with that was if you traveled
a lot outside your culture while growing up, you were far more likely to wind up being one of the
intellectual radicals. You could virtually divide the world of mid 19th century naturalists
into the ones who had gone to someplace very exotic versus the ones who left their office
in Oxford to go look at the little birdies in the bushes outside and predicting who embraced
evolution and who didn't. So yeah, that's a big predictor. I was at a convention in Toronto years
ago, and there was a debate. It was the scientists and the philosophers. And before the first half
hour was up, one of the scientists was so frustrated. He crawled on top of the table. He crawled on
top of the table and he was banging his fist at the philosophy. He was so angry. And it's
interesting to see this tug of war. I don't know the answer to the are all questions,
scientific questions. Does philosophy is it is philosophy science? How do you even start that
conversation? Oh, God, I'm going to fall into terrible sort of hegemony here.
Everything we do from like our noses twitching to the aesthetics we invent and the cultures we
is the product of like the brains we carry around and brains are made of biological yuck.
And like, you know, no matter what type of philosophy you wind up espousing, and the
polls show about 90% of philosophers firmly believe in it's both a material world and somehow
that's compatible with there being free will and holding people responsible for their actions.
For whatever reasons, that's the kind of brain you wound up having. And that's how you got there.
So philosophy is yet another manifestation of our lives as biological organisms.
You speak a little like a philosopher to me. You've got that kind of storytelling aspect
of the philosopher, not that's an insult or a compliment. Well, reading some of their stuff,
I can only be deeply insulted, but I wish there had been more more anecdotes along the way there.
I mean, are all question scientific questions because I tend to lean that direction?
Well, depends on what kind of science I was recently rereading. Stephen Chey Gould had this
essay where Gould was agnostic and left leaning all of that paleontologists.
And this famous essay that he called Oh, Non-Overlapping Magisteria, in which he made the
argument that why can't we all just get along and like there's room for both science and religion
because they're interested in non-overlapping areas of inquiry. And that's totally wonderful if you're
the type of scientist where what you care about is like the evolution of snail shells, which is
a lot of what Gould did. On the other hand, if you're the kind of scientist who tries to
understand the neural basis of violence or the neural basis of mental illness or the neural
basis of kids getting brain cancers and any of those horrible, those are not non-overlapping
areas of inquiry. What you're doing is like you were studying the science of why some awful,
awful things happen and how insisting that it's a completely separate domain to say that there are
transcendent forces who did that. And for good reasons that we may not know, there's no room for
both. So in those realms of science, if you study like any of the awful areas that biology take you
to, which is like saying the nature of life and lots of you can't have that and room for
religion as well, they're incompatible. Free will. Okay, fine. The philosophers say,
I have agency. I can choose. At some point, I can get involved. I can be an interventionist.
And yet I also, my brain is doing what it does at such a speed and in such a way that
it's sort of predetermined. I'm just realizing what I'm doing. So can you sort of spell it out in
small words, you know, with crayons and language that a guy like me can understand your approach
to free will, sir? Well, first off, there's a tiny subset of philosophers who are incompatibilists.
They say you can't have free will and our understanding of how the universe works. They
don't go together. They're not compatible. But they are way out on the lunatic fringe,
which is where I am as well. But yeah, the majority of philosophers say, yes, yes, yes,
the world is made out of atoms. And there's such a thing as biology. But somehow, somehow,
that's compatible with us being agents and masters of our own actions and thus appropriately
held responsible for things. And I think that's gibberish. And it's gibberish. Well,
so many people believe it because it's often a drag to think otherwise.
But it's gibberish, because people get pulled into looking in the wrong place for free will.
You sit there, and you got to make a decision. What flavor ice cream are you going to get?
Or a decision like, are you going to pull this trigger or not? And you form an intent as to
what you're going to do. You're conscious of what your intent is. You've got a pretty good guess
what the consequence will be. Most importantly, you know, you're not being forced to do this.
There are alternatives available for you. And for most people and for our criminal justice system,
that's necessary and sufficient to show there was free will. And there's a whole world of people
who have been debating with really elegant experiments, trying to locate when exactly does
your brain form an intent and when are you consciously aware of it. And that's great. But
like none of that has to do with free will. Because as you sit there, and you have this intent,
and you know that you have it, and you know you don't have to act on it, there's alternatives
available to you. None of that asks the only question you can ask, which is, so how did you
turn out to be the sort of person who would have that intent in that place and time? And when you
look at how you turned out to be that sort of person, your brain one second ago, your hormones
this morning, your environment for decades, how you were raised, your fetal stressors, your genes,
your goal. When you look at that, none of us had any control over how we turned out to be the sort
of person who would have the intents that we have, who would have the wishes that we have,
who would have the extent of willpower, you can't will yourself to have more willpower,
you can't successfully wish to wish for something different than what you wish for. And when you
look at sort of the mechanics of how we become, who we turned out to be, that's where you see
there's no room for free will there. All we are is the end products of our biological histories
interacting with our environmental histories, over which we had no control. Well, if that's the
case, I'll play devil's advocate or apologist, often religious apologist, and how could you ever
chastise or punish the child for stealing the candy out of the store? How could you ever jail
a murderer if it was never their choice? Well, this is where we get into some really thin ice,
because if you follow through the logical implications of this, blaming and punishing
anybody ever as a virtue in and of itself is not only intellectually insupportable as ethically
insupportable. Likewise, praising and rewarding anybody because that's virtuous to do that
makes no sense either, because nobody earned anything. None of us had any control over who
we became. None of us are entitled to any more or less consideration than anybody else. And amid
that, yeah, punishment and reward can be very good instrumental tools. And that could be very
effective at shaping behavior now and then. And certainly some of that goes into child rearing,
and some of that goes into every aspects of our behavior. But the notion that any sort of justice
is being served, when you punish someone for behaviors they had no control over, or reward
someone else for behaviors they had no control over, it is just a morally unacceptable world.
Oh my God, people have conniptions at this point. You're just going to have murderers
running around on the streets, obviously not. I mean, that was my first, I found myself literally
sitting forward going, wait a minute, do we not imprison the person who is a murderer or potential,
or who may murder again, or for the protections of society, there are so many layers to that
onion. But what someone hears on the surface is, well, hey, it wasn't their fault. So whatever,
that's not what you're saying. No, you've got to protect people from damaging individuals,
regardless of the fact that people become damaging because they were damaged. You got to protect
society from it. But you do it in a way where you subtract free will, you subtract blame,
you subtract volition, you subtract rotten souls out of the whole equation. Oh my God,
that's so difficult. It's a quarantine model. Someone becomes dangerous, you quarantine them,
so they can't harm other people, you quarantine them the absolute minimum and not an inch more
than that. And you don't moralize at them about how they're a bad person for needing to be quarantined,
and you protect society from that. Whoa, that is like so impractical. We do it all the time.
We do it. You got an airline pilot who has hay fever, and they're taking antihistamines,
and as a result, they're drowsy, and the law is something like if you're a pilot and you've taken
antihistamines, you can't fly for three days because you're dangerous. You got to protect
people from drowsy pilots, not because they have rotten souls and want to hurt somebody,
but you quarantine them. You can't fly, but you can do whatever else you want,
and it's not your fault that you got sneezing and that. And we do that in all sorts of settings
where we can protect society from individuals who are capable of being damaging through no
control of their own without invoking culpability. And here's one with a great historical sort of
precedent to it. You get some person, middle-aged person, driving along and from out of nowhere
with no prior history whatsoever, they have a grand mal seizure, and they lose control of the
vehicle and they strike and kill someone in the process. And this is totally heartbreaking and
tragic, but we do not sit there and say, oh, they evilly decided to have a seizure and lose control
of the car, they could have prevented it. No, of course, we don't say that. And people used to say
that throughout all of European history, seizures were associated with demonic possession and people
burned at the stake. No, we don't blame somebody. It's incredibly crappy luck that this person had
a seizure from out of nowhere, but we got to protect society. We use a quarantine model,
and every state in the country has a law, they vary in terms of the length of how long do you need
to be seizure free on the right meds in order to be able to drive again. Not because the person is
sleeping with Satan, but they got like screwed up potassium channels in their head and it's not
their fault, but we got to protect society from them. And we can do that now. And that would have
been unthinkable to somebody 400 years ago, where somebody had a seizure and in the process, like,
you know, flung their arms around and bopped you on the head. Obviously, they and their buddy,
Satan, were working with intentionality. It would have been inconceivable then to have a mindset of
saying, oh, it's a neurological disease, it isn't the person's fault, we need to do more research
to know how to prevent it. And but we got to make sure they're not driving if there's a chance of
them having a seizure. And that's easy for us now. And all we have to do is extrapolate and know
that there are things where we're sitting right now. And it's intuitively obvious that some people
are rotten mean people and other people are kind and all of that. And like, people can be who they
want to be kind of stuff to know that 400 years from now or 40 years from now, whatever, we'll be
looking back and saying, oh, my God, I can't believe they used to think that one's capacity for empathy
was a product of free will. Here's the biology of it. And we and our judgments will seem just
as primitive as people who were saying epilepsy is a sign of demonic possession. And in those cases,
yeah, there's no blame, there's no praise, there's no special treatment, there's no sense of entitlement,
there's no such thing as justice being served. But nonetheless, you got to have a society in which
dangerous people can't damage people. And where you foster people with the capacity to do tough,
really useful things and like motivate them to do it.
How about your inbox is a fun place. Right now, there are people who've climbed on a table and
they're banging their fists on the top toward you right now. I'm just going to let them and you have
it out right now. You've been very generous with your time. Before I let you go, if I may,
I want to bring in a friend of mine who is a paleontologist. Her name is Erica. She runs the
Gutsick Gibbon Channel. She is one of the smartest people I've ever met. And she is a fan of yours.
And so I wanted to just bring her in for a quick introduction and see if she had a question or
comment for you. Erica, good to see you. Hey, Seth. Hi, Dr. Sapolsky. It's a pleasure to be here.
I'm sorry to kind of crash the interview, but gosh, when I found out that Seth was interviewing you,
I was like, oh my gosh, you know, you've been such a large inspiration to me for so long. I was like,
I'm simply going to have to ask for you to drop in and pester you for a moment.
That sounds good. So I'm coming at this more from the... I'll give you my background. My master's
degree, I got in primatology out at Rohampton over there in London. And I'm currently a third
year PhD student in biological anthropology. So I'm on the morphology side of things. I study
like myosin apes and things of that nature. But I sort of come from the school of behavioral
ecology in living primates. So your work on the primatology side of things, I found to be
supremely inspiring. And I really enjoyed... Actually, I haven't read your book on... I believe it's
called Determined, but I finished Behave this past Christmas and I really enjoyed it. So I'm
going to sort of ask a question that might not be expected, that's a bit divergent from what
you guys have been talking about with the free will stuff. And I'd just like to hear your favorite
anecdote throughout the years of your studies regarding some of our closest living relatives.
Well, let's see, a number of them, a number we're completely disastrous, darting, attempting to
anesthetize some of the baboons. Probably the most exquisite moment I ever had in my 33 seasons
of hanging out with these baboons was one with my wife who came out and studied the baboons,
also did her thesis on them. And we had this incredibly ancient guy in the troop who was the
last one from my original population in the late 1970s. I'd always liked him. He was this like
gentle old guy. He was a gentle young guy back when his... He, as far as we can tell, he was
like probably half blind at that point. The kids, the infants hassled him because he was at the back
of every progression. We were sure he was going to get picked off by hyenas. And like very, very
tentatively, we darted him, we anesthetized him, which is what some of the work was with all the
baboons in the troop, and did a work up on him to see how his body was doing. And when he woke up,
you put him in a holding cage, and then you open up the door and every baboon on earth runs out
of there barking and threatening and tear-assing out of whatever this... And we did it for him,
and he walked out slowly, and he took a few steps, and he sat down, and we did something that breaks
all the rules of like field primatology. We sat down next to him, and we all sat there for a while,
and like we broke even more rules. We had these like little... In Kenya, they're called Malika
biscuits, and Swahili Malika is angel, these little angel biscuits, and which are like cookies,
shortbread cookies. And we gave him a piece, and we had some, and just sitting there like watching
the zebras and watching the clouds with this guy who had been around for 20 years from when
things started with them. This was like a moment to die for, even though we were breaking all the
like starship enterprise rules of how you're supposed to be a primatologist. So that was just
an exquisite moment. Dr. Sapolsky, you did a lot of work with baboons. Living among them,
when I say it that way, it sounds like you're like climbing in the tree, and you're actually part of
the, you know, the troop. But can you just in, just in a moment, tell everybody kind of what your
background is in this area of your work, please? Yeah, I've kind of oscillated back and forth between
two fields as a lab neurobiologist to feel primatologist. The common theme has been understanding
stress in the lab, what are the effects of stress on the brain, what do particular stress hormones do,
molecular biology of that, can you genetically engineer neurons to be more resistant to stress,
blah, blah, all of that out with my baboons. It was looking at these socially complicated beasts
with these really, really challenging, stressfully challenging societies and stuff,
and figuring out whose bodies dealt better with stress than others, who had the rotten
cholesterol levels, who had the bad blood pressure, all of that. And what did that have to do with
their social rank, their patterns of social affiliation, their personality, which is a totally
legit term for other primates. And that's what the darting was about monitoring their bodies.
Wow, what's that? That is our National Geographic Clock. Each hour on the hour makes a different
sound. Wow, he brought one of them back from Africa. Our kids grew up with that and it is
as did our dogs. And it's amazing when we have like somebody over and we're all just sitting
there and like suddenly they hear like some hyena cackle or something and we don't respond,
the dogs don't look up, did they just hallucinate that sound because we're habituated to it. So
yes, that's our National Geographic Clock. I would think it'd be a social experiment,
you're actually watching their reaction as if they're in the wild. Yes, then we take urine
samples. Erika, did you have anything else for Dr. Sapolsky before we call it? I just want to make
sure you've got a few minutes with him. No, gosh, no, that was phenomenal to hear. I've done work
in Kenya, I go every summer and collect fossils over there in West Kenya, kind of off in the
core region. And it's interesting to hear the softer side of baboons because for us out there,
when the baboons crest the hill and they're curious about you, it's quite intimidating
to see a large group of dozens of baboons, especially the males hearing them coming with
that barking sound. I prefer the verbates because they're so much more docile comparatively,
although they're really naughty. Dr. Sapolsky, though, wasn't there a story that you had told
that you were studying a troupe of baboons and they got tuberculosis and you disappeared and left
that work for a decade came back and there was a noticeable change in their behavior. They were
more docile, more cooperative. Did I read that right? Yeah, it was a very rare artificial
unlikely circumstance having to do with the presence of humans where it wound up half the males and
the troupe died of tuberculosis and it wasn't random, which half it was the males who were most
aggressive and least socially affiliative. And this left you with a troupe that was female dominated
and much nicer male baboons left there and they developed and this is an okay word to use. They
developed a social culture that had much less aggression, much more social affiliation. Males
did not display aggression onto females when they were in a bad mood. And the most amazing thing was,
as you said, I gave up on that troupe after that and didn't look at them for a decade.
But coming back, yeah, they were still like that, but it was new males by then. Male baboons grow up
someplace else, leave their home troupe at puberty and transfer into this new one. And over this decade,
they were being repopulated by young jerk male baboons who had grown up out in the big,
bad normal baboon world and they showed up and somehow it took about six months
for them to learn. We don't do stuff like that here. And I did a ton of work trying to figure out
what was the mechanism for the cultural transmission in them. So that said, nonetheless, they were
still scary. I do not love baboons. They're obscene backstabbing guys. And that's why they're good
for studying psychological stress. But this particular guy was wonderful.
When I read the story, I must have read it wrong because I was thinking you had left and there
hadn't been direct contact and they all had done philosophy or something. They all sat around the
base. They had a meeting and thought, well, let's become more civilized. It is time for us to evolve
to a higher echelon of baboon. But that's not what happened. That was kind of a one-off
because of human intervention. Go ahead, Erica. I'm so curious because I remember that anecdote
as well. And I thought that was so fascinating because, you know, in paleoanthropology,
there's this big question. Paraparamatology as well. Like, was the common ancestor of humans
in chimpanzees more chimplike or more human-like? And either they have these disparate social
systems, one being more female-dominated or co-dominant and the other being more male-dominated
and they're just separated by this one river. It makes you wonder. I remember reading that and
thinking to myself, like, I wonder if something similar happened in the common ancestor of the
Panans where you got perhaps this more violent, more linear dominance, hierarchy-oriented
group of Panans that for whatever reason, they see the more aggressive individuals kind of
culled from the group and then they end up with this sort of female structure to it,
more co-dominant structure, I guess I should say, to it. But I think that's so fascinating to just
mull over. And it's speculative. Yeah. That or ecological models where you have very, very
dispersed resources so you can't get big territorial troops, you can't get males dominating a whole
bunch of females. Yeah, all sorts of different routes by which you get that. Well, I could just
leave you two in a room and probably go on vacation, but I'm going to- I'd hold them captive
of conversation. I've got a side could just ask them questions all day long. You got to cut me off.
I was thinking 45 minutes, but I just couldn't let him go, so we hit the hour mark. By the way,
we were talking about his dog. This is Linus. He is a descendant of the wolf and so he sits with
me occasionally when we are doing the hard work of pointing and clicking here, but Eric, it's
always good to see you. And Dr. Sapolsky, you are such a good educator and you're such a wonderful
communicator, storyteller. I've got your lectures up here this week as I was prepping for the
interview listening again and I'm just struck by how good a science communicator you are. It's
one thing to have the data, which I think there's so much good data, but to have somebody who
communicates it in the way that you do, that's just rare and it's really exceptional. So thank you
for your work and thanks for being here. Thank you. Thanks for having me on. Take care. Good luck.
You
