Dr. Eric G. Strauss is a research associate professor of biology at Boston College.
He also serves as the director of the environmental studies program and as a science advisor for
the Urban Ecology Institute.
He received his B.S. from Emerson College and his Ph.D. from Tufts University.
Dr. Strauss has served on the Barnstable Conservation Commission and on the boards of directors
for the Cape Cod Museum of Natural History and the Association for the Preservation of
Cape Cod.
His research projects are supported in part by the National Science Foundation, the Henry
David Thoreau Foundation, the U.S. Forest Service, the Boston College Intersections
Program and other funding agencies.
Dr. Strauss' research focuses on behavioral ecology and science education.
He studies the influence of environment on the reproductive success and life history patterns
of social vertebrates.
Much of his work has been strengthened by collaborations with the Urban Ecology Institute,
the Lynch School of Education and the Urban Ecology Collaborative.
With help from these partners, Dr. Strauss works to promote the stewardship of healthy
urban ecosystems by improving our knowledge of urban ecological function and by engaging
communities in the process of urban restoration and transformation.
Dr. Strauss has published extensively, both in behavioral ecology and in science education.
He is the editor-in-chief of the web-based journal Cities and the Environment and is
senior author of a nationally distributed science textbook, Biology, the Web of Life,
and an upcoming textbook on urban ecology.
Dr. Strauss' research studies serve as curricula for courses taught at Boston College, its
partner universities and collaborating high schools.
His main courses include Foundations of Urban Ecology, Ecology of a Dynamic Planet, Animal
Behavior and Organisms and Populations.
Through his work in science education, Dr. Strauss strives to create authentic connections
between the scholarship of original research and the teaching of high school and college
science.
Dr. Strauss prepared the course guidebook that comes with these lectures.
The guidebook includes the lecture outlines, a timeline, a glossary, biographical notes
and a bibliography.
To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to review these materials before
or after each lecture.
