Music
Hello and welcome back.
You know, in the last lecture, we were investigating the impacts that humans have had on ecosystems.
And today it's a transition.
We're going to be shifting from thinking about humans as forces that change the planet
to the science that helps us to understand how we can measure and evaluate those kind of forces.
Now ecology has different scales, very much like history, and it involves legacy, such as the land ethic.
But today we're going to focus on key contributors.
We're going to talk about Heckel, who coined the term ecology from the word oikos.
Eugenius Varming, who brought early ecological thinking to the science of botany.
Arthur Tansley, who introduced the whole idea of ecosystems.
And of course Darwin, who glimpsed the big picture of how systems change over time,
focusing on natural selection as an explanation for life's unity and diversity.
Now I want to begin with some really cool imaging that we have from our laboratory.
And what you see here in this sort of grainy gray image is actually a thermal image of the deer that we study.
And what you're seeing from the deer is the energy that's given off in the infrared.
And this is one of the modern tools that we can use to measure the number of animals in a system.
Now we're studying white-tailed deer as a function of trying to understand the Lyme disease system.
And there's a relationship between deer density and human risk of Lyme disease.
We're going to have that conversation in detail a few lectures from now.
But you can see here these images are taken at night and we wouldn't be able to see into that vegetation to be able to count those animals.
But yet because they're mammals and they're giving off heat, you can see that we can count them
and you actually see birds in the background and other organisms as well.
I can only imagine the kind of conversation we could have with Charles Darwin if he had had those tools to be able to assess animal density.
Now in some respects ecology has been of a bit of a wrestling match among conflicting ideas.
A struggle to emerge from this shadow of natural history and a bit of a feud among zoologists and botanists
and microbial ecologists for a holistic vision that is really the hallmark of this discipline.
Like so many sciences, we have powerful tools to investigate and theories to help explain the details of particular phenomena.
However, it is much harder to unify such a wide-ranging science than it is to explain its individual parts.
Like the very root of the word ecology, oikos, which is Greek for the idea of a house.
So now imagine all the individual systems within a house.
The electrical system, the plumbing, the heating, the house construction and the human design elements.
How do these interact to form a whole system?
Now surely they do, but we consider them all as subsystems.
Hence when a new house is built, we have separate inspections from the plumbing inspector and the electrical inspector and so forth.
Yet we live in a house as a whole system.
Perhaps only envisioned as a complete system by the architect during the design and construction phase.
Now architecture has the model of something called universal design,
which is a theory of construction that considers the challenge of providing physical access to all parts of a building system for all people,
regardless of their physical limitations.
But this is still a fairly focused and narrow vision.
Now ecology's first big unifying hurdle was to distinguish itself from natural history.
Robert Peters in an essay published in Perspectives in Biology and Medicine draws the distinction between natural history and the science of ecology.
In that natural history is essentially a contemplative process and ecology as a science is a tool for prediction.
He argues for a retreat from natural history in order to formulate, other than to formulate initial impressions of an ecosystem.
However, not all ecologists accept this premise.
Ia Wilson, one of the 20th century's most accomplished ecologists, argues that natural history, the uncovering of new species in their interactions,
is at the very core of the ecological science and is absolutely integral to moving the science forward.
Now as you can see, the debate is healthy and generally a science grows stronger as a result.
So let's begin our conversation with one of the world's great naturalists, Charles Darwin.
Now really any conversation of Darwin is really an homage to the movement of naturalist to science.
And he turned the art of observing nature into a powerful scientific tool and a holistic explanation of how biological systems work.
But ecology is a relatively recent science and has grown out of Darwin's work.
And ecology is understood at different scales.
So if you take a look at this graphic we have provided for you to help you lead you through this idea,
you can see that when we think about this science, when we think about understanding a holistic presentation, if you will, of the ideas,
we have an ecological context for our understanding.
That's the data and the mathematical models, the scientific responsibilities that go with doing this kind of science.
But there's also a socioeconomic context with values and interests and human information.
There's the land and these other assets that are also in essence a responsibility, if you will, to understand how the system operates.
And then of course there's an institutional context because we're dealing with humans.
And here we have law and authority and public sector responsibilities.
So these overlap and help to create this holistic understanding.
And some of the overlap involves a regulatory overlap and some of it involves the social obligations that as citizens and stakeholders
we bring to a conversation around ecology and its use in ecosystem protection.
There are informal decisions that we make all the time around our behavior in the communities in which we live.
But where all three of these come together we have the potential for the strongest partnership,
both in the development of ecological ideas and ultimately using ecology as a tool for human betterment.
So when we think about ecology, we think about these levels developing from the most fundamental to the most complex.
And let's explore some of these levels in which ecologists do their work.
Now first of all ecologists work at the molecular level where we are investigating interactions among the chemicals associated with living systems.
And ecologists here might be investigating things like pesticide residues.
And we know that these residues have tremendous impact on things like amphibian development which we're going to be addressing later in this lecture series.
Some of these residues actually mimic the endogenous hormones that organisms have and sends these haywire signals in the developmental regime of frogs.
And as more data are coming out we're discovering that humans are susceptible to these as well.
And in rural areas there's actually the emergence of an understanding that certain months of the year when humans are conceived,
especially if it's in the late spring and early summer when pesticide residues tend to be highest within ecosystems,
downstream impacts of developmental abnormalities in these developing fetuses are actually highest during periods of time when conception happens in that window of the calendar year.
In addition ecologists work at the cellular level and here we begin to investigate the first scale of autonomous living entities such as the soil bacteria and the photosynthetic algae.
These organisms have tremendous impact on nutrient cycling or greenhouse gas levels.
And in fact there's a whole field of ecology called microbial ecology that focuses at this level.
And some of our most powerful theories and models that are driving our understanding of ecology come from this scale.
Moving up in scale we have the tissues and here we're seeing cooperative interactions among cells, primitive living societies if you will,
and you may not have actually thought about the tissues in your body as being a cooperative coventure among individual cells but they are.
And here ecologists focus on the uptake of toxic chemicals, certain compounds of which are sequestered in certain tissues,
and have significant downstream impacts like lead in the nervous system and mercury in the tissues.
We're going to be talking about both of those later on in the course.
Larger scale yet, organs structural and highly specialized, here the evolution and adaptation of organs to different ecosystems,
understanding the ecology of carnivores versus herbivores which changes dramatically the body structure and behaviors that these animals go through.
And then there's ecology at the level of the organism which is the most important unit of evolution because as we'll see in later conversations,
it's individual organisms that carry these bags of genetic information, the DNA, and those bags either get transferred to the next generation
or they don't, fundamental measure being that of fitness. We're going to talk about that.
And here things like the impact of urbanization and human land use change on animal behavior and animal foraging strategies has a huge impact in understanding the nature of ecology.
The effect of lights on bird migration and sea turtle orientation, another piece of work done at the scale.
Another scale increasing in size is that of the ecology of populations and these are interactions among individuals within a species.
And here we have the considerations of things like local and global extinction events,
gray wolves which are locally extirpated but still have a global presence.
The next level are communities. These are multiple species interactions and this is one of the most important domains of ecology.
And it's the core scale for understanding interactions in ecology, the movement of energy, the cycling of materials.
Now ecosystems, which are communities along with the physical environment, provide a large scale regional view of the ecological health of the landscape,
such as measuring forest health in urban areas as well as coastal fisheries, both areas that we will invest heavily in in this course.
Even larger we have the biomes, which are large regions of the world defined by water availability and vegetation.
And here we're considering the entire terrestrial or aquatic and atmospheric living system.
And here we're connecting to things like Love Lock's Gaia hypothesis and we will talk about biomes and the biosphere later in the course.
Now the early ecologists focused on something called limiting factors in the world of animal ecology and plant ecology were actually quite separate.
Now we began our conversation with Charles Darwin and we need to include Alfred Russell Wallace in this conversation as well.
And their contribution was to think about the origin of species, which in many ways is the birth of community ecology.
Today's species are derived from ancestral species in an unbroken lineage of genetic transmission.
Remember broken chain equals extinction and natural selection is their model of what drives that change.
Evolutionary change in populations where favorable heritable traits are inherited and become more common over time.
And organisms that survive pass on those traits to their offspring.
And over time the variation among members of the population increases and the characteristics change, i.e. they evolve.
So we define natural selection as the force that shapes the genetic characteristics of populations, favoring the most reproductively successful combinations and therefore certain individuals.
Now this idea of natural selection actually gets its roots from an English clergyman and fledgling economist Thomas Malthus.
He lived from 1766 until early into the 19th century, 1834.
So although he had this career as a clergyman he studied mathematics at Cambridge and he grew up in an incredible environment.
His family was friends with the philosopher David Hume and Jean-Jacques Rousseau.
I can just imagine the kind of conversations that happened around the dinner table when he was a young boy.
He developed mathematical models for understanding populations and wrote a famous essay called The Principle of Population.
And from this we get the idea of the Malthusian catastrophe because his calculation suggested that the Earth's human population would double every 25 years without some kind of external population control.
Now these ideas tremendously influenced Darwin and in fact influenced other scientists like Verhulst who developed logistic growth models after some of these ideas that Malthus had forwarded.
Now unfortunately Malthus is remembered in social history for his relatively cruel philosophies that emerged from his belief that the Earth was becoming drastically overpopulated.
And it had a tremendous influence on British social policies including those that led to the Irish potato famine which in fact we will talk about later from an ecological perspective in this lecture series.
In fact his pessimism gave rise to the idea that economics was the dismal science.
But really his contributions were really helpful in forging an idea about the way in which populations grow.
Now Ernst Heckel actually is credited with coining the word ecology which comes from the Greek word oikos meaning house.
And he supported the idea that an individual's ontogeny maps its entire history or phylogeny.
In other words an individual's development actually goes through sort of a mini evolutionary process.
He was a zoologist and he studied comparative anatomy.
He was an aggressive promoter of the ideas of Charles Darwin.
And he dabbled in studies of human evolution making wild predictions without any evidence.
And in fact some of his predictions are poked fun at today because not only are they tend to be wrong but they had some pretty heavy social overlays.
He predicted that humans evolved in the East Indies.
In the end his theories were actually weakened by his belief in Lamarck's theory of acquired inheritance.
That individual organisms can evolve within their lifetime and then pass those on to their offspring.
It was a compelling idea at the time in which evolution and natural selection were getting their scientific sea legs eventually proved to be wrong.
But there were a number of scientists who made significant contributions but their vision was a bit crippled by the fact that they couldn't let go of the Lamarckian model.
Another critical contributor to the idea of ecology is Eugenius Farming.
And he transformed ecology into a science through his work in botany.
So he believed in the direct descent of living organisms in the same species and he incorporated some of Darwin's ideas of natural selection.
But he remained at heart a Lamarckian.
And so his initial contributions, plant biology, very, very helpful and really was one of the foundations of the area of ecology that botany would occupy.
But again his vision was limited by this Lamarckian model.
Now Victor Shelford came along.
He was an American zoologist and an animal ecologist.
He did most of his work at the University of Illinois.
And one of the things he's most remembered for is he helped to found the Ecological Society of America.
Which is a unifying organization to which most of us as ecologists belong to.
And one of the things he did is he was in charge of the Illinois Natural History Survey from 1914 to 1929.
And by the way this natural survey became the model for the national federal efforts to understand the natural history and ecology of our landscape.
And he's best noted for something called his law of tolerance.
Where he says a species distribution is determined by the environmental factor for which the species has the narrowest tolerance.
Such as oxygen or pH or salinity for something like marine organisms.
Back on the botany side we had Arthur Tansley who was an English botanist who was championing this idea of ecosystems.
And he was the founder of the British Ecological Society.
And these two Ecological Societies, Ecological Society of America and British Ecological Societies,
have been extraordinary forces of uniting and bringing together ecologists at annual meetings, regional meetings,
to help sort of flush out the core aspects of the science.
Now he was heavily influenced by farming but he rejected Lamarckism.
So here we have a fully modern Darwinist or Darwinian view of evolution being incorporated into our thinking about ecological systems.
And he considered that there was an interaction of the biological and the geophysical forces.
Now later in life he branched into psychology and had some very interesting ecological ideas that helped to push forward that discipline as well.
He did important research on species range and looking at environmental conditions.
And in 1939 he published a huge map of the vegetation of the British Isles.
Now we begin to understand the systemic approach.
So he was looking at the distribution of plants from an ecosystem level, sort of stepping back.
Only imagine if he had GIS capacity to create these beautiful digital maps, what his vision would have done.
Switching back to the United States, we consider the work of Eugene Odom.
He lived from 1913 to 2002, 88 years of extraordinary productivity.
And he's best remembered for thinking about nature as interactive systems.
And one of his great contributions was that he wrestled ecology away from the idea that it was just an additional branch of biology.
Instead he envisioned ecology as an integrated freestanding science that investigated the interactions of living organisms and the abiotic earth across all scales.
Now he did some great pioneering work at the Savannah River installation in Aiken, Georgia.
And he began actually with a government grant to investigate the ecological implications of the nuclear weapons production that was taking place on the river ecosystem.
Now his early career was frustrated by his colleagues who misunderstood ecology as just a formalized type of natural history, devoid of any unifying themes.
And like so many great inventions, if you will, in human history, frustration and need becomes the driver for change.
And so Odom sought to correct this with his most famous work, his book Fundamentals of Ecology, which was first published in 1953 and updated many times later.
It was the first and only textbook in the field of ecology for decades.
Now he spent most of his career at the University of Georgia and he was a steadfastly critical thinker about the science of ecology.
And he helped to really sharpen the rigor of ecological theory.
And he pushed to separate the politics of the environment and the science of ecology apart so that the science could stand as a body of work and therefore be useful in the policy and political arena.
But the science would be driven by theoretical questions.
And we could argue that he was really one of the first scientists to study ecology on this larger scale.
Now some of the key ideas of ecology involve legacy and land ethic.
And here we see some of the historical development of environmental ethics, like the Golden Rule, the relationship between individuals and their society.
The sage Hillel formulated the Golden Rule as a precedent for understanding early Jewish moral law, that which is hateful you do not do to your fellow.
And emerging from this idea was Aldo Leopold's land ethic.
And he considered the relationship between Homo sapiens and the living earth in which we are cohabitants.
And some of his most important essays included thinking like a mountain, in which he writes of the interaction between the deer that live in that environment
and the role that they play in the ecology of the mountain was really transformative work.
He also wrote a Sand County Almanac which was actually published after his death. It was published in 1949.
And he worked to forge a union between ecology and conservation.
Understanding that ecology was a distinct science but felt strongly about the use of ecology as a tool for human betterment.
So his major contributions worked towards soil conservation in his native Wisconsin, which led to the state's first soil conservation act.
He was a co-founder of the Wilderness Society.
He worked for the U.S. Forest Service and the University of Wisconsin and stands as a landmark of the kind of work that can transform a science into a useful tool of human improvement.
Now modern ecology accounts for ecosystem services, especially in arenas like urban ecology and landscape ecology.
And really modern ecology is a variation on the theme of what have you done for me lately?
This links the science of ecology to human survival.
And modern ecology attempts to weave these two ideas together.
And one example would be the long-term ecological research sites that have been set up in collaboration with the National Science Foundation and research teams across the country.
There are about 30 of them.
Now interestingly enough, two of which are actually set up in cities, Phoenix and Baltimore.
And they have a human biological focus.
And they're led by a new wave of ecologists, Nancy Grimm in Arizona and Stuart Pickett in Maryland.
And if we take a look at the way in which they are considering the use of ecology as a tool, you can see that they've created this integrated social ecological system
where there are social components like the demography and technology and economic structure and institutions that humans bring to the landscape.
And there are these bio-ecological components that have been traditionally measured in ecology, like primary production and biodiversity and nutrients and disturbance.
And these come together through an emergence of our understanding of the interactions that humans have with their environment.
How do they use land? What are the land cover implications?
What about consumption and disposal and so-called flux, the way in which elements that support an ecosystem change over time?
And then there are these external systems that drive that, biophysical and political and economic forces that shift these ecosystems.
It's a new and integrated way of understanding the way in which ecosystems function.
We will get into this in great detail later on in this course, but I want you to understand that one of the great transitions in modern ecology has been to bring in the human factor.
These projects consider humans as central to understanding ecology.
So what are the demographic patterns? What are the economic systems? What are the power hierarchies? How does land use and management impact the designed environment?
Now this takes us back to Tansley, right? Because Tansley was thinking about this complicated relationship between the physical environment in which organisms live and the biotic environment.
Those are the organisms themselves. Tansley, that's Tansley's model.
Tansley would recognize, if you were alive today, the contributions that let's call the urban ecologists.
That the urban ecologists are making to our overall view of ecology by simply adding additional boxes.
So Tansley would be comfortable with this biotic box and the physical box and the interactions that take place between the two of them.
And people like Stuart Pickett and Nancy Grimm would say, you know what? There's a significant part of the environment that's been built upon by humans.
Turns out it's only about 6% of the world's land mass, but it happens to be the most valuable pieces.
And there's also a social force associated with the way in which humans live.
So we know that humans interact with their built environment.
But if we take those two ideas and attach them to the original Tansley model of the biology box and the physical box,
and then we add the built environment and the social drivers and complexity that humans bring,
we now actually have captured all of those apparently disparate ideas that give rise to our understanding in ecology.
And as we think about the changing world and the increase in the human footprint on the landscape,
and the fact that cities as emergent systems are the most important ways in which humans live,
it really challenges us as ecologists to expand the nature of our science,
maintain a robust science, but use that science in support of human need.
So looking forward, what does ecology look like as we move into the next generation of scientists?
Well, Andrew Reid from the University of Edinburgh and James Clark from the Nicholas School for the Environment at Duke
in a recent edition of the journal Trends in Ecology and Evolution were asked to predict the future of ecology
as that journal celebrated its 20th year of publishing.
Now, the authors were quick to point out how dangerous it was to predict the behavior of scientists.
However, what they saw was a need for a widening of spatial scales where ecology will contribute,
especially this unification of microbial ecology with its theoretical and modeling base
with the powerful natural history data of the larger animal and plant ecology.
They also envision a blossoming of applied ecology, science and service to human needs
with a focus on climate degradation and habitat loss.
They also suggest that new tools will permit entirely new kinds of questions to be asked.
You know, the emergence of technologies that permit investigating animals and plants remotely
delve into their genetic secrets and reconstruct their natural history through chemical analysis
is forever changing the way that ecologists do their work.
Now, satellite-based radio telemetry permits scientists to track the movement of animals to a very detailed degree.
Polar bears, wolves, whales, even small animals can be fitted with GPS radio collars and followed remotely,
allowing scientists to get very detailed information on their geospatial activities.
Our lab uses radio telemetry on coyotes and turtles to understand more of their natural history patterns and behavior.
We're going to talk about that a little bit later.
Now, molecular biology has also transformed the science of ecology, allowing researchers to track the lineages
and evolutionary patterns of organisms in ways thought impossible just a decade ago.
For example, genetic analysis is unraveling the mystery of isolated populations of organisms.
Seaside sparrows, which were considered to be at least six subspecies,
sort out to only two distinct populations when the appropriate genetic markers are used.
Now, the endangered red wolves, which have shown some hybridization with coyotes,
present a population tangle that has implication for management.
Researchers at the University of Idaho, along with US Fish and Wildlife Service scientists,
have located at least 18 gene loci that are unique to red wolves
and make it easier to differentiate populations of wolves and coyotes along their zones of hybridization.
Now, the emergence of chemical isotopes as a way of investigating ecosystem function
has also transformed our ability to reveal trends in ecosystems.
As you probably know, isotopes are forms of an element that vary in their number of neutrons.
Now, they're functionally identical in living systems, these isotopes,
especially of carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and sulfur.
We can track those in the tissues of organisms.
And different ecosystems have different ratios of isotopes,
and so samples of tissue can be traced to the areas in which they were formed.
Very useful, for instance, if you are trying to figure out where a bird molts along its migratory route, for instance.
Now, in the next lecture, we're going to focus on the forces and drivers that change ecological systems.
And this is the beginning of ecology as an integrated process.
Thank you.
