Hello, and welcome back. You know, in our previous lecture, we had investigated this
notion of legacy and begun to investigate not only how ecosystems are formed and impacted
by history, but also looked at the history of the people who investigated some of the
early aspects of ecology. But ecology is the study of systems, and it's the systems thinking
part that we need to reengage today. You know, all ecosystems and the organisms that live
there are shaped by the forces of natural selection, and ecosystems are always changing.
The drivers or the forces that change ecosystems can be biological, geological, physical, and
social. And in fact, in the next two lectures, it's going to take us a while to unpack all
of these ideas. But we're going to start today. I want to begin with an image that is very dear
to me. It's a picture of a scrub pine taken from our field station down on Cape Cod, and it's taken
in the early morning, and you can see that there is water dripping from the pine bough. And I think
it's a great way for us to begin to think about this notion of history and connection to systems.
Cape Cod, for those of you who may have visited, know that it sticks out in the ocean.
It has some of the most challenging weather patterns of any place in North America,
and the organisms that live there have to be particularly hardy, because for the most part,
the soils are relatively poor, they're wind-driven, it's mostly sand dunes. And so the creatures,
especially the plants that live there, are pretty hardy, and scrub pines are particularly
scraggly-looking plants, and many of the people who live there actually think that they're ugly,
because sometimes half the tree will essentially have no pine needles on it at all, and that's
usually the side that's facing towards the wind. But I look at those trees, and I think survivors,
I think organisms that are able really to withstand extraordinary impact. And in this particular image,
you see this sort of gentle and soft morning that suggests that there's a calmness and quiet to the
ecosystem. And in fact, before the sun has risen, the dew in the morning is still hanging off of the
leaves, and the day will get warmer, the wind will pick up, the system will become more energized,
but this is sort of a quiet moment, and it's very reflective for me to see that. It's quite an
extraordinary place. Remember from our history when we were talking about Arthur Tansley's work
in the 1950s, it really helped develop our understanding of examining ecology as a system.
You know, we can envision ecology as a result of a variety of legacies,
and these legacies include predictable outcomes, but also contingent outcomes.
Now, Tansley's idea, remember his idea of these multiple boxes? We had the biotic complex
and the physical complex, and they were interacting. So we had non-living forces
and organisms that were living there, and they impacted each other. You know, this was an important
idea that Tansley brought forward. But more recent research that we will be investigating in more
detail later in our lectures by people like Stuart Pickett and Nancy Grimm and others suggests that
there is an important additional component, and we touched on it just a bit in the last lecture.
And that's thinking about the social aspect of what humans bring to ecological systems,
and the fact that humans build things along the way. So we used the term ecosystem engineers in
our last conversation, and that's an important component when we're thinking about this diagram
or this conceptual framework for our work in this lecture. So we have the social complex,
we have the built complex, and then we have this box of the biotic complex and the physical complex
that Tansley provided for us, and all four of these are interacting. And so while historically
it may have been enough to think about the storms and the geology of a system as it impacts on the
organisms that live there, we really now need to be asking additional questions. What are the impact
of the humans that live there, both in the humans with respect to their behavior, the so-called
social complex, and then what have humans physically done to the ecosystem with respect to
building roads or diverting rivers or consuming water that might be there or changing the quality
of the soils. And in order for this to really be fully appreciated, we need to remember that
understanding history is important to ecologists. In some way, this makes ecology different
as a science because these historical events are so important. So ecological theory must encompass
the past land use, the climate, the natural disturbance, and history. And ecosystems vary
across space and time. And so as we move through this course, we're shifting from a model that
relied on stability as the key component and the changes occurred infrequently to a theory that
understands that ecosystems are malleable and constantly changing. As you can imagine, that
ramps up the complexity of the theories. The classic paradigms that were the building blocks of
ecology encompass words like stability and equilibrium, linearity, control of disturbance.
In fact, even the way we categorize relationships among organisms is dynamic.
If you take a look at this image, you'll see that we have ideas like taxonomic affinity and
guilds and functional groups. Those relationships reflect this dynamic and changing relationships.
So when we think, for instance, of taxonomic affinities, we're talking about collections
of organisms that are closely related to each other, like the small mammals that might be
living in an ecosystem or the birds that might be living in an ecosystem. They eat different foods,
they may live in different parts of that ecosystem, but they are relatively closely related taxonomically,
and hence at their core have relatively similar needs. Now, another way of bringing this idea
together is to return to this idea of a guild. We just mentioned it. But these guilds can have very
different organisms as part of that way of collecting them, but the guilds refer to the
kinds of foods that the animals need or more generally the kind of resources they need.
So you might be talking about organisms that are relying on nectar for their food,
and that could be bats or birds or insects, but they're all relying on the same kind of foods.
So despite the fact they might be very different sizes and have different life history patterns,
if there's a drought, for instance, that impacts the amount of nectar that's available,
well, that impacts a broad range of organisms. And finally, we have functional groups. And functional
groups are organized around the way in which they go about solving their problems. And so you might
have different kinds of insects that are bunched together and they might have very different
lives. But essentially, they are solving some of the day-to-day problems of how they acquire food.
They might be parasites or something like that. And so they have similar characteristics in that
respect. So in the 1970s, we saw this emergence of a new approach based on non-equilibrium,
constant states of change. This is how we're going to view ecology. And the beginning of a
recognition of humans as the critical ecosystem drivers. So if disturbance is inherent to the
internal dynamics of ecosystems, and ecosystems might be then subject to sudden and unpredictable
change, what are the consequences over the long haul? What are the impacts with respect to resilience?
How will this ecosystem respond to the kind of changes? Now, we got a bit of an inkling to this
in the early 1960s when Rachel Carson, a naturalist and author and scientist, wrote what became a
watershed book with respect to our understanding of ecosystems. And that was Silent Spring. And in
that book, Silent Spring, what she did was to document a political and functional history of
the use of pesticides, and as well as including important segments of data. But what she really
did that was so great was to begin to think of the impact with respect to its overall systems
approach. So she was investigating the adverse impact of the agricultural use of pesticides,
such as DDT, in the United States. And the idea that that DDT can remain as residues in the ecosystem
and actually biomagnify within the food chains and food webs. Now, we'll investigate this in more
detail when we look later at biomagnification. But it gives you an idea that here are some of the
roots of systems thinking. Something that's happening years before, pesticide use can reside
within an ecosystem and build up in certain species and have downstream impacts that hadn't been
considered at the time in which these pesticides were being regulated. So emerging from these
early studies, like those of Rachel Carson's, was a shift from stability to resilience,
which suggests that we should investigate resilience to a larger degree. What do we mean
when we say resilience? We're talking about the ability of an ecosystem to undergo disturbance
and maintain its functions and controls. So the disturbance is integral, but it's not destructive.
Another way to think of this is to think of ecological persistence. In other words, the core
characteristics of the ecosystem exist over long periods of time, despite the fact that they are
buffeted by constant change. If we think about constant change, we can divide these forces of
change up into some of their fundamental characteristic parts, and that would be thinking
about them with respect to their time course. Do they occur in short doses or do they occur over
long periods of time? Ecologists have a new model for understanding this dynamic nature,
and the most important features of this model are that it includes both short and long-term events
and integrates both earth science and human impact. This model was developed jointly by the
National Science Foundation and a group of ecologists who are working in long-term ecological
research, and it's a way of integrating not only these different kinds of forces that are at work,
but again taking a clear look at the role that humans have in the ecosystem.
This program or this model called the ISSE framework, which is Integrated Science for
Society in the Environment, takes a look at a variety of forces and drivers and services
that allow us to really understand how ecosystems work and change, and so we can think of a series
of external drivers, we can think of ecosystem services, we can think of biogeophysical forces,
biological drivers, and working at different scales. So if we take a look at a basic
structure of this conceptual framework, we see that there are essentially two fundamental boxes.
There's a human side to this equation, and then there is the way that the ecosystem functions
within the community, and linking the two are these services. The idea that ecosystems, healthy
ecosystems, provide critical services for us, and we know that to be true. We talked in the last
lectures, for instance, about barrier beaches and salt marshes that had been destroyed around
urban areas as a way to facilitate development, a short-term gain in a long-term cost that resulted
in tremendous damages to those ecosystems because the services provided by salt marshes and barrier
beaches, that is, absorbing storm surge related to hurricanes, was removed. And so the systems were
unable to absorb those shocks from the storms, and so the impact of the storm was more severe.
It's an example of ecosystem services. So ecosystem services link together the human side of the
equation and the biotic side of the equation. When we think about how these systems are impacted
then, we can think about them as having long-term changes and short-term changes, what we call
presses and pulses, and these serve as external drivers. And then there are a series of questions
that we can then pose as ecologists about how the system works. So let's take a look at some of the
drivers. At the global biophysical level, we have things like ocean currents and trade winds.
Ocean currents have historically been used by humans to move vessels long distances,
same with the trade winds, but not only do they do that, they also move pollutants,
they also move other organisms. Global climate change and atmospheric chemistry
is a huge aspect of the large scale of forces that are at work. Now at the local level, the local
biophysical forces, we have things like primary production and nutrient cycling and the micro
climate. These are all things we're going to look at in detail. Nutrient cycling is the way in which
materials move through local ecosystems. Primary production is really a measure of how
healthy your plant community is, and the micro climate refers to the specific
conditions that organisms are living in in very, very small scale. So for instance, you know with
respect to micro climate, one side of your house could be much colder or warmer than the other side,
simply as a function of which way the wind is blowing at a given time, the direction that the
sun is coming from, and so forth. There are geologic drivers to these systems. The geologic
drivers include the topography and shape of the landscape and how that landscape is changing over
time. If we're talking about a particular ecosystem, the altitude that that ecosystem is at, the way
in which water drains the profiles of precipitation, the so-called hydrogeology, what is the relationship
of that landscape to water, these are critical variables with respect to the nature of the ecosystem.
At the local level, we can have things like morphology, which is the local structure in which
these organisms are finding themselves. It's the localized shaping of the landscape with respect
to its relationship to hydrology and geomorphology, again the shape of the land and how water is
related to that system. And then there are human social forces. This is the new component that
modern ecologists are bringing to the table with respect to this conversation. Power structures.
How is political power distributed within a community? That has enormous impact. Are the
decisions made at the local level? Are decisions made at the top level and enforced? These are
significant changes with respect to the way in which ecological decision making plays out within a
community. What about human migration? There's been tremendous movements of people around the planet.
And human events can also be broken down into short and long-term events.
And in addition to the length of the event, these events also have what we call feedback loops
in the sense that one event often has an impact on other events.
Let's take an example of a system of feedback loop, and that would be lime disease and gypsy
moth outbreaks. Now, gypsy moth outbreaks and lime disease tend to be a Great Lakes and New
England and east coast of the United States phenomenon along with the gypsy moth outbreak,
neither of which are particularly beneficial to humans and ecosystems, so we actually consider
that a dish amenity. But the key species involved with both lime disease and gypsy moth outbreaks
are white-footed mice. And in the case of lime disease, something we're going to look at in more
detail later, but just to give you a little bit of an input now, white-footed mice carry the tick
that is responsible for transmitting the bacterium that causes lime disease to humans,
so we consider the deer tick a vector. So as mouse populations increase, so do the number of deer ticks.
But mice are incredibly dependent on available food resources.
So as mouse populations increase, they also eat more of the gypsy moth larvae. And so as gypsy
moth populations increase, the mouse population increases and ultimately drives the gypsy moth
population back down to a low level. So as mouse populations increase, the risk of lime disease
goes up, and the risk of gypsy moth outbreaks and tree damage go down.
So we end up having a negative correlation that feeds back on each other.
I said a few moments ago that there were five central questions that help us to understand
the relationship of humans to ecosystems. And it's these five critical questions
that help us to shape our understanding of how this new model, this new conceptual framework,
the ISSE framework for understanding ecological systems, helps us to push the science forward.
And let's go over some, let's go over those questions. The first question is, how do long-term
press disturbances and short-term pulse disturbances interact to alter ecosystem structure and
function? In other words, we can categorize these kinds of short and long-term impacts,
but what are their interactions? Are changes in short-term impact also impact long-term? We don't
know. And this is an important arena of questions that are emerging. Second, how can the biotic
structure be both a cause and consequence of ecological fluxes of energy and matter?
So in other words, how does the distribution of organisms as we find them within an ecosystem
either cause or serve as a consequence of some of the other dynamic aspects or changes or fluxes
that we're measuring, especially of energy and matter? We touched on this just a moment ago
with the role of white-footed mice with respect to gypsy moth outbreaks and Lyme disease.
Three, how do altered ecosystem dynamics affect ecosystem services? I mean, to me,
this is really the $64,000 question with respect to the future of sustainability.
So as humans alter ecosystems, as humans change the way in which rivers flow, as we change the
nature of soils, as we alter barrier beaches, as we plant more croplands, as we alter the
drainage of soils and so forth, how does that impact the key ecosystem services that we're
depending on? And one of the things we'll discuss later in more detail is how these ecosystem
services play off. But I think that you're getting the sense that we think these ecosystem services
are pretty valuable, and we'll put some dollar figures to them later on in the course. But the
take-home message is that, you know, ecosystem services are the most economically friendly
way to solve some of the most fundamental needs of the human species, clean air, clean water,
and safe soils. Question four, how do changes in vital ecosystem services feed back to alter
human behavior? This is really a question of, do we learn from our mistakes? In other words,
if we understand that certain ecosystem services have to be maintained and we'll have to change
our behavior to maintain them, will we actually do that? And that, of course, remains to be seen.
And finally, question five, which human actions influence the frequency, magnitude, or form of
press and pulse disturbance regimes across ecosystems, and what determines these human actions?
Here we're talking about this interface between human activity and the core aspects of disturbance.
Now we've talked about the fact that disturbance can be either
long or short-term in duration. Let's consider some of the long-term presses.
One of the most obvious and severe is that of climate change. This is something that's taking
place over centuries, and that's the typical scale at which we begin to think about long-term presses.
They are forces of change that extend over a long period of time. Forest succession,
the way that forests change over time in ecosystems. Coastal erosion is another example of a long-term
press. Human social movements can also be important impacts that take place over a long
period of time, and demographic and neighborhood changes are also critical when we add that social
box to our conceptual framework of long-term presses. Immigration, movement of populations,
another key consideration of long-term presses. Now what about short-term pulses? The easiest
way to think of these are things like catastrophic events. Hurricane Katrina in 2005. We've gone
back to this a couple of times, but it is so powerful in its explanatory capacity, if you will.
We've learned so much from some of the mistakes that happen both during the hurricane as it
played out, but also some of the ecological management decision-making that took place
around the city of New Orleans, sometimes decades before that hurricane struck.
The Boxing Day tsunami in 2004, that was an earthquake, was followed by a huge tidal wave or
tsunami. It was centered off the coast of Sumatra in Indonesia, and hardest hit were the coasts of
Indonesia, India and Thailand. And in a relatively short period of time, only a couple of days,
quarter million people were killed. It was one of the most deadly storms that we've ever encountered
in the recorded history of humanity. Disease and invasive species, another short-term pulse that
can have significant impacts within an ecosystem. A local example in North America is the Asian
Longhorn Beetle. It was introduced as an exotic species from China, and it's dangerous because
the larvae, the immature forms of this beetle, burrow into a tree in order to get their food,
and while they do that, that girdles or damages the vasculature of the tree, so it can't move
water and nutrients around. Some of the initial impacts we call stem dyeback, where we see dead
leaves, and eventually death. It's essentially a 100% fatal disease for trees, and each adult
female beetle can lay up to 100 eggs. In the United States, these beetles prefer maples and elms,
buckeyes out in the Midwest and willows. We believe it arrived in the United States in solid wood
packing material from China. In Worcester, Massachusetts, a city in the central part of the
state, 1,000 trees were removed, and eventually 6,000 trees are going to have to be cut down over
a 64 square mile area as a result of this infection. So it has significant social impacts as well,
because this happens to be a city that is in many ways identifies itself with respect to its trees,
and as many 6,000 mature trees are going to have to come down. Another example is the tamaricks,
genus of trees that are collectively called salt seeders, which are invading the Grand Canyon.
Turns out there are many species in this genus. There are at least eight
that have been introduced in the United States, so we refer to them collectively
as tamaricks, and when they are introduced into an area, they change the soil chemistry,
and they crowd out native plants. They tend to change the pH in the soil,
and it produces monocultures of tamaricks, of the salt seeder, and they're water hogs.
In peak growth periods, they can use up to 200 gallons a day per plant,
and they have been colonizing western rivers as these rivers are damned to reduce the annual
flush of fresh water, and so as these river systems have been stabilized, these trees have
been able to take root, and they're really wrecking havoc and running amuck in these western ecosystems.
Another example is the zebra mussel. Zebra mussels have become a significant problem in the Great Lakes
and in areas of Canada. They're native to the Caspian Sea, and they were transported to the
United States by water in the ballast of trans-oceanic vessels. They're infesting all over the Great
Lakes and also into Quebec in Ontario, and they're not only do they create monocultures,
but they're probably the source of a deadly avian botulism infection that has periodically
wreaked havoc in that part of the country. However, it's an interesting phenomenon,
because their presence in these ecosystems has actually resulted in pollution reduction
in some lake systems and also likely to increase small mouth bass populations,
and so it's an interesting story with the zebra mussels, mostly bad, but there appear to be some
mitigating impacts associated with this species. Disturbance, you know, when we talk about things
like zebra mussels and that kind of thing, we're tending to think that all kinds of disturbances
are problematic, and I don't want to give that impression, because again ecosystems are dynamic,
and disturbance is actually part of the natural process. It's important to note that not all
forms of disturbance are detrimental. In fact, some forms of disturbance are actually central
to ecological resiliency. For example, forest fires. In typical fire-controlled ecosystems,
cyclical fires are necessary for normal succession and regrowth of the forest. However,
this relationship between forest fires and now human-dominated forest systems
have some interesting feedback activities that are happening. As climate change is increasing the
intensity of our most severe storms, lightning and thunder are now more severe and they're causing
an increase in forest fires, and second, human practices in these forests of suppressing fire
for a long period of time, especially on federal lands, have created excessive amounts of fuel
that are on the forest floor, and when these fires come through now,
they burn more intensely and do more damage than they would have if earlier fires had been allowed
to burn. This is an example of a human cause management dilemma because the natural disturbance
regime was suppressed. The capacity of these ecosystems to buffer these events have been
reduced by human activity. The loss of wetlands, another great example, wetlands,
forests, mangroves, barrier beaches has increased the impact of hurricanes and typhoons. We've
mentioned this before. The challenge posed by these problems require a really integrated approach
to understanding ecology of human-dominated landscapes in cities, and in the next lecture,
we will begin to investigate how ecosystems are shaped by the forces and drivers that
the human as a social species provides. So until then, thank you very much.
