Hello and welcome back. In the last lecture we had an opportunity to think about forces
and drivers short and long term. We were investigating the both physical scale and temporal scale
of changes in ecosystems. And today we're going to take those tools and we're going
to put them right in some of the most challenging aspects of our ecology as it relates to the
human experience. Climate change, sustainability and urbanization. The human population growth
is on the rise and as humans we need to understand that not only are we likely to be causing
the problems but we are also having our power and the ability to solve the problems.
Think about the last time that you've gone on an airplane ride and if you have flown
along either the eastern or the western seaboard you will have noticed especially if you fly
at night essentially an unbroken line of lights. And if you fly in the east coast you can
fly essentially from Portland, Maine to Virginia and not see really any break in the sea of
lights except when you're literally over water. It's a rather extraordinary testimony
to the kinds of impact that humans have made. And we really need to study this impact because
it will play out as an important component to the issue of ecosystem resilience. Humans
are the most important factor when we think about the future survivorship and resiliency
of the world's ecosystem. There's been a recent and the only way to describe it is recent
because humans go back about a million years and really it's only been in the past few
hundred years that there has been an incredible change in the human population and it has
really dramatically changed what we call the ecological equation. It took nearly a million
years for the population of humans to reach its first billion and at the current rate
of population growth we're adding a billion people to this planet every 20 years. We're
already well over six billion and continuing to climb. You know the technological nature
of humans gives us this capacity to increase our footprint, increase the impact of what
we're doing. And human demography is continuing to shift. We're moving towards a more urban
existence. You know Nancy Grimm and her colleagues have been studying this phenomenon for quite
some time and if you take a look at the chart from some of her work you can see that as
we look at the total percentage of the population beginning in 1950 and going up through the
modern times and even projecting out into 2030 you can see that the percentage of people
living in rural environments has gone down over that period of time and that the number
of people living in urban areas has gone up and that's a world trend. The box situated
inside is that population trend as it exists in the United States and you can actually
see that the change is more extreme. The population in the United States living in rural settings
is declining dramatically and in urban areas is growing like crazy. Which leads us to consider
that the growth is essentially a developed world phenomenon, at least the shift towards
cities and we need to make it clear that that's really not the case. The data that you see
in front of you now is actually both the existing population and projected future population
of some of the major cities across the world and if you look at the most populous city
right now which is Tokyo you can see that actually it's projected growth in the future
which is shown by the red histogram actually is not changing much in comparison to its
current population level but if you look at some of the developing nations and the cities
there like Sao Paulo in Brazil and Delhi in India and Shanghai you see those red histograms
are much taller than any of the others around them which indicate that the population growth
rates in those developing nations in those cities is extreme and when we think about
the challenges of sustainability in developed nations it's hard enough for us to think about
sustainable cities and sustainable human footprints in relatively wealthy nations but in those
nations who are still having developing economies the challenge of urban growth is particularly
daunting. In fact we will spend an entire lecture talking about this challenge of urban
growth because it's so central to the idea of sustainability and resilience within ecosystems.
What are the most important human impacts if we're going to think about humans as drivers
in the system we need to think about what the impacts are. We've mentioned one of them
urbanization but with every part of a city that grows there has to be an agricultural
component that helps it support the needs of individuals living within those cities
and so agriculture is as important an impact to cities the two sometimes are not spatially
connected the food we eat may actually be grown thousands of miles away we're actually
going to look at that a little bit a little bit more later in this lecture but the two
go hand in hand so urbanization creates very very high concentrations of humans living
in a particular area but associated with those humans is the fragmented ecosystems that are
necessary to produce agriculture. As a touchstone we think of the colonialization or the emergence
of western traditions in this country beginning about the time the pilgrims arrived in North
America in the early 17th century when the first pilgrims would have set foot in New
England nearly one billion acres of forest habitat existed in what we consider the lower
48 states region rather extraordinary these were old growth forests most of that old growth
forest is gone there's only remnant really tracks across the United States especially
in the east coast and what remains is actually quite different in structure than was encountered
by the pilgrims. What we do know is that the United States has somewhere in the vicinity
of about 700 million acres left so it's about three quarters left but it looks very different
than it did at the time that the pilgrims were there. Stuart Pym who's an ecologist
at the University of Tennessee estimates that at least half of the forested land in the
eastern part of the United States has been permanently lost and this has resulted in
the permanent extinction of a number of bird species and this is interesting to note because
only about six percent of the total land mass has actually been settled or built on and
so in a sense you're saying well if only six percent is built on then how is it that we
can have such a large global footprint and I think you'll all agree that even without
a detailed analysis the distribution of resources as they are found spatially in an ecosystem
are not equal and humans are very sensitive to that even those who are not scientists
so the six percent of land that's being used by humans is those are those ecosystems that
are the most rich and diverse and provide the most resources for people to use so although
the total land impact for habitation is about six percent that six percent represents the
most fragile and environmentally sensitive areas. Along with about six to seven percent
of the land that's built up about twelve percent of the earth's surface has been planted as
crops and traditionally when we plant crops we plant them as monocultures and although
these two combinations together don't seem like much remember they are the most biologically
diverse habitats and that's why they were settled in the first place and so when you
look at this high percentage of humans that live in coastal embayments or along coastal
margins or near lakes they've made those choices because the climate is more hospitable and
the resources are more accessible and this is somewhat ironic in the sense that the very
resources that attracted us initially to those ecosystems are not there anymore and so if
you're from New England and you particularly enjoy seafood much of the seafood that you'd
order in traditional restaurants didn't come from New England even though they might be
species identified with New England they often come from distances very far away because
the ecosystems themselves the local ecosystems have been so degraded. Ocean ecosystems are
no different with respect to the impact of humans. Halpern and colleagues have done a
significant investigation into looking at the human impact of our activities along coastal
margins and they've created a world map of impact and as you investigate this map you
find that not surprisingly the ocean areas that are most disturbed are those that are
closest to human population centers and those areas of ocean ecosystems that have had the
least amount of impact are those that are in arctic areas or other areas that are isolated
from general human use. So for example river flood plains, estuaries
and coastal margins show the highest impact because those hold the resources that we need.
So human impact, a take home point from this is that human impact is disproportionately
large in comparison to the amount of land that's been settled. So examples of this include
coastal cities in the United States like New York and Boston, New Orleans, Los Angeles
and San Francisco, high concentrations of humans living in areas that have very, very
high or at least had very, very high biological productivity. Remember our story about New
Orleans and Boston in previous lectures? Somewhere in the vicinity of 80 to 90 percent
of all the wetlands that surrounded those two cities have been removed to make transportation
easier or to expand the amount of space that's available for development, but the cost of
doing that has been to expose those ecosystems to more severe storms or more severe storms
caused by environmental change, but then the impact of those storms is disproportionately
large because of the fact that the normal buffering systems, in this case the salt marshes,
had been removed. As we think about cities, remember we have to support these cities and
we've talked about cropland, but another way in which these cities need to be supported
is through energy needs and despite the fact that the pollution load is high and the debt
we run up from an ecological perspective is staggering, we still produce about half the
electricity in this country from coal. We have a voracious appetite to gather coal and
as a result we have developed new technologies to extract coal from ecosystems, one of which
is a technique called mountaintop removal and this is particularly prevalent in Appalachia,
in West Virginia, in Pennsylvania. Over 1200 square miles of biologically sensitive river
areas have been buried because what they do when they try and access the coal seam is
they take the top parts of the mountain off and they have to dump the soil somewhere,
so they dump it into the valleys and those valleys of course become drainage areas that
go into communities. 2,200 square miles of mountaintops have been cleared and destroyed
so far and the Environmental Protection Agency estimates that by 2010 at current rates there
will be something like 1.4 million acres of mountain ecosystems will be destroyed by
this technique. To put that into perspective that's an amount of land the size of Delaware,
this is a significant impact on the ecosystem. Remember that in doing this it's not as though
these corporations are taking the tops off of mountains because it's something to do,
we're doing it in response to an insatiable demand for energy that we have as a nation
and again because we are such a small portion of our energy is produced using renewable sources
we are still bound and yoked to the need to produce fossil fuels either in the form
of petroleum or in the form of coal. An international example of this kind of extraction
takes us back to the palm oil conversation that we had earlier, we've talked about this
but again the palm oil itself has some utility within the human domain but the cost of doing
it, the cumulative impact of its use exceeds the geospatial size that was actually used
to produce those products. Another thing to consider is that rapid human population
growth has changed our patterns of consumption and created a series of crises on the planet
and the most important of which we consider this notion of sustainability. We'll talk
more in detail later when we talk about how energy and those kind of systems, those kind
of dimensions of ecosystems function but as an introduction by almost any analyses that
have been done we have exceeded we call the carrying capacity of the earth which is the
number of people that can live there in a sustainable way over a long period of time.
So we'll detail this later but the analysis seemed to suggest that we've exceeded the
carrying capacity and we're actually surviving on stored resources that are not being replaced
is that any more obvious than we think about our reliance on fossil fuels. These petroleum
reserves are non-renewable as we consume them and consume other resources from terrestrial
and ocean environments, they're not being replaced and we either have to look to other
sources or we will suffer significant population impacts. So I say that this challenges us
to develop human practices that reduce degradation and exploit renewable resources. Remember the
planet has limited resources and populations are continuing to grow. So we talk about alternative
sources of energy, those that are renewable such as wind and solar and geothermal and
biofuels but remember at this point that technology has not been completely developed
and in fact many of our strategies for developing things like biofuels are currently more costly
from a carbon standpoint than their payoffs and that's because they're new technologies.
So for instance as we discussed before if we're using palm oil as an alternative biofuel
at the point at which that biofuel is consumed there is some immediate benefit but the biofuel
in the form of palm oil is being produced in a non-sustainable way in Costa Rica and other
nations around the world and the combination of burning and the combination of soil removal
and the combination of transport swamps out any advantage that we're getting from using
it actually as a biofuel. Another example is clean coal. We talk about clean coal and
linked to new technologies and there are ways to link clean coal strategies to a sustainable
economic model and that would require retrofitting current plants and it's something we can move
towards but it's not something that has been fully embraced and so when we think about
this challenge of coal it is an addiction that we are locked into without immediate alternatives.
Another thing to consider for instance is how far does your food travel before it reaches
your mouth? Food production requires an enormous amount of resources and it's particularly
ironic when we consider it because for instance if we talk about a banana we don't actually
pay the banana to grow but we have to produce that product somewhere and we have to transport
that product to market and especially when we're talking about food production it's very
very time sensitive and banana production particularly uses all kinds of extensive
amounts of resources and fossil fuels both to grow and move it around it. Typically in
banana plantations there's extensive amounts of fertilization that has to take place and
they're often very remote from the areas in which the products are consumed and so there's
an additional cost and burden that's associated with the production of this kind of food.
So we have a combination of explosive population growth and consumption of fossil fuels and
what we've done is created a condition where humans are actually altering, making permanent
alterations to the climate and as extraordinary as this may seem it's not actually unprecedented
that species could modify the climate in a major way so we've actually learned something
from the past. I mean for example if we go back three and a half billion years ago when
life first evolved as best we know there was actually no free oxygen in the atmosphere.
The oxygen was locked up in rock and it was primitive photosynthetic organisms that were
generating oxygen as a waste gas that profoundly changed the atmosphere from one that was a
reducing atmosphere without oxygen to that which is an oxidizing atmosphere, one that
has oxygen in it and in fact the folks, the ecologists who study some of the early paleobiological
evolution suggested if oxygen had been in the atmosphere it's quite likely that life
might have evolved quite differently than what we see now.
So this notion that humans can change ecosystems with their activity has created conditions
that pose both challenges to us but also help us to see possibility.
Let's talk about this notion of oxygen again. We're oxygen using organisms and in fact
metabolism as we see it on the planet today most of the advanced organisms are using oxygen
through processes we call oxidative phosphorylation that's actually how we get our energy.
And so our evolution is tightly linked to these huge climate change events. Looking back
historically the presence of oxygen dramatically changed the way in which life evolved over
the long haul. The question is what are the changes to the chemistry of the earth as we
are creating now, what kind of scenarios will play out in the future because of those changes?
You know the chemistry of the ocean is profoundly impacted by the marine organisms that live
there. You know they can alter the pH, they can alter the temperature. If we think of
the great grasslands of Africa and the American Midwest these grassland ecosystems were actually
created by the foraging patterns of the deer, bison and antelope that live there. The fact
that they have a diet of grasses prevented the growth of trees and shaped the entire
ecosystem thus altering those biogeochemical cycles that took place there. So humans are
not the first species to alter the planet, however we are doing so at an alarming rate.
Arguably the most important contribution to climate change that humans are doing is
through the introduction of additional greenhouse gases into the atmosphere. Now greenhouse gases
include a wide range of molecules including methane, water vapor, nitrous oxide, ozone
and carbon dioxide. Water vapor is probably the most important greenhouse gas and makes
up about 70% of the contribution of greenhouse gases that are in the planet, around the planet
right now and typically in the form of clouds. However from the standpoint of climate change
the most important form that humans produce is carbon dioxide which is a waste gas that
we produce both from metabolism and from combustion of fossil fuels. Carbon dioxide flows out
of every exhaust pipe and every smoke pipe and out of the digestive tract of every breathing
animal and human. Now many people argue that carbon dioxide is a natural gas or chemical
and not a problem but the anthropogenic release of carbon dioxide tips the scale with respect
to the ecological balance. So greenhouse gases are actually critically important without
greenhouse gases we wouldn't have life on earth as we know it and the chemistry of greenhouse
gases are complicated. But the idea here is that the additional greenhouse gas produced
by humans is changing the climate enough to be detrimental. Now here's where it gets
a little bit complicated and you need to stay with me and we're going to come back to this
a little bit later in the course as well. But greenhouse gases are the traditional model
in which we understand the way in which greenhouse gases are produced tends not to be accurate.
It's generally portrayed as though the gases act as a blanket and trap the heat given off
from the earth. Although that is partly correct it really doesn't work particularly well.
And in order to do that we need to understand something about the way in which solar energy
interacts with the surface of the earth. Now when solar energy strikes the surface of
the earth and we can think of say 100% of the solar energy that strikes the surface
of the earth some of that is going to bounce back off of clouds. Some of that will be lost
in the atmosphere and some of it will actually strike the surface of the ground heating the
ground up. Now as the ground heats up some of it is re-radiated back into space as it's
reflected something we call the albedo effect off of things like snow and ice and some of
it is absorbed and re-radiated back as heat. Clouds play a critical role in the amount
of energy that strikes the earth. And from the image that you see here you can see that
on a cloudy day a significant portion of the solar energy that would strike the earth is
actually bounced back because of cloud cover. Again something we call the albedo effect.
And at night just the opposite is true. At night if there is heavy cloud cover a significant
portion of the heat reflected back from the earth is actually trapped. And in fact remember
your coldest winter nights for instance are those that are a cloudless sky in which the
energy can be released. But here's the part about greenhouse gases. When sunlight energy
strikes the surface of the earth it heats it up and the heat that is released by the
earth is in the form of infrared frequencies. And as those infrared frequencies reflect back
away from the surface of the earth they have to pass through the atoms of greenhouse gas.
And here's where the blanket analogy fails. Those infrared rays that are reflecting back
from the surface of the earth are not trapped inside the greenhouse gases. Instead the particular
frequency generated by that radiation causes the greenhouse gas molecules to resonate.
And in doing so they generate additional heat and energy. As you can see from the image
these frequencies that are generated out from the surface of the earth and go back into the
atmosphere pass through these greenhouse gases and in doing so cause the greenhouse gases
to re-radiate energy in a slightly different frequency and cause an increase in the amount
of heat. So yes there's a net gain as far as energy retained within the earth but it's
not happening just like a thermal blanket. What's happening is stimulation of these molecules
and re-radiation of heat back towards the earth. Global greenhouse gas emissions are
increasing worldwide. Carbon dioxide levels have risen by more than 30% in the past 200
years. And the international panel on climate change predicts that if left unchecked atmospheric
carbon dioxide concentrations will range as high as 970 parts per million by 2100.
As a result we know the global temperatures have increased significantly. In the past
30 years significant warming of the earth's ecosystem is incontrovertible. I mean most
climate experts agree that it's the result of the accumulation of additional greenhouse
gases in the atmosphere that are the result of anthropogenic activities. Now in later
lectures we're going to investigate how this increase in global heat changes climate. Some
areas become drier, some areas become wetter, some hotter and some even become more cold.
So what does this have to do with cities? The third topic here that we said we would
talk about. As human population levels approach 7 billion more than half the world's population
now live in cities. In the developed world that figure reaches almost two-thirds and
the percentage is continuing to rise. Cities provide a strategy for the conservation of
resources and achieving unprecedented economies of scale. You know many ecologists consider
cities the key to human sustainability. Cities reduce the per capita consumption of resources.
We know that public health trends around the world show that humans who live in cities
have longer life spans and better health conditions. We're going to look much more
closely at the relationship between cities and sustainability in our final two lectures
that we will be covering in this course. In our next lecture we will investigate the social
and policy models that shape the world's ecosystem. Until then, so long.
