Hello, and welcome back.
You know, traditional ecology was a science of the wilderness, but modern ecologists have
embraced the human factor.
Human power structures, social organization, information flow, and cultural practices can
profoundly change the shape of ecosystems.
Humans are truly ecosystem engineers.
We began this conversation in our last lecture, but today we're going to look much more closely
at some of the social organizations that impact the ecology of our planet.
Let's think about this whole challenge to begin with about internationalization.
You know, our food, our clothing, electronics all come from around the world, and we've embraced
the notion that we gain from a cultural exchange.
But from an ecological sense, not only are we thinking socially, but we are physically
moving things around the planet.
We are taking resources from one part of the world and sending them somewhere else and
moving resources back and forth.
And this has a significant impact on not only the social evolution of humans as a species,
but it also has a profound effect on the ecology of all living things on the planet.
So we know that ecology has shifted as a study of the wilderness to now an additional focus
on the study of humans as ecological drivers.
Humans act as drivers on policy, socioeconomics, the biogeophysical world in which we live,
and we will focus on this lecture on the social aspects.
The reason we need to do this is because the ecosystems in which we live can reach a point
where they are too degraded to perform the functions that we need from them and the ecosystem
becomes unstable.
Remember in that multi-box conceptual framework that we looked at, the ISSE framework.
System services are the key aspect that we're trying to preserve, and eventually these services
are degraded to a point that social and economic functionality can decline.
The ecosystem declines, our urban systems decline, and then our system becomes unstable
again.
Let's take an example of how human impact can affect landscape ecology.
This takes us back a little bit to the history of the Irish potato famine, which occurred
in the middle of the 19th century.
The Irish potato famine was ostensibly caused by a plant disease, caused a blight, called
a blight that was caused by the black fungus, Phythophthora infestans.
Now this fungus caused the potato harvest to fail for a number of years.
It resulted in a million people dying of starvation, a million people immigrating in
just over three years.
It was a profound change to the Irish culture and to the Irish nation.
Now the roots of this are complicated.
They have deep social components and biogeophysical components, but the end result was a significant
change.
Now in contrast, in communities where potatoes have been a core crop for generations, or
even centuries, in the Andes, where the potato is native to, Andean farmers plant 500 varieties
of potatoes in order to avoid the kind of impact that's caused when you plant only
one species.
The black fungus, the potato blight, wouldn't have happened if there were multiple species
of potatoes that had been planted.
In this way we see an ecosystem service such as high levels of biodiversity acting as a
buffer to the unpredictable environmental change.
In fact Andean farmers will plant these multiple different types of potatoes at all different
levels along these terraces and in doing so defend themselves against the kind of thing
that devastated the Irish landscape.
So we need to think about the socioeconomic drivers, the policy drivers that have influence
on ecosystems.
Let's begin at the global scale, as we did in the last lecture, we worked our way through
different scales.
So at the global scale some of the most important impacts are treaties like the Kyoto Protocol
or the Agenda 21 as it was developed by the United Nations.
For that involved an earth summit that was held in Rio de Janeiro and the environment
and development in 1992.
It ended up producing a protocol that was signed by 178 national governments which went and
adopted the standards.
And in this were 27 core principles.
It was a human centric ecology but was very much focused on the idea of sustainability
and included such elements as equality of women, environmental justice, sustainable
agriculture, a stakeholder status of indigenous peoples.
And this is worth taking a moment to talk about because historically when we think about
environmental interventions, we think of them as coming from the top down.
But in the environmental justice movement and in the most appropriate scale in which
environmental change occurs, it is the bottom up, it is community level involvement that's
absolutely critical and the Kyoto Protocol recognized this.
Now to date the U.S. has signed but has declined to ratify the Kyoto Protocol but many countries
are moving forward in trying to adopt its sustainability practices.
At the national level, the United States has had actually a very interesting historical
relationship with the environmental movement.
The Clean Air Act and the Clean Water Act are actually examples of some very successful
legislation.
They came about as a result of a variety of rising environmental concerns which took the
sort of public stage in 1970 with the first Earth Day which was a national celebration
which was spearheaded by Senator Gaylord Nelson from Wisconsin who sponsored this national
day of teaching around the country on the environment and the challenges of an overpopulated
human community.
And emerging out of that came a series of regulatory frameworks that the U.S. uses to
structure its environmental regulation.
Among other things we have national law that defines the environmental protection agency's
responsibility for protecting and improving the nation's air quality and at that time
a very focused concern on the ozone layer.
Now if you'll take a look at some very interesting data with respect to lead, you know lead as
it emerges as an air pollutant is one of the most serious and lethal pollutants that we
contend with in a highly technical society.
Lead is a byproduct of combustion of many fossil fuels and prior to the signing of the
Clean Air Act, we had relatively high levels of lead in the water and soil and in the air
but with the Clean Air Act came the intervention of various strategies including unleaded fuel,
catalytic converters and other forms of containment of lead in the combustion process.
And as you can see from the histogram, if we look at lead levels before and after the
implementation of these regulations, we've seen a tremendous reduction in the amount
of lead in the environment in the United States and that's really, really good news.
Another piece of really important legislation was the Comprehensive Environmental Response
Compensation Liability Act called CIRCLA which you probably know better as the Superfund
Program and that was enacted by Congress in 1980 and what it did was levy a tax on petroleum
and chemicals at the industrial level.
In the first five years it generated about $1.6 billion that was used for the cleanup
of polluted sites.
The Act was renewed in 1986 and a trust fund has now nearly $10 billion in assets that
can be used for cleanup and the Superfund Program has been incredibly effective in trying to
go after the most difficult of pollution issues.
There's also the National Environmental Policy Act or so-called NEPA which was signed into
law in 1970 and it set the standard for requiring environmental impact statements.
For those of us who are familiar with projects as they go forward now in the country, we
expect that we would be filing an environmental impact statement that would assess the potential
damage that we might cause in any ecosystem with respect to building roads or constructing
buildings, something like that, but prior to the 1970s those weren't even filed and
they I think most importantly became the model for the state environmental programs.
And because the United States is such a varied ecosystem, these kinds of regulations are
often best handled at the state or even local levels because of the differences that you
see in the ecological characters of the particular states and communities and towns.
Another I think really important regional intervention has been the so-called RGGI,
the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative.
It's an effort by Mid-Atlantic and Northeastern states to create mandatory market-based effort
to reduce greenhouse gases through the sale of emission allowances.
In this case the proceeds from these allowances are used to spur clean renewable energy research
and development.
And the goal seems modest, but it's pretty significant.
It's to reduce CO2 emissions by 10% by 2018, which involves not only curbing the increase
in CO2, but managing to reduce it to the levels 10% below the levels that we see now.
I would also argue that one of the most important scales of intervention, and again this is
coming from an ecologist who looks at these challenges in different scales, are the impacts
that can happen at the local level.
Remember the local level is going to encompass the most accurate depiction of the ecology
of the landscape as it sits.
And so local communities can implement growth management acts, comprehensive plans, zoning
and building codes, and of course the state environmental protection acts.
Local zoning boards can have a huge impact on things like whether or not big box stores
or mall developments happen in a community, or even lot sizes.
Zoning regulations are interesting because they define housing and commercial density.
And this is one of the challenges that we face when we begin to think about how ecology
maps on to what are essentially political attempts at intervention.
So let's say we have a community that is having a challenge by extensive growth, which
is putting a significant burden on the ecosystem services within the community.
Well some of these communities will respond to increasing population by zoning for bigger
lots.
And in some communities this goes up to three acres or even more.
Now while that does limit the number of individuals who can move into the community, it doesn't
actually solve the problem of fragmentation because by doing a series of zoned lots you
still end up breaking up the ecological integrity of the community.
And I think worse when you begin to implement these kind of zoning regulations, especially
as the lots become bigger and bigger and bigger, you're actually pushing away a whole cross
section of the community that can no longer actually afford to live in the town that they
might be working in.
So an ecologist would come to the table and say, perhaps we need to think differently about
local zoning.
And one strategy towards this is to think about something we call cluster zoning, where we
put our residences in relatively close contact with one another, but it allows for expanded
amounts of green space away from those dwellings.
Some communities are approaching this.
So instead of taking 10 houses and putting them each on three acre lots, let's take these
10 houses and put them on a smaller collection of lots and let's preserve the other 25 acres
for access by members of that community.
Now local zoning ordinances can actually force developers to acquire existing parcels.
And this is a very interesting response to environmental need.
We talked about this notion of the tragedy of the commons a couple of lectures ago, and
local zoning ordinances fall into that category.
Because if you're a developer, you might consider rebuilding an area that has already been used.
But what you don't know about the history of that area is in response to what are the
impacts that the previous owners have done.
Is there oil in the ground?
Is there hazardous material on that site?
Is there a legacy of human activities at that site that's going to come back to bite you
as a developer later on?
And so what happens because of that fear of the unknown, developers almost always historically
have preferred to go to new sites and put up new buildings as opposed to reusing old
ones.
And so what we've seen when that kind of response is used or that kind of building strategy
is used, we see what we consider classical sprawl, where the inside of cities or inside
of towns begin to decline and the buildup goes to the outside.
And you end up with large numbers of buildings that are being unused.
Now redevelopment authorities, like the one that we have in Boston, can actually develop
strategies that make it more appealing for developers to reuse existing sites.
They can do a number of things.
They can expedite plan reviews, for instance, where developers reuse old buildings but bring
them up to modern certification with respect to sustainability.
And federal and state regulations can limit the liability of new owners with respect to
what has happened in the past before they own the land.
In that way, you have taken away some of the disincentives to move into existing buildings.
And this is a way of balancing that public versus private cost-benefit analysis that
developers have to use.
Let's think about global socioeconomic drivers.
This is on the very largest of scales.
Political regimes, trade policies, exchange rates, world markets, commodity prices, all
of these have profound impacts on world environmental conditions.
You know, we talked about the palm oil plantations before, and we discussed how dramatically
they alter ecosystems, especially tropical landscapes around the world.
I want to talk about another challenge to global ecosystems, essentially on the same
scale as the palm oil plantations.
And that's worldwide shrimp farming.
Americans have become particularly fond, as have the Japanese and European markets,
of having shrimp as a regular part of our diet.
It's become a $9 billion annual industry.
Almost 1.7 million tons are harvested annually.
But remember, we started out this conversation talking about the fact that not only are cultural,
but there is physical distance between the resources we use and where they are produced.
75% of the shrimp that is consumed annually is produced in shrimp farms in Asia.
The other 25% mostly come from Latin America, and of that mostly from Brazil.
And the whole shrimp farming industry has moved from small local practices to much more concentrated
sort of ultra-sized farming, mega farms.
This is now a global industry, and essentially only two species of shrimp are grown.
The Pacific white shrimp and the tiger prawn.
So almost like the story about the potatoes, we've gone from having lots of different varieties
of shrimp down to these monocultures.
And these monocultures are susceptible to disease such as white spot syndrome and yellow
head disease.
And when the monocultures become diseased, it wipes out entire farms.
And so the response of the people who run these farms is continued rapid expansion and
movement of the farms leaving behind a legacy of degraded landscape.
Because wetland systems are the preferred areas in which these shrimp are grown, as much
as 10% of the world's mangrove ecosystems have been lost to make way for shrimp farms.
And like any concentrated farming, and we have our own terrestrial examples here in
the United States where we have intensive cattle and hog farming, concentrated feed
and waste have devastating local impacts on ecosystems.
So in essence, here we are in developing nations, consuming our shrimp for dinner, and we get
the benefit of the shrimp, but the ecological burden is transferred to developing nations
who are seeing this as a short term way to enhance their economy.
But in the long term, it's having significant detrimental effects and it's causing the
collapse of local ecosystems.
Now in response to this at the end of the last century in 1999, the World Wildlife Fund
and the World Bank partnered with a series of sustainable aquaculture experts from these
various countries, and they have developed what they call a healthy practices model.
It's still in the early stages of development, but it does look like it may be an initial
pathway towards sustainability on that front.
But as you can see, we have two models here that we've talked about that are very challenging,
and they're driven by consumer demand in developed nations, shrimp farming and palm oil production.
We need to return to a conversation about urbanization because the development of cities has caused
a demographic shift, and in this demographic shift, remember, if people are living in high
densities in urban settings, they can't for the most part grow much of their own food.
They're going to rely on this from other sources.
And as we've mentioned before, the world is becoming increasingly urbanized, rising
from about 37% in 1970 to about 60% predicted in 2030 worldwide.
And the most important part here is that urban areas will see 95% of the world's population
growth through the next 30 years, and world income has grown in response to urbanization.
Work by David Bloom and his colleagues at the Harvard School of Public Health have looked
closely at the relationship between real income per capita as members of a population and
the percentage of the population living in urban areas.
And if you take a look at the figure, you can see there's a pretty extraordinary relationship
between income and percentage of the population living in urban areas as the population of
individuals living in urban areas goes up in any particular ecosystem, in this case
it's politically defined as nation, you see that income goes up as well.
So there's a positive relationship between percentage of people living in an urban landscape
and the income.
And this engine of economic growth drives many of the fastest growing cities.
Now in the United States, Las Vegas is one of our fastest growing cities.
It is growing about as fast as it can.
There's a tidal wave of sprawl that comes with these developing areas.
And although in cities like Las Vegas, the growth is driven by economic expansion, it
turns out that Bloom and his colleagues have discovered that this growth in urban wealth
is not equitably distributed.
If we take a look at another graph from his paper that appeared recently in Science, you
can see that they have tracked the population percentage that's living in urban areas from
1960 to 2000 and beyond.
And then they've also looked at the change in real income.
And they've compared both Africa and Asia, which as you can see from the top lines have
very similar growth patterns.
Growth have grown from about 20% urban population in the 1960s to about 35% population living
in urban areas by the year 2000.
But look at the tremendous difference in the growth as far as real income.
In Asia, the growth in real income has been extraordinary.
And Africa, the growth has been slow or in some instances even declined.
And this represents the different social drivers, again the ecology of the system, different
social drivers leading to this increase in urbanization.
In Asia, it's industrial development leading to greater productivity that's driving the
movement into cities.
Sadly in Africa, it's more related to social strife and conflict, driving rural inhabitants
into the relative safety of the urban landscape.
So it's a migration driven by fear.
And as you might predict then, the response is not an increase in economic earning potential.
It's simply moving from rural areas to urban areas.
So this complexity of outcomes is a signal that urbanization is not always going to
lead to enhanced quality of life.
Now world governance and government structures and social organizations are often going to
determine how resources are used.
World consumption and production of energy, it's a very uneasy balance that results in
conflict and unexpected alliances among suppliers and consumers.
Again, Hardin's tragedy model fits very well here.
We think about the areas of the world that have the highest amounts of conflict.
They tend to have that conflict because they have areas that are the most important sources
of resource.
So China and India are growing populations and their use of resources and effect on the
planet is rapidly increasing.
In fact, in 2006, China surpassed the United States in annual greenhouse gas production.
In that year, the US produced about 5.8 billion tons.
China produced 6.2 billion tons.
I would point out, however, that China has a billion people and we have about a third
of that.
And so the per capita use is still extraordinarily high in the United States.
And in China, the increase came primarily from new coal-fired electrical plants and from
the massive production of cement that they need to expand their urban infrastructure.
Now some would argue that this shows the fallacy of global treaties such as the Kyoto Protocol.
So here we've had the Kyoto Protocol in place for a while, but we still have countries
like India and China growing and doing so in ways that increase pollution.
But others would suggest that this pattern actually reinforces this disparity between
wealthy and developing nations.
And I would argue that these patterns exist as a function of the conditions in which these
nations find themselves in.
So then what is the sort of way out of this?
What is the pathway towards sustainability?
And I think one example would be to look at agriculture and the Green Revolution, which
I think has been another one of the world's great success stories.
Remember the Industrial Revolution of the 18th and 19th century gave us tremendous technical
capacity.
It led to the development of machines and an entirely new vision of what it means for
humans to be involved with labor.
There's been a switch towards technology for production of goods and services.
There's been a hyper-concentration of resources in urban production centers.
And initially, people living in urban areas suffered what we call an urban penalty.
And that was related to how dirty and pollution-filled and disease-ridden cities had become.
They no longer have to sort of suffer that burden, but initially they did.
After the birth of the urban public health movement, the rising standard of living and
birth of the middle class really changed cities so that we can see, as we did in Bloomsworth,
that the consistent model or the overall model is that as urban populations increase,
so does real income.
But the Green Revolution followed the Industrial Revolution, and it was a transformation of
agricultural technologies and research in the 1950s.
We're going to focus in more detail on the agricultural revolution, but I want to take
a look at the agricultural revolution as a social driver.
Now Mexico was a major leader in the development of the Green Revolution.
They created new ways for wheat production to help feed their rapidly growing population.
In 1943, Mexico imported half of its wheat.
By 1956, Mexico was self-sufficient as far as wheat production.
And by 1964, Mexico exported half a million tons of wheat.
This industrial revolution has also led to the admittedly more controversial development
of genetically engineered crops and pesticides and increase in our world's food production,
which has had mixed results.
But the extraordinary thing is that we are actually able to feed our population.
One of the developments associated with the agricultural revolution has been an emergence
of a real understanding of how these systems interact.
And so now, in fact, in sustainable agriculture systems, we see patterns of use such as integrated
pest management, where the appropriate interplanting of multiple species of plants can actually
reduce the need for pesticides and fertilizers.
And in addition, we also see the use of strategies such as crop rotation, which is a way for
farmers to rest the land, which is actually an old practice made reference to in biblical
texts.
The idea that we won't grow the same crop continuously year after year after year within
an ecosystem, we will continue to rotate the crops, some of which actually put nourishment
back into the soil as they're turned over.
It's actually an old idea, one that was brought forward by Aldo Leopold in his notion of the
land ethic, but one that's finally making its mark on an international scale.
In the next lecture, we're going to take this idea of food and consider how energy moves
through ecosystems from a scientific perspective, the role that organisms play in moving the
energy through what scientists call the trophic cascade.
So until then, farewell and thank you.
