Hello, and welcome back to our investigation of ecology.
You know, in the past few lectures, we have talked about the movement of energy.
We've talked about the ecological side of this, the challenges, the pollution impacts,
and some of the geopolitical issues related to acquiring energy as humans.
The other side of the equation, of course, is the materials.
And in previous lectures, we set the stage by saying that energy flows in a unidirectional
way through ecosystems, arriving from the sun, transformed into a variety of chemical holding
patterns, if you will, used to run the metabolism of organisms, reproduction, repair, movement,
and so forth.
Some of it gets passed on to the next trophic level, but ultimately that energy is lost
to the ecosystem as heat.
But organisms are more than just their energy.
Organisms are made up of stuff, and so where does the stuff come from?
And in this particular lecture, we are going to be focusing on the idea that the materials
of life get used over and over again.
These organic molecules are finite.
Organisms are not an endless supply worldwide.
And the availability of nutrients actually limits the size and distributions of organisms.
There tend to be particular limiting factors.
And we're also going to consider how the recycling of matter can enhance an ecosystem's
physical resiliency.
As the old adage goes, you are what you eat.
So we're going to begin our conversation today with a couple of images, both of which
come from our study site down on Cape Cod.
In the upper left is an image of an endangered shorebird called a piping plover.
It was actually the focus of my doctoral studies back in the 1980s.
And it was a community-based study in which we organized students and local participants,
as well as scientists, to investigate a long-term study of the impact of humans on piping plovers.
It turns out that piping plovers and humans want to use the same barrier-beach corridors
that plovers need for nesting and humans need for recreation, which is a very important
economic engine for coastal communities like those on Cape Cod.
And so what I was really doing was studying an ecological conflict of competition among
species.
But in the previous lecture, remember, we said that there can be direct and indirect
forces that one species exerts on the other.
And here's where I think this picture is particularly interesting.
Piping plovers nest on the shore right near the ocean edge.
They nest above the high tide line, and they lay their eggs right in the sand.
And their eggs are camouflaged, so they're very hard to see.
And that works pretty well.
We're going to actually investigate later in the lecture series some of the details
of this activity that they go through for their reproductive life cycle.
But the picture on the bottom is the one that's so fascinating to me.
This is a remote camera that's set up in front of a piping plover nest.
And historically, in any given year, about a third of the nests were lost to predators.
They didn't even hatch.
And that's not unusual for species that lives along a coastal margin.
It's living in an area that is very exposed.
And predators begin to key in on the areas in which these prey species are found.
The irony here, of course, is that our lab also studies coyotes, which we've mentioned
before.
And here's a picture, a game camera picture, of a coyote taken at night.
And there's a flash that's happening here so that we can tell what animal it is.
This is a coyote discovering a piping plover nest and about to devour it.
And why this is relevant to this conversation today is that this is an exchange of energy.
But it's not just an exchange of energy, it's an exchange of materials.
So when the coyote consumes the eggs that were laid by the piping plover, not only
will it break down the chemical materials in those eggs, the complex carbon compounds,
and extract energy that were locked up in the bonds of those chemicals.
But it will also extract materials that it will use to repair and build its own body.
So literally the carbon that was locked up in the yolk of that egg will be broken down
and rebuilt and will find itself in the tissues of that coyote.
I mean, we literally are what we eat.
It's not a metaphor.
And this links also to an additional consideration before we jump in in that this is a measure
of trophic dynamics.
This is a bridge from what we've done in the past couple of lectures to what we're going
to do in the next couple of lectures.
These animals in the picture here are different trophic levels.
But the picture that's missing here at the very top of the trophic level in this system
are humans.
Not only live with coyotes, but occasionally hunt coyotes.
And so it's another level within this trophic system.
And in fact, the role of humans as hunters is actually a very important one in ecosystems,
especially in those ecosystems where humans are the dominant species.
So if we think historically about a place like New England where this research is taking
place, if we go back 250 years before there were cities, then the dominant top order predators
in a community like that would have been bears, mountain lions and wolves.
But as humans moved into New England in huge numbers from Europe, they displaced those
other top order predators.
And in essence, this interaction, this energy flow, this movement of energy from one trophic
level to the other was altered.
And just like we learned in the previous lecture, the direct and indirect effect of predators
is incredibly important.
So when you lift those predators off, it changes the ecosystem.
And as strange as it may seem, the remaining top down effects that those predators would
have exerted on an ecosystem, the wolves, the bears and mountain lions, are now being
exerted by a relatively few number of species, coyotes are one, but humans actually become
a very important top down force.
So for animals like deer, which are relatively recent inhabitants of North America, only
about maybe 20,000 to 30,000 years ago, humans have always been and continue to remain probably
the most important predator of deer.
And as fewer and fewer humans in urbanized areas are hunting, we're seeing an increase
because of a release in the top down pressure, similar to the way that the pressure was
released when moose populations dropped in Isle Royale.
We're seeing that the balsam furs were released and were growing faster.
As hunting pressure and predatory pressure on deer are released, then the deer population
grows and what are the results?
We're seeing increases in zoonotic disease, increases in the number of times that humans
in their cars are hitting deer, which now is over a quarter of a million times each
year in the United States.
And so we're seeing a system that is changing as a result of changing demographic and consumer
patterns of humans.
And so these are social and behavioral decisions that humans are making, but they have profound
impacts on the nutrient cycling and the energy flow.
And we are on that bridge.
We are now crossing from a conversation of energy flow into a conversation of nutrient
cycling.
And boy, are we seeing it here.
Those nutrients are moving from the piping plover into the coyote.
So all materials and ecosystems are recycled and they reside in compartments.
Substance are sort of metaphorical but physical domains so that we can sort of consider how
these chemicals move.
The world has a finite amount of any given nutrient and the speed at which it moves through
ecosystems is pretty highly variable.
Anabolic biological activity increases the complexity of chemical substances.
So using chemical energy, cellular metabolism can take basic materials to produce living
structures.
This is the essence of how metabolism works.
Cells take chemical energy and turn it into physical tissue.
This acquisition of chemical materials and transformation to higher complexity is also
at the core of the evolutionary process.
However, lifespans of all organisms are also finite and organisms do not live forever.
Now, individual organisms may pass on their genes.
This is how ecologists define the notion of fitness.
And we're going back to our Darwinian conversation a couple of lectures ago.
Natural selection favors populations of organisms, favors individuals within those populations
because of the traits that they are expressing at any one time and how those traits mesh
with the dynamics of an ecosystem.
Those individuals that reproduce more frequently have their genetic material represented in
the population in the next generation to a higher degree.
However, and I don't mean to sound philosophical because I'm trying to be concrete here, the
individual organism is what we call a fleeting aggregation of organic molecules.
More cynically, we are a bag of DNA that exists for a certain amount of time and we either
pass on that material to the next generation or we don't.
But our own lives in the organism that we inhabit now comes to an end.
And it is a reality that is difficult for us to consider because our sort of cognition
is around our own lifetime.
But the genes in our bodies are much older than ourselves and the history of humanity
goes way back much before the beginning of our own lifespan and continues on beyond our
own lifespan.
The materials in our body will be recycled either quickly or slowly depending upon the
decisions we make at the time of our own passing.
So when organisms die or eliminate waste, these materials are broken down by organisms
and that group of organisms we call decomposers, we introduced them in the previous lecture.
And the ecosystem services they provide involve the releasing of those complex molecules back
into the physical environment where they can be utilized by other organisms in the future.
And what I want to do now is return to our energy diagram that we began to investigate
in the previous lecture.
Remember on the left side we showed the movement of energy.
Beginning with the sun, solar energy absorbed by the group we call producers.
That energy captured into the chemical bonds of particularly light sensitive pigments.
That energy is now trapped into a biological tissue and is now available to other organisms.
And so we see how energy trapped by producers ends up fueling the metabolism of consumers.
Ultimately that energy passes through and is lost as heat.
But notice on the right side of the diagram, left side of the diagram has got a straight
line from the sun to heat.
But on the right side of the diagram what we see is a cycle.
And we see a cycle between the physical environment and the organisms that live there.
And that cycling involves the movement of matter.
Because the carbon and other materials in our body were bio accumulated by other organisms
in previous lifetimes.
We acquired them by eating producers directly or eating some animal that ate a producer.
So we either ate an animal that ate plants or we ate plants directly and we incorporate
those carbon skeletons into our own framework.
And we will at the time of our death and also by eliminating waste, we will release those
unused materials back into the ecosystem.
So there is a constant exchange between the physical environment and living organisms.
The energy is flowing in one direction but the cycle of materials is continuous.
And that's important to remember because ultimately the amount of complex molecules that are available
is a very, very small fraction of the matter in the universe.
Most of the matter in the universe is hydrogen and helium can't build much of an organism
out of those inorganic components.
But the carbon based molecules that are out there are actually very, very rare in its
living systems that bio accumulate them but we don't get to keep them forever.
And we pass them on through this process of nutrient cycling.
So these geophysical processes such as erosion and sunlight physically alter materials in
the ecosystem.
This is an example of abiotic forces releasing nutrients into the ecosystem.
Now when I was in graduate school I was fortunate enough to accompany my research colleagues
to a site in northern Canada where they were doing a long term study of mountain goats.
It was being conducted by a Tufts University ecologist by the name of Benjamin Dane.
I mean this was awesome country with towering peaks that at first really overwhelmed me.
I'm a coastal flat lander and our base camp was at 11,000 feet.
So it actually took me quite a few days to overcome a sort of uncertainty about heights
and to get used to working in what is an extraordinary rugged and beautiful countryside.
And in fact the site we worked at we went in by float plane and then by helicopter and
in fact from the top of these mountains it was such a remote location you couldn't even
see roads from the top of the mountains let alone buildings.
It was a transformative experience for me growing up in heavily populated areas of the
Great Lakes region and then in the East Coast and then in Europe for a while.
I really had never been in an environment where I hadn't seen houses and people constantly.
But what amazed me the most when I was studying these goats in British Columbia was that they
would travel great distances to acquire precious minerals that served for them as metabolites.
We literally can think of them as goat vitamins.
They were accessing the salts that were released from the weathering rock and from the forces
of wind and rain.
It's rugged, rugged countryside up there.
In fact in future lectures we're going to come to understand how these different kinds
of biomes especially those in mountains get formed.
But back to the goats.
This is really risky business for the goats because when they come down off the mountain
slopes into these valleys in order to lick these stones there's a very, very high risk
that they will be preyed upon by wolves because down in the flat valleys the wolves can move
very quickly and the goats are really exposed.
But it's an interesting payoff because the nutrients are essential.
So the goats have this challenge.
They can stunt their own growth and reduce their probability of reproduction by staying
on the mountain or they can get the salts that they need by coming down and taking a
big risk.
So their need for salt overcame their fear of wolves.
And we'll actually look more closely at the role of wolves in changing the behavior of
prey species later on.
Fascinating story coming out of Yellowstone which we actually had touched on before the
same kind of ecology of fear.
So from the remote areas of British Columbia back to human technological practices which
have been a focus for us as we think about the sort of crisis aspect of our work as ecology.
Human technological practices have altered the temporal aspects of material cycling.
We've speeded it up dramatically.
The compartments that these nutrients would likely sit in or materials, we've increased
the rate at which these materials move.
So mining and combustion processes accelerate the release of materials into the biosphere.
And high tech activities, as we mentioned before, produce highly toxic materials.
One of the fascinating aspects of technology is that we can create heat and pressure that
can concentrate highly toxic materials into small spaces.
Then unfortunately we often release them into the biosphere.
One obvious example of this is something we call e-waste which is the junk that happens
when our electronics and computers wear out which given the voracious consumption of electronic
devices that we have in developed nations, we turn over this material incredibly fast.
We're going to actually talk a lot in the next lecture about the whole issue of e-waste
in human garbage.
Suffice it to say for now that our appetite for electronic technology has resulted in
mountains of toxic trash.
And unfortunately that burden falls disproportionately on poor nations who attempt to make a living
trying to recycle this material.
So the key molecule in life is no doubt, it's carbon in its many molecular forms.
And the carbon cycle is very important for the movement of carbon which is a vital nutrient
from the earth in and out of the atmosphere in various compartments and back to the ground
is what we call the carbon cycle.
We're going to look at the carbon cycle in some detail.
Now when we think about carbon we can consider it either as it is exposed to human access
or it is sequestered.
If it's sequestered it is essentially not exposed to humans and not accessible.
Carbon is essentially held in four reservoirs.
The first is the atmosphere primarily as carbon dioxide and remember we've already had a conversation
and we'll re-engage this about the role that carbon dioxide as a gas plays in the overall
climate conditions of the planet.
Plants take about a quarter of the carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere and they photosynthesize
it into carbohydrates.
Remember that's the key step in making life available on this planet, making life possible
is the process of carbon capture that happens in photosynthesis as the combination of sunlight,
water and carbon dioxide get transformed into carbohydrate.
About another quarter of the world's carbon is absorbed by the world's oceans and carbonate
rocks in the soils and also in the sediments.
And these are compartments that can last for a significant period of time.
For example limestone and coral are examples of critical warehouses of carbon.
So limestone and coral especially coral are generated through biologic processes and locking
up carbon dioxide and coral has some very interesting implications not only for climate
but also for buffering the changes in acidity in marine ecosystems.
Carbon is also found in sedimentary deposits such as coal, petroleum and natural gas.
Remember we talked about the challenges in the last lecture of trying to extract these
materials from the earth and use them as energy sources.
And finally carbon is stored as dead organic material such as humus in the soil.
So if we take a look at the carbon cycle you can see a series of arrows which help to
illustrate this movement of materials from the soil into the atmosphere, into the sediments,
into the ocean and so forth.
We can see exchange happening directly from the ocean to the air as carbon dioxide is
exchanged among the coral communities in the atmosphere.
We can also see carbon dioxide entering the atmosphere as a byproduct of combustion as
takes place both in automobiles and in factories at any time that hydrocarbons are put under
high pressure and heat and break apart.
We can also see that there are natural sources of carbon dioxide that come from combustion.
Volcanoes when those take place they release enormous amounts of carbon dioxide into the
atmosphere.
And don't forget you can also see the arrows here that connect the atmosphere to plants.
Plants exchange carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.
They take carbon dioxide in as part of photosynthesis.
But remember and this is something that many people forget including my students and sometimes
even myself.
We tend to get so focused on the fact that plants take sunlight and do photosynthesis
we forget that plants also have to survive at night.
And they have to survive in the winter when they drop their leaves.
So the process by which they acquire these carbon reserves and build them into complex
carbon molecules, they're not doing that to serve us as consumers.
They're doing that to serve their own metabolic demands.
And so not only do plants photosynthesize but plants also go through energy production
just like we do and give off carbon dioxide as a waste gas.
And it's easy for us to forget that sometimes plants are absorbing carbon dioxide and sometimes
they're giving it off.
And when areas are deforested there is a profound amount of carbon that is released back into
the air through this process because not only will some of the trees be burned by humans
to clear the land, there will also be the breakdown of all of that cellulose, the wood
that breaks down, which are really just long carbon compounds and those will be released
into the air as carbon dioxide.
And don't forget humans and other animals release carbon dioxide in the atmosphere by
respiration and breathing.
And especially as professors, you know, we're noted for all the hot air that we produce.
Carbon is released through the process of weathering of rocks as well as a decomposition
of plants and animals.
And we can think of that carbon cycle as divided into two categories, the geological
part which happens over millions of years, weathering and erosion, and the biological
part that works over a shorter period of days and centuries.
One of the biggest impacts of humans with respect to geological, with respect to the
geological forces occurs because we sort of intervene in that process.
All of those petrochemicals that are buried deep beneath the surface of the earth would
normally be there for millions of years.
But we dig them up, burn them to produce either heat or electricity or motion and that releases
the carbon back into the atmosphere more rapidly than it would normally happen.
Now the amount of carbon being released in the atmosphere has increased dramatically
over the past 200 years.
Almost all of us now are familiar with the graph of atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration
that was made famous by former Senator Al Gore in his film An Inconvenient Truth.
We're devoting an entire lecture to greenhouse gases and so I'm not going to spend much
time on it now.
But the overwhelming majority of climate scientists believe this increase is mostly due to the
anthropogenic use of fossil fuels.
Although remember agricultural and cattle come in a close second with respect to the
impact and release of carbon dioxide and rising amounts of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere
is causing a rise in surface and sea level temperatures.
We're going to devote an entire lecture to this critical aspect of our course.
Now the nitrogen cycle is also important because the movement of nitrogen is critical
with respect to the development of proteins.
It's along with carbon, it's the key component of proteins and proteins make up most of what
we are as an organism.
It's the nitrogen is a sixth most abundant element on the earth's surface, makes up
about 78% of the atmosphere.
Nitrogen mostly exists in its inert form in the atmosphere and does not cycle through
the atmosphere and the earth without the help of living organisms, the so-called nitrogen
fixing bacteria.
These highly specialized bacteria establish a relationship, a symbiotic mutualism with
many plants with respect to their roots in the soil.
Nitrogen fixing bacteria take inert forms of nitrogen and make it available to plants.
And typically these bacteria found either in the root nodules of some of the plants or
they're associated with the root tissue.
Now the key thing that they do again is to take this inert form of nitrogen which is
very common in the atmosphere but inaccessible to us metabolically and turn it into a more
chemically active form.
And often this is the first step in actually colonizing inorganic soils and certain plants
and their symbiotic nitrogen fixing bacteria particularly good at that, one species of
which are lupins.
And lupins and their symbiotic nitrogen fixing bacteria that recolonize Mount St. Helens
after the volcano erupted in 1980 served to provide this critical metabolic bridge for
nitrogen into the soils so that plants and insects could follow.
Nitrification is another process by which bacteria convert ammonia into ions that are
more usable by most plants such as nitrites.
And this occurs actually only under aerobic conditions and is thus really limited to terrestrial
ecosystems.
And then there are some microorganisms that under extreme conditions of low oxygen tension
something we call anoxia will actually denitrify the soil and these bacteria use the nitrate
ion directly as a key metabolite in their quest for energy and they convert it either
nitrous oxide or back to diatomic nitrogen and so it's sort of lost to the atmosphere.
So those actually are processes where the nitrogen goes back out of the bioavailability
region and into the abiotic world.
Nitrogen can be found in the oceans and atmosphere and the soil and plants and these nitrogen
fixing bacteria help to move the nitrogen from the soil into the plants by making the
nitrogen more metabolically active.
Some nitrogen is actually released into the atmosphere through lightning and nitrogen
is released into the air by combustion from factories.
Now pollution has tremendous impacts on biogeochemical cycling.
You know humans have a large impact on these two cycles by moving carbon and nitrogen artificially
from one compartment to the next.
For example fertilizer is used on crops that doubles the amount of natural nitrogen transfer
that would be taking place in an ecosystem.
The increase of nitrogen oxide especially affects the ozone layer and it's contributed
to the depletion of that ozone layer.
The use of fertilizers on crops has tripled the amount of ammonia which contributes both
to poor air quality and acid rain.
And the increase of fertilizer use also causes problems when there is a large amount of fertilizer
that runs off into oceans and lakes and rivers.
It causes eutrophication and that causes an increase in the photosynthetic activity at
first by plants and bacteria, causes an algae bloom that depletes the amount of available
oxygen for fish and other consumers.
We talked about that before when we talked about the dead zones.
You know there was a famous experiment looking at the impact of limiting nutrients in the
1970s at an experimental site in Manitoba.
A team led by ecologist David Schindler from the University of Alberta investigated the
role of limiting nutrients on aquatic ecosystems.
One experiment added phosphorus, another critical nutrient to a series of experimental
lakes and the result was eutrophication from a bloom of cyanobacteria.
Phosphorus turns out to be a key limiting chemical element in DNA.
I mean these studies helped us to illuminate the importance of nutrients in causing pollution.
You know under the wrong conditions even healthy nutrients can be pollutants and degrade ecosystems.
This discovery led to the control and development of new regulations regarding the discharge
of phosphates into oceans, lakes and streams.
You know nitrogen runoff from fertilizers and animal waste remains a huge problem.
You know in the next lecture we're going to tackle this huge problem of human waste and
the challenge of recycling including e-waste.
So until then, farewell.
