Hello, and welcome back. From our previous lecture, we learned that the stuff of life,
the materials, are used over and over again. You know, this is also true for human materials.
They simply don't disappear, but unfortunately, often we tend to treat them that way, treat
them as though they do disappear. You know, the ecology of human trash is extraordinary
for both its complexity and enormity. Each day in the United States, 90,000 truckloads
of trash are picked up and disposed of. In this lecture, we're going to examine the
nature and extent of human trash along with its impact on the environment. You know, even
recycling efforts often result in ecological toxicity and levels of human suffering. This
has become one of the most vexing challenges of the 21st century. We'll examine the ecology
of the end stage of human consumption and consider alternatives to the current strategies
of waste disposal. You know, think about this. Our patterns of consumption are so locked
in, especially in Western culture, that we don't realize how much material we generate.
I like to use the example of the overflowing shower stall. Now, I don't know if your family
is anything like mine, but you make your way into the shower and there's different shampoos
and soaps and all these products, and each individual who's using that has their own
sort of personal favorites. And not only is this expensive and sort of messy to deal with,
but think about it. The chemicals in those bottles, after you've used them on your body
and get washed off, go down the drain. The materials that the chemicals came in, the
soaps, have to be thrown away, and so that becomes plastic waste. And there was additional
energy required to move that material around before it got to you. So we have all this
packaging and products that are stored for relatively short periods of time between the
shelf and our consumption. And then, ultimately, we have to dispose of not only the chemicals,
but ultimately we have to dispose of the containers that they came in. So human waste streams
are increasing in volume and toxicity, and their disposition represents an enormous challenge.
As our population continues to increase, so does the amount of waste that needs to be
disposed. Some of the waste created by humans is from our own metabolism, and rural areas
of the world, human metabolic waste, is just buried or dispersed. But in urbanized areas,
the amount is so large that we must collect and treat our metabolic wastes. Ignoring this
problem leads to all kinds of waterborne diseases, such as typhoid and cholera, which still kill
hundreds of thousands of people a year worldwide. We're going to consider water pollution in
particular in a future lecture. Now human waste or feces are treated in waste treatment
plants. This is a combination of chemicals and physical processes that are used to remove
the wastes. There are traditionally three stages of wastewater treatment. There's so-called
primary treatment, and here the solid materials and feces and others are physically removed
from the water stream, where they might be treated in a different way. And the separation
includes wastewater and so-called gray water and street runoff that has entered into the
sewer system. So now we have this water and we need to do something with it. And the second
step in treatment, we call secondary. And here we use chemicals and bacteria to break
down the waste. And then in some sewage treatment facilities is an additional scale of treatment
that we call tertiary. And the effluent or treated water is usually returned back to
the environment in a local stream or river. Now many sewage treatment plants ultimately
encounter problems that have pretty significant ecological outcomes. One of the big problems
that occurs is when there's large amounts of rain. In this instance, the sewage systems
cannot accommodate all the excess runoff from the roads and paved surfaces. And here if
you take a look, we have an example of one of the sewage systems in which they are handling
both the effluent that's coming out of human habitation, our metabolic wastes, but also
handling the runoff from roads. And if you notice, the system ends up having to deal
with huge differences in the amount of total flow. So on a typical day with little or no
rain, the sewage flows into the sewage treatment plant and can be treated by primary and secondary
and often tertiary processes. But what happens during a rainstorm when there's a big additional
flush of rain? Here we run into a problem where the sewer system, the treatment system
simply becomes overwhelmed and there ends up being a system to allow that overflow to
simply bypass the treatment process. And this is where the excess pollution comes from because
a sewage treatment facility can only handle so much. Now when we cause this overflow,
often untreated sewage is released along with the combined overflows. Another issue
with combined sewage overflow is the increase of things like hormones and prescription drugs
that are being released into the water that were at some point prescription medications
for people. This is due in part to an increase in prescription drugs and hormone like mimics
such as drugs that control birth control and fertility. Once those things pass through
our body, they're back into the ecosystem. These drugs tend to be water soluble and
small amounts are excreted when we urinate. Now we don't even have a system established
yet for treating water for these kinds of challenges. The increase in hormone mimics
and other drugs in the water we know affects the plants and animals that are living near
the outflow and in fact represents one of the most important impacts that we know of
in amphibian populations, something that we'll talk about later. Now solid waste or garbage
is another problem and as our society becomes more consumer and materialistically driven,
we have more and more solid waste to deal with. The amount of garbage or trash thrown
out each week in the United States is about three and a half barrels per household or
about 90,000 truckloads each day. And if we take a look at a landfill image, you get a
sense of just the extraordinary scale that that works out to be. It's about 240 million
tons of garbage annually generated in the United States. Much of this garbage is household
waste and the percentage of disposability has increased over time as we shift to a
use once throw away culture. Now the solid stuff is called municipal solid waste or MSW
for short and over the past 40 years, the amount of municipal solid waste has doubled
in the United States. Americans generated about two and a half pounds of municipal waste
per day in 1960 and currently that's up to about five pounds per day and continuing to
grow. Now the cost of management and disposal of this waste is very high and the ecological
impacts of the trash are absolutely devastating. Even the recycling activities that humans
do can cause significant challenges and often result in significant social inequities that
lead to environmental injustice. Now historically cities have either buried their trash or burned
it or took it out to sea and dumped it. Landfills or dumps are one way to dispose of trash.
And landfills generally began as a hole in the ground and if they're relatively modern
they might be lined with some kind of an impervious material like plastic. This is a very important
helps to prevent the toxic materials from leaching into the ground and adding to possible
groundwater contamination. Now historically the problem is of course that most landfills
didn't have that and so most of the thousands of landfills that remain across North America
and Europe, even though they're not being used now, don't have those kind of linings
and the garbage that's there is continuing to leach toxic materials into the soil and
into the groundwater that sits underneath the landfill itself. Now when you build this landfill
layers of trash and garbage are covered with soil and the idea is that microorganisms and
bacteria in the soil will aid in the decomposition of the trash. Landfills are generally regulated
under the Environmental Protection Act with federal regulations but each state is responsible
for enforcing those regulations and so what you have is a very complex matrix across the
United States of the way in which these landfills are regulated. Many problems occur like soil
and water contamination as well as poor air quality associated with these landfills.
Now, we have a whole new set of problems related to solid waste disposal that as a result
of our use of high tech materials like computers and televisions and flat screen TVs that we
call e-waste. People living in the United States have a lot of electronic devices. Computers,
televisions, handheld devices, mobile phones, they're the hallmark of a modern society but
they bring with them a tremendous legacy of waste when we're done with them. It's estimated
that 3 billion devices live in American homes and they all wear out and that's where the
real trouble starts because inside the heart of these machines lie a toxic soup of heavy
metals and other poisons. Now I have here a piece of an old circuit board that came
from a computer. It's part of a video card and for any of you who have ever tinkered
with your own computer this is a pretty common sight and essentially it is pretty harmless
in this current state. The toxic materials in this card are isolated from our use but
this card is made up of a variety of different materials many of which can be recycled and
so one of the challenges that we face is that when we go to take these cards apart they
will expose some of the toxic materials that are there and those people who are actually
involved in the process of recycling are at relatively high risk and even when we don't
recycle these materials we create these mountains of old circuit boards buried in computers
and as they get crushed under the weight of materials on top of them they begin to release
the toxic materials that during the period of time that they're used on a daily basis
represent relatively small risk. So when these electronic devices are built the toxic materials
such as lead and mercury are insulated from the outside environment and are very safe
for us to use. Remember most of the really nasty stuff is confined to the circuit boards
themselves but when these devices no longer work they're taken apart by recyclers discarded
in landfills or left to pile up in houses and dumpsters. Now Americans discard approximately
two million tons of these electronic devices each year. Collectively we call this junk
e-waste and much of it ends up in landfills. Lead, which is a brain toxin, is necessary
to make the cathode ray tube that lights up the viewing screen and to make connections
on circuit boards and that's just one of the toxic chemicals. Mercury, another serious
biological toxin is found in flat panel displays. We talked about mercury when we discussed
the minimata case in Japan. Cadmium, which is a known cancer causing agent, is found
in batteries and on circuit boards. Now polyvinyl chloride or PVC is highly toxic when it's
burned and is the plastic that houses computers and insulates wires. So although PVC is relatively
inert as we use it on a daily basis, at the end of the use cycle for these materials they
become highly toxic as they're disposed of. You know later in this lecture we're going
to talk a little bit more about the high social costs of dealing with e-waste. Now marine
debris and dumping is an entirely other kind of problem in practice that has been used
for waste disposal. You know in 1972 the United States Environmental Protection Agency was
given the authority to allow limited ocean dumping in surrounding ocean waters. Now currently
it's banned worldwide after debris began washing up on public beaches and this is a huge problem
as dumping is either under regulated or not regulated at all. It's very hard to catch
the disposal of illegal substances like plastic and medical waste. Now think about it, if
we think that the challenge of managing waste in the terrestrial environment is hard, remember
that 70% of the world's surface is covered by ocean and so ocean dumping is almost impossible
to effectively patrol. Now one of the great problems with ocean dumping which is a little
bit different than landfills, so we think about landfills here right, we have the problem
of putting garbage inside a fixed location, we cover everything up, now we do have materials
that leach out and gases that might escape but we pretty much know where the garbage
is. In the ocean when we dump things they don't necessarily stay where we dump them,
they tend to get moved around by the massive current system. So this one serious problem
with ocean dumping of the many is a trash travels with the ocean current. You may dump
it one place but it ends up somewhere else. It collects in areas where the currents are
weakest and one example is the great Pacific garbage patch of which we have an image here.
It's double the size of Texas and the debris washes ashore to nearby islands including
Hawaii and you can see from the image that these large current systems that are located
around the world are contributing to the movement and disposition of trash. There are essentially
five large major ocean wide gyres, one in the North Atlantic, one in the South Atlantic,
North Pacific, South Pacific and the Indian Ocean and they end up serving not only as
conveyor belts to climate which we will talk about in another lecture, but they end up
as literally machines moving garbage around the world's ocean and again where the gyres
are weakest the garbage tends to collect and they become these huge submerged islands of
trash. Tires have historically been used for coral refrestoration. Americans generate
about 300 million discarded tires per year and one model was to use some of these tires
to actually create anchors in which the coral communities could begin to reconstruct themselves.
In the 1970s about 2 million used auto tires were dumped off the Florida coast in an effort
to create an artificial coral reef. These tires were lashed together and weighted down
with cement to create additional habitat for the reef, additional reef habitat that would
hopefully encourage more fish which they have done. But the problem is over time the tires
have broken apart and as the rubber deteriorates it releases the toxic chemicals that were
embedded in the tire and that actually begins to restrict and reduce the coral growth. The
poisons released by the tires themselves become inhospitable. So you have this very difficult
situation now where you have the very structure upon which the corals are built are releasing
poisons into the corals environment. Now the tires have also moved around due to things
like hurricanes and storms and as the tires have moved around not only have they damaged
the home reef but they are threatening the remaining natural reefs that exist. Now in
2007 in a huge effort the Coast Guard and the Navy removed tires that covered about 34
acres of ocean floor. It was a huge project and this was done in response to this rising
issue and in response to this there was the formation of the National Undersea Research
Program. Part of this group's focus is the study of deep sea biodiversity as it responds
to pulses of human disturbance. In this case toxicity from dumping. In addition these organisms
and their role in the food web are of concern as these contaminants can find their way back
into human metabolism. The study area is on the east coast of the United States in temperate
waters off the coast of New York City only about 100 miles from one of the biggest cities
in the world. The history of this dump site includes its use as a receiver of wet sewerage
some 40 million tons that was deposited over a six year period of time beginning in 1986.
The data suggests that the marine ecosystems biodiversity was being significantly altered
as was the sediment composition which had levels of silver that exceeded a control
areas measurement by a factor of 20 fold. Many benthic marine organisms use the sediment
as a home burrowing burrowing into the layers and incorporating organic material into their
bodies. Ecologically this was causing a rise in the numbers of creatures like sea urchins
and sea stars that could ingest the sludge derived from the organic matter.
So in a 1993 study that was conducted by Fred Grassley and Paul Snellgrove working out of
both the Memorial University of Newfoundland and Rutgers University they found levels of
silver appeared to be on the increase as far as 50 nautical miles south of the dump site.
This was suggesting that the recovery of the dump site had led to changes in other habitats
as re-suspended materials were transported to sites south of the dump site. So I mean
the insight here is that this material continues to be worked into the system and ends up being
found in organisms that are you would essentially at first blush consider them not to be impacted.
Well back to e-waste. Remember we talked about how the problem is generated by the breakdown
of these materials. So we've talked about tires, we've talked about other kinds of waste,
but we began a few moments ago talking about circuit boards and that challenge. So what
we know is that e-waste and toxic materials are becoming an increasing problem especially
in poor nations. Electronics like televisions, digital cameras, computers and cell phones
all contain various toxic chemicals and metals that need to be disposed of properly. Most
of these products are not biodegradable and they tend to be sent to poor countries to
be taken apart. Countries like China, India and Kenya due to the lower environmental
standards in those countries. Now while e-waste accounts for only about 2% of the trash in
landfills, it's about 70% of our toxic waste. And according to a recent article by National
Geographic, the Environmental Protection Agency predicts that in the next few years about
30 to 40 million computers will be thrown away. Along with a switch to high technology
and television, there will be an estimated 25 million TVs that are now obsolete and will
be disposed of every year. Cell phones represent another e-waste stream and in 2005 alone,
almost 100 million cell phones were discarded. And every one of these electronic materials
contain precious metals that can be recycled but are very risky to do. So what we know
in India and other countries where e-waste is sent, people rummage through collecting
parts that contain these metals. They then melt down the e-waste and they melt down the
metal and then collect it and the waste and other waste streams remain. They melt down
some of the pieces to collect bits of lead and copper. These materials are often melted
in the same pots that the family uses to cook their meals. And during this process, the
air and soil qualities at these dump sites have very, very high levels of carcinogens
and air pollutants. In 2005, the Basel Action Network released a report on digital dumping
and abuse in the African continent. And it was found that when landfills got too high,
villages would just set them aflame. And of course, that releases additional materials
into the environment. The residents, of course, were complaining of fumes and poor air quality.
Children in livestock often roamed through these trash piles and trace amounts of harmful
metals ended up in their diets. A long-term study is being conducted in China right now
and it's finding that children living near or at these e-waste dumps had significantly
higher blood levels of lead than those living farther away. It was also found that the amount
of lead found in the blood increased with age. As you can imagine, continued exposure results
in higher levels of toxicity. Think of our conversation about biomagnification and about
long-life creatures. Humans sit at the top of the food chain. We're long-lived. We have high
metabolic rates. It sets us up to be susceptible to these kinds of challenges.
This is not to impugn the activity of recycling. Recycling is a critically important means
for us to reduce our waste. Remember the three Rs of recycling. Reduce, reuse, and recycle.
Reducing the amount of energy and waste is central to helping the environment. Reusing items
and prolonging the life of items can also be a very useful practice.
However, when we engage in this, it's complicated. The recycling of plastics, metals, and papers
are an important practice, but generally recycling is a fairly complicated cost-benefit analysis.
Many people argue that the cost of recycling and removal is actually more expensive than
the use and discard strategies that have been implemented over the past 50 years.
But recycling helps reduce the amount that goes into landfills and therefore creates more space.
The EPA has also found that overall recycling reduces carbon emissions by about 49 million metric tons.
Since 1980, America has recycled only about 10% of its municipal rubbish.
Today, that rate is at about 25%. So we've seen a big change between 1980 and the present.
Australia and the Netherlands, those figures reach about 60% or more of their municipal waste.
Recycling in urban areas is even more cost-effective, however, and the long-term benefits have more
value and further support the need to recycle.
One example is a Florida's Trash to Energy program.
Across the country, about 150 of these combustion facilities are working nationwide and produce
collectively about 2700 megawatts of energy by burning 33 million tons of municipal solid waste each year.
Florida has the biggest municipal waste to energy capacity in the United States.
Nearly 20,000 tons are incinerated each day in facilities like the one shown here
and generate over 500 megawatts of electricity.
Other municipalities are capturing natural gas, methane, that is released from old landfills
that are using the gas to power and heat local communities.
For example, the University of New Hampshire became the first major institute of higher education
to tap into the gas produced by landfills.
They built a 13-mile pipeline from a local landfill and now the University of New Hampshire
powers about 85% of their on-campus energy needs from this renewable source.
Called Ecoline, this project lowers the University's carbon emissions and it's stabilized their energy costs
by tapping into a sustainable source of fuel.
One way to help ease the impact of e-waste is to find new ways to build, discard and recycle electronic devices.
The architect William McDonough is an expert on environmental design and has written extensively about it.
In his book Cradle to Cradle, he suggests that we don't have to be buried in e-waste.
Instead, we need to reinvent the way things are built.
Using a technique called life cycle analysis or LCA, we can assess the environmental impacts of products along with the energy they use.
If we can make products more safely and find better uses for them after they are no longer needed,
the negative environmental impacts will be reduced.
One example is synthetic paper. It is made from plastics that would otherwise end up in landfills.
So as you can see in this context, there's a lot of work to be done.
And in our next lecture, we're going to move from a consideration of trash to an understanding of the movement of water.
And as you know, the trash and water nexus is a pretty tight one.
So stay tuned and thank you.
Thank you.
