Hello, and welcome back.
You know, in our last conversation, we were thinking about the implications of changes
in water dynamics that can then feed back on the climate.
In this lecture, we're going to talk about how the climate dynamics, especially the change
in climate, can have an impact on ecological systems.
You know, the consensus among credible climate scientists is that the Earth is warming and
it's warming rapidly.
The causes are complex, but the most likely critical factor is the intensified use of
combustion technologies by humans.
It's the additional carbon in the atmosphere has a net warming effect.
As the global climate warms, ecosystems are changing across the globe.
Investigations include the shift in animal migratory patterns, life cycle fluctuations
in plants, and the rapid disappearance of marine and coastal habitats.
You know, everyone has an anecdote with respect to climate change, and the one that comes
to mind for me is growing up on Cape Cod in the 1970s and 80s, as I became interested
in ecosystems and became interested in birds.
It was actually quite rare in the 1970s to see a cardinal in your backyard, and cardinals
now are one of the more commonly distributed North American birds, and part of this has
to do with the reduction in severity in winters in some of the northern states.
It's allowed cardinals to move east and north, and in fact, many of the individuals within
our population of cardinals, especially in the Boston metropolitan area and also in Cape
Cod, don't even migrate because the winters have become warmer and they can stay for the
year.
And so that's a pretty significant change in the span of only about 25 years.
Now global and regional climates are changing rapidly, most likely in response to human
drivers.
But before we engage the climate change issue directly, let's draw the link closed between
the physical aspects of climate change and the ecology of the species that live on the
planet that's warming.
Climate and ecology of systems are linked in very fundamental ways.
First of all, climate drives long term pulses of energy and precipitation.
In previous lectures we've talked about how climate is a function of precipitation and
the amount of heat energy.
Well if you change those fundamental variables, you're going to change the climate.
Remember from other conversations that we had in this series that heat energy and water
availability are fundamental drivers of the biomes themselves.
For example, the difference between a hot desert and a rainforest is the availability
of water.
Both have high heat energy.
Now tundras are deserts without all the heat.
Take away the heat, take away the water and you have a tundra.
If you have a tundra and add heat, you get the desert.
If you have a tundra, add heat and water, you get a rainforest.
As such, climate change has the capacity to reconfigure the basic aspects of our ecosystems
as we know them.
We also know that living systems will adapt to this change, but the human cost is likely
to be profound.
One of the most vexing aspects of climate change is the way in which the timing of natural
events changes as the biosphere heats up.
This research is called Phenology and focuses on the annual timing of natural events, such
as the emergence of leaves on deciduous trees, the arrival of migratory species and the onset
of breeding activity.
Consider that the timing of the events in the life history of organisms is clearly linked
and integrated.
In fact, animal migrations are often timed to coincide with food availability along the
way.
If these systems are not in sync, then both the migratory species and the species they
prey upon can have dire consequences.
A critical phenological relationship is that of the migratory shorebird, the redknot,
Colledrus canutus, and the prey species it relies on to complete its journey, the eggs
of the horseshoe crab, Limulus polyphemus.
Now each year, over one million shorebirds visit the rich coastal embayment of Delaware
Bay.
This area is a critical stopover point for what will then be a non-stop push northward
to the arctic breeding grounds for these birds.
Many of these birds flew in from great distances, such as Tierra del Fuego at the very tip of
South America.
Now the redknotes arrive by the thousands to gorge on the eggs of the horseshoe crab
that have been laid in the intertidal sands.
This ritual has been going on for thousands of years and is essential to the whole ecology
of the Delmarva Peninsula.
An increase in human harvest of the horseshoe crab for bait in the conch industry and for
the biotech industry has devastated the population.
A team led by Lawrence Niles of the Conservation Wildlife Foundation has been analyzing the
trends for this relationship and the data trends are really quite daunting.
And if you'll take a look, we'll investigate some of these trends.
First of all, you can see that the harvest of horseshoe crabs reported in the mid-Atlantic
saw a tremendous increase as the interest in developing a conch industry in that region
became more widely shared and also the use of horseshoe crabs for the biotech industry.
You can see that as the industry ramped up, more and more horseshoe crabs were being harvested.
And you can see also that in the past few years the horseshoe crab harvest has been declining.
Not for lack of effort, I would add, but for lack of resources.
And in surveys that were done by Niles and his team, you can see that the capture rate
of horseshoe crabs using their methodologies was declining.
So here what they're using is a standard effort measure and over time that same effort is
yielding smaller numbers of individuals, which is an indication that the population is shrinking.
And this has some pretty significant impacts because as the horseshoe crab population has
reduced, then quite clearly the number of eggs being laid in the sand is reduced, which
means that the arriving red knots are not able to have access to the food that they need.
And in fact, beginning in the 1990s and going through to the present time, they have been
doing mark recapture studies of the red knots and the proportion of those red knots that
fall into the 180 gram body capacity has been reduced dramatically, which means that the
birds are not able to put on the weight that they need to finish their migratory tract.
It's pretty extraordinary the metabolism of migration for birds.
Birds lose half their body weight during migration and the stopover points are the critical ones
for them to complete their journey.
I liken it to the rest stops that we have on long trips.
We may be traveling for a long period of time and we may spend actually a very short amount
of time at that stopover point, but during that stopover point, we're likely to take
on food and we're going to fill our automobile with fuel, despite the fact that we're there
for only a short period of time.
If that stopover point isn't there, we don't make it from point A to point B. And the same
is true for these kinds of migratory relationships.
And when it's this extensive as it is between the red knot and other shorebird communities
and their relationship to horseshoe crab ecology, the system is very, very tightly interlinked.
So if you couple this to climate change, which is altering the breeding and wintering grounds
for the red knot and gobbling up coastal habitat for the horseshoe crab, we can see the makings
of an ecological disaster that are driven both by the anthropogenic activity of human
fishing in the near geospatial domain, but also because of overall climate change is
exacerbating the problem.
We will visit the migratory story later in the series and look in more detail at the
impacts of disrupted migration.
But this example serves to underscore the biological impact of climate change.
Now according to the best data that we have, the global mean surface temperatures of the
Earth have increased about 0.6 degrees centigrade over the 20th century.
The 1990s was the warmest decade and 1998 was the warmest year in the last thousand
years in the Northern Hemisphere.
Over the last 50 years, nighttime minimum temperatures increased by about 0.2 degrees
centigrade per decade.
And the 150 year review shows considerable warming trends.
And here we see data from global warming trends beginning just after the middle of
the 19th century.
This is the sort of history of instrumented change that we have and you can see both the
annual averages and overlaid on top of that the five year averages which allow for smoothing
of the data.
And you can see quite consistently that beginning in the start of the 20th century and leading
in to the 21st century there has been a relentless climb and increase in global temperatures
despite some normal and consistent fluctuations.
You know the Earth goes through normal cyclical warming and cooling patterns, however examination
of the effect that humans have is that global warming is occurring and humans are the critical
contributing factor.
Now in order for us to understand this a little better we need to understand how heat moves
around the globe to begin with and the Hadley cell concept is a pretty helpful model to
consider the movement of heat around the globe.
With Hadley cells we understand that the circulation of air dominates the climate on earth.
So heat produced in one part of the earth gets moved around because of the overall global
circulation of air currents and it works a little bit like this.
Solar heating at the equator which has the most direct contact with or the most direct
angle to receive solar energy.
This up causes the air to expand and travel up in latitude and then ultimately diverges
at the poles.
Now soaring birds use this phenomenon on a smaller scale to conserve energy while flying.
The notion that warm air rises and cool air falls, this rising of warm air becomes an
available energy source that animals can use.
George Hadley in the middle of the 18th century proposed an idea of a simple single cell of
convection air rising and cooling in a circular manner.
He proposed this idea to help explain why sailors found winds blowing east to west in
the lower latitudes.
Now later on this model was improved by William Ferrell who proposed a three cell model in
1865 and this model divides the circulation of each hemisphere into three distinct cells.
So this heat driven by these cells circulate air between the tropics and subtropics, we
call that the Hadley cell, then there's a Ferrell cell in the middle latitudes that
circulate and then finally there's a polar cell and each consists of one belt of rising
air that moves up, cools and then sinks and then warm air moving up again and back where
it originally rose and these three cells work together like the cogs of a wheel and you
can see from the data how these cells can churn and generate a grand movement if you
will of heat around the earth and the circulation is intimately related to this notion of trade
winds which was the observation that initially developed the theorem and these tropical rain
belts and subtropical deserts and the jet stream were all related to the movement of
air as a result of these cells.
Now there is a zone of low pressure at the equator, the so called equatorial low or this
intertropical convergence zone that sort of serves as the base, upward motions of warm
air, favor heavy rain showers and most often occurring in the afternoon.
As air travels upwards it also moves from west to east caused by the Coriolis forces
because not only is the earth a sphere and moving around the sun but of course it's
rotating on its axis as well.
The movement of air in the atmosphere is what causes our weather, in the U.S. the jet stream
is the main air current that moves from west to east.
But other localized wind patterns include the monsoons of India, the Santa Ana winds
in California which occur when there is high pressure over the Rockies and here the air
descends the western slopes and warms by compression not because it was traveled over a desert
but causing coastal areas of California actually to be warmer than Las Vegas.
Ocean currents are horizontal movements of surface waters and ocean currents have similar
behavior patterns although the medium is different, air and water have different densities and
different physical properties but you see the same type of mixture and exchange that
takes place.
There is a large amount of energy and moisture exchange between the ocean and the lower air
atmospheres.
Ocean currents are actually driven by the winds that occur in the lower atmosphere.
However, they move a little bit different about 45 degrees to the right of the air flow
in the northern hemisphere.
So in order for us to begin to understand this notion of climate change or some scientists
like to refer to it as climate chaos because as global energy systems intensify some areas
become wetter, some areas become drier, some areas become warmer, some areas will actually
become cooler but overall the system is heating up.
And so in order for us to understand this we need to investigate greenhouse gases and
the so-called greenhouse effect.
Now greenhouse gases occur naturally in the earth's atmosphere and they include water
vapor, carbon dioxide, methane and ozone, all naturally occurring gases in the atmosphere
and the primary physical function they have with respect to global climate is that they
help absorb and emit the sun's infrared radiation.
Now it's a good thing that we have greenhouse gases.
If we didn't the temperature fluctuations and overall temperature loss on the planet
would be such that life would essentially be incompatible.
So the question we have here is what are the human impacts or what are the anthropogenic
contributions to the distribution of greenhouse gases that appear to be causing the problem?
So what we do know is that over the last 150 years the greenhouse gases have been driving
significant amounts of temperature change.
Now the levels of greenhouse gas are changing in response to the changing climate.
One of the most important contributions that we have that help us understand this are some
of the atmosphere carbon dioxide data that have been gathered from a variety of areas
and most important the historic data that came from the monoloa figure that you see
on your screen.
Now these data were originally gathered by a scientist named Keeling who was gathering
data both from the monoloa observatory in Hawaii and also from the South Pole.
Now the funding ran out early on to continue to gather the data from the South Pole but
we have essentially an unbroken data set of atmospheric carbon dioxide measured at the
monoloa laboratory in Hawaii that runs from 1958 to the present time.
And if you'll notice that carbon dioxide concentrations which were just over 300 when Keeling began
gathering his data in 1958 are now in the current iteration approaching 390 parts per
million and you see the steady upward increase of carbon dioxide.
You also see superimposed upon that the annual cycle and this is fascinating I think and
many people miss the subtlety of the ecology that's happening here on the annual cycle.
Notice in the inset that the peak occurs on an annual cycle of the fluctuation occurs
somewhere in March and April which is the period of winter in the northern hemisphere
and as we go from April to October you see that there's actually a drop in atmospheric
carbon dioxide.
Well that has to do with the arrival of summer in the northern hemisphere because the bulk
of the world's forests are actually in the northern hemisphere.
And one of the things that forests do is to sequester carbon because they take carbon
dioxide from the atmosphere and they turn it into organic carbon that is part of both
their metabolic needs and their physical structure.
We've mentioned before and we'll talk later that one of the solutions to climate chaos
and increased anthropogenic formation of carbon is to plant more trees and here is one of
the most striking examples.
So the southern hemisphere for a variety of reasons is reasonably depopurate of large
scale forests in comparison to the northern hemisphere so we see an annual fluctuation.
So during summer in the northern hemisphere we're sequestering enormous amounts of carbon
through our forests and then our temperate forests essentially go to sleep and boreal
forests go to sleep in the winter as it becomes too cold for photosynthesis to continue and
during the period of time in the summer in the southern hemisphere where other forests
might be taking over there's not as much forest cover.
And so we see the overall global carbon dioxide levels go up on their annual cycle.
But superimposed on that is this general trend of pretty dramatic increase in the amount
of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.
We also see that in a figure from the IPCC the International Panel on Climate Change
which recently finished another one of its critical reports that the amount of greenhouse
gas has been growing pretty consistently between 1970 and 2004 going from about 28.7 gigatons
of carbon equivalents per year up to almost 50 during the last big window of measurement.
So very, very significant.
So the greenhouse effect is a model that we use to understand how our earth remains
a hospitable environment under normal circumstances but actually heats up with the addition of
this anthropogenic carbon.
So the greenhouse gases in the air end up modulating the environment.
Now we use a greenhouse metaphor but that's not really perfectly accurate.
You know a greenhouse works by sunlight comes in, it heats up inside of the greenhouse and
the infrared radiation is trapped as it tries to escape out through the glass and it's sort
of passively held in as an insulator.
The sunlight penetrates the atmosphere, warms the earth's surface.
The longer wavelength infrared radiation is then radiated back from the earth's surface.
Now a considerable amount of the outgoing infrared radiation is absorbed by the gases
in the atmosphere and so far that's a little bit like what happens in a greenhouse but
here's the interesting part.
The reason these greenhouse gases are so named is that when the infrared radiation is absorbed
by these molecules, they don't just trap the heat, that frequency of energy actually excites
their molecular structure and they generate heat back down.
So the metaphor I like to use when we think of the blanket model of thinking about greenhouse
gases, it's less like a greenhouse and more like an electric blanket.
Electric blanket in the winter keeps you warm not just because it traps your body heat but
because it generates additional heat as a function of an electrochemical interface.
So we think about this energy from the sun in the form of photons reaches the earth.
It propels both the biotic and abiotic systems of the planet and the earth's temperature
is this dynamic balance between how much is absorbed and how much is radiated back.
Solar radiation passes through the clear atmosphere and some of that radiation is reflected back
to the earth's surface as it bounces off of clouds.
Solar radiation is absorbed by the surface and warms the earth.
This infrared radiation is emitted back into the earth's atmosphere and it warms the lower
atmosphere as it does so.
And again, some of this IR is absorbed by greenhouse gases which respond by generating
additional energy.
Now sea level rise is another critical component that we need to consider when we think about
global warming and greenhouse gases.
Now the global average sea level has increased by about 10 to 20 centimeters during the 20th
century.
Since 1961 it has risen at an average about 1.8 millimeters per year and since 1993 that
average has accelerated to about 3.1 millimeters per year.
Satellite data since 1978 show that the annual average Arctic sea ice extent has shrunk by
about 2.7 percent per decade with a large decrease in under certain summer conditions
of about 7.4 percent per decade.
Now according to the international panel for climate change, sea level temperatures have
increased by 1 degree centigrade in the 20th century.
And I want to stop for a moment and just stop listing statistics and have you think about
that for a minute.
Remember in the previous lectures we've talked about how the chemistry of water alters the
ecosystems and one of the key properties of water is its high heat of vaporization or
how much heat it can store.
So although 1 degree doesn't sound like a lot, when you think about how much energy
that means is being additional is being stored in the world's oceans and that the world's
oceans cover 70 percent of the world's surface, that's an extraordinary additional amount
of energy.
The result is this additional heating, the northern hemisphere spring and summer sea ice
extent has decreased by about 10 to 15 percent since the 1950s.
There's been a 40 percent decline in late summer Arctic sea ice thickness in recent
decades and there's been a 10 percent reduction in snow cover over ice since the late 1960s.
And one of the most striking examples is the Muir Glacier which in our sort of period of
time of consideration has gone from an environment in which the glacier covered most of that
ecosystem and one of the most extraordinary visual images that we have in our hemisphere
to one that clearly shows the glacier insignificant retreat.
Now another impact of climate change is storm severity and the desertification of the planet
both of which are increasing, approximately half to one percent per decade increase in
the northern hemisphere mid latitude precipitation has occurred during the 20th century.
There's been a two to four percent increase in the frequency of very heavy precipitation
events in the northern hemisphere especially in the mid to high latitudes over the last
half of the century.
The number of very severe hurricanes has doubled since 1970 and this actually falls
within most of the climate predictions that the impact of climate warming will be felt
only in the most severe storm events.
These major storm events include level four and five hurricanes like Katrina that are
occurring all over the world.
From 1990 to 2004 there were 25 hurricanes in North America a 56 percent increase.
Now this warming sea surface temperatures provide tropical storms with more ambient energy thus
increasing their chance of developing into hurricane four storms.
Now another factor that relates to this climate change issue is the amount of water that we
have stored in reservoirs and we've talked a little bit in previous in our section about
human use of water about storage and diversion.
Well the amount of water that we have in reservoirs has quadrupled since 1960 and withdraws from
rivers and lakes have doubled since 1960.
However as mentioned earlier we're actually seeing the total reservoir level drop.
For instance the water in Lake Mead the reservoir above the Hoover Dam has experienced severe
droughts between 2000 and 2003 and the water levels have receded almost 60 feet.
This loss of stored water is affecting homes in the western United States as threats of
water shortage loom.
The certification in India and other parts of the world is also increasing and this is
where drought and sort of poor land practices results in the loss of soil which results
in the loss of vegetation and vegetation help to retain moisture and so the systems become
deserts.
This a hell of the 1960s and early 1980s ended up killing almost a million people and affecting
more than 50 million as great regions turned into deserts.
Australia is experiencing and has experienced one of the world's worst droughts in the country's
history which occurred in 2003 and by 2006 they were still experiencing significant diminished
movement in their rainfall.
In response to these recent severe droughts Australia is adopting many gray water reuse
practices and water monitoring systems to try and recover.
Remember they're one of the few countries who are practicing large scale drip irrigation
because they're forced to do so.
The western U.S. has seen many droughts throughout its history.
Remember the 1930s the dust bowl the drought that affected the great plain states had severe
effects loss of crops and farmlands.
The mid 1980s the Midwest experienced severe droughts that has significant holdover effects
and is leading to some of the depop depopulation in that part of the world.
In 2002 the Rocky Mountain states experienced severe droughts coupled with forest fires.
Now these are all daunting challenges that we face but we shouldn't despair because there
are significant interventions that we can do as a population and as a species that can
modulate and turn around some of these challenges and we will do so in future lectures.
In our next gathering we're going to start to talk about the whole issue of food and
how organisms gather resources from the ecosystem.
Until then be well.
