Hello and welcome back. In this lecture we're going to be revisiting energy and we're going
to consider it as it is transformed and moved among organisms. You know, energy and food
flows through ecosystems in very complex pathways that we call food whips. In this lecture we'll
consider the interaction among producers and consumers as the food moves across multiple
trophic levels. The structure of the energy pyramid, ecosystem biomass distribution and
the role of predators in modulating the size of the population will all be discussed today.
We'll also investigate the impact of urbanized ecosystems on trophic control and we'll look
at humans as consumers. We'll consider that with respect to ecological sustainability.
I want to begin today by sharing with you a skull of a coyote that was recovered from our
study area some years ago and I'm showing it to you today because again we're talking about the
way the energy moves through ecosystems and we're talking about predators and prey and if I
disarticulate here the top and bottom of the skull you can see the dentition you can see the
teeth here in this organism and you can see from the shape of the teeth and the way in which
they're oriented this is a meat eating animal no question about it. It sits at the top of the
food chain and gathers almost all of its calories from meat although coyotes in comparison to other
of the dog predators do actually have a wider diet and they will eat things as unpredictable as
berries and vegetation and of course food from human areas and so that actually adds to their
ability to survive in human dominated landscapes because they have a generalist component to them.
So we're revisiting energy and ecosystems. We previously investigated the flow of energy and
today we're focusing on control points and this is a field of science called trophic dynamics.
Although earlier we talked about food chains it's more realistic actually to think about food webs.
Producers create their own food food through photosynthesis or chemosynthesis. Food webs can
be either in aquatic or terrestrial regimes. You know all organisms get their energy from
the sun but producers are the most efficient at using the sun's energy to produce their own food.
You know energy is lost from one linkage to the next in this food chain or web model that will
be building. Further linkage the further that linkage points are away from one another the
less strongly the energy is received. We're going to take a look at both simple and complex food
webs from a desert example and I want to remind you that the models that we're going to see are
used primarily as conceptual tools. The truth is that food webs are actually so incredibly
complicated if we were to have them all displayed on sort of a flat field it would be almost impossible
to investigate. So if we take a look at this conceptual tool you can see that for a desert
ecosystem for instance you would have plants that anchor the food chain and you'd have insects
like crickets that might be feeding on that as well as small rodents who would also be feeding
on the vegetative matter. Then you would have carnivores who would be feeding on the rodents
or also feeding on the insects. Scorpions are in the desert and so you're going to see them feeding
on insects as well but that's a relatively simple distribution. Now the way the arrows point are
important the way the arrows point is the way that the energy is flowing so you see the energy
flowing from plants to primary consumers the herbivores and up to the various stages of carnivory
those produce those consumers. Now if we look at the more complex model we see that the interactions
are more complicated the arrows are moving in multiple directions and that actually reflects
the more realistic arrangement of the way in which food webs work in desert ecosystems and by
extension any ecosystem and so here we see that there are animals that can feed on a variety of
different food sources and so the complexity begins to build as we add more and more data. You know
large predators in a food web exhibit what we call top-down control on ecosystems. Remember the
Isle Royale wolves whose force of a top-down influence on moose affected the entire vegetative
structure of the island. Remember that as they were feeding on moose and reducing moose numbers
that relieve the pressure if you will of herbivory on the balsam fir seedlings and they were able to
grow faster and so what you saw here is a classic top-down control. These trophic relationships
play out in fascinating roles in urban settings. Two researchers Stanley Fayeth and Paige Warren
and additional colleagues have been working in Phoenix and discovered that birds play a very
important role in the plant community structure of urban areas. If we take a look at those data it
was a fascinating set of experiments that they developed. What they did was to have exclusion
cages around certain vegetative communities that would restrict the ability of birds to get into
the system and so if there are birds it would be going in to eat insects in the experiments in
which they put up the cages the birds couldn't get in and so if we take a look at the data we see
that they did experiments in three different locations in Phoenix. They did experiments in
the so-called music suburban yards and these are yards in which people watered the grass,
watered the vegetation and it was essentially a vegetative community that wouldn't exist in
traditional hot dry Phoenix climate. It was more of an eastern and moist environment hence it's
called music. They also did this experiment in some of the urban desert remnants that existed
within Phoenix and finally they did these experiments in the outlying desert community. The
results were very interesting. It turned out that if you measured the number of herbivorous insects
these are the insects that would be praying directly on the plants. In the music yards if they
had the bird exposures the numbers of those insects were higher. In other words they were
released from predation and the numbers increased. The same was true in the desert remnants that
were in these urban areas. If the bird exposures were put up then the number of individuals was
much higher but when they went to the outlying desert community the resources were relatively
poor out there and it turns out the number of herbivorous insects were no different in for the
part of the experiment in which the bird exposures were installed versus those that weren't. I mean
this suggests that urban ecosystems alter the control points in this kind of an arid environment.
Now an additional experiment that was conducted which was designed to test the positive and
negative interactions between desert shrubs and annual grasses in a desert ecosystem was
investigating this whole idea of competition in niche. The desert shrub and Brogidumotia was the
test species here and its relationship with local grasses were tested in two treatments. In one
experiment the annuals were removed these are the plants that grow underneath the bush and in the
other the shrubs were removed. Now the net and so what they did is to measure the net change in
biomass in other words the amount of herbivorous material that was there before and after the
experiment. Now the effect of the shrub turned out to be positive on the annual plants. In other
words the presence of the shrub actually helped the annual plants grow and that's probably related
to providing some shade and water retention to the soil. Remember these are dry desert environments.
Now the effect of the annuals on the shrub was actually negative probably the result of the
annual plants stripping away nutrients from the soils. So what we saw here was two different
kinds of impacts one positive one negative on each other. There's a dynamic cycle that exists
between predators and prey and this has to exist for the food web to remain intact. If you have
too many top order or large predators it creates too much top-down control where the trophic level
is depleted and cannot support the large amount of predators. If you have too few predators
consumers at the herbivore level can be a problem as the producers or plants may not be able to
support this large herbivore population and it becomes a bottom-up problem. We're seeing this
more and more in fragmented habitats where herbivores are being excluded. Let's take an example
of white-tailed deer in the United States. White-tailed deer are essentially overcrowded in many of
the ecosystems across the United States and this overcrowding leads to things like epidemics and
starvation. One of the problems associated with excess numbers of deer besides this problem of
starvation of the deer themselves we have this issue of humans living near deer and it turns out
that as humans and deer interact we tend to lose as humans because the deer sometimes become
targets for us in our automobiles unintended of course and that's a very significant problem but
also the issue of Lyme disease which we will be talking about in this lecture series as well. The
interaction of deer in communities where humans exist increases the risk of Lyme disease.
Now another example of the impact of predators has to do with the reintroduction of Yellowstone
wolves and elk. Now this is a very interesting story in the sense that wolves as you know had been
extirpated from many parts of the of North America for a long period of time. They were hunted
almost to extinction over the past 150 years but efforts by the federal government and researchers
to reintroduce the wolves especially to protected areas like national parks have been reasonably
successful. Now the assumption was that the reintroduction of wolves to national parks would
re-institute a type of top-down control as they are top-order predators but some of the consequences
of the reintroduction have been pretty interesting. As we mentioned before in another lecture the
most important prey species for the wolves are the elk that live in the park. Now for decades
these elk had been living in what were predator-free environments for them. There were no wolves and so
the elk were able to move through the park without any worry of predation. In response to that what
the elk did was to spend significant amounts of time in the areas where the vegetation was most
lush and that vegetation happened to be associated with rivers and streams that run through the park.
Now those are particularly fragile ecosystems and don't survive well if they're being trodden on by
elk. So over the decades when wolves were not in the park there was an ecological decline of the
rivers and streams as a result of overgrazing by the elk. Now the introduction of wolves changed
that and it wasn't that wolves were preying on that many elk. It's that the wolves were profoundly
changing the behavior of the elk in response to the risk of predation. We call that the ecology of
fear. And so even though not that many elk were being taken the elk were responding to the risk and
the safest place for the elk to be was on the gentle slopes of the mountains. Now the food isn't as
good as it is in the streams and creeks. The elk would love to be down in the lush vegetation of the
creeks but there the risk of predation was higher. So they left the creeks to be in more safe areas and
in doing so it released the pressure of herbivory on those plant communities in the rivers and streams
and they were covered. A very similar model to what we saw in the Isle Royale study. So if we take a
look then if we come back to this idea of predator control let's return just a moment to the
Fayeth and Warren article and research that they did because we have a little bit more data now. I've
talked about the Isle Royale wolves. We've talked about the Yellowstone situation. I direct your
attention to the image on the screen. What they discovered in their work was that in the outlying
desert ecosystems the control points were primarily from the bottom up because the resources were so
poor in the desert communities the soils were essentially depleted because of the lack of rain. It
ended up being resources that ultimately determined how many plants there would be which determined
how many herbivores there would be and therefore avian predation even though it exerted some pressure
on the herbivore community the strength of that pressure was relatively low and that's depicted
by the thickness of the arrow. Now in the central area Phoenix urban ecosystem where they were
focusing the other part of their work you see that there was indeed an impact of resources.
Resources did in some way limit the number of plants and do in some way limit the number of
herbivores but the experimental design that they conducted clearly showed that avian predators
had an extraordinary influence on the herbivore community. Remember those caged areas that excluded
birds had more herbivorous insects which indicated that the birds were having a significant impact.
So I return to that because it really helps us close the circuit if you will close the loop on
understanding this kind of pressure. Let's take a look at this from a different perspective here
and I want to talk about stellar sea lions and their decline. Stellar sea lions are a very
important top order predator in ecosystems. They tend to be consumers mostly consumers of fish.
Historically sea lions fed primarily on herring which are rich in fat and essentially a key
component of their nutritional regime. As the ecosystems changed in the northern waters the
fish community structure was also altered as primarily from the impact of human fishing and
actually physical modifications of the ecosystem and so in response to that the sea lions switched
their diet and they switched from eating herring to eating cod and Pollock which are much lower in
nutritional value much lower trophic efficiency. So what happened then is the sea lions are forced
to shift their diet and in shifting their diet it dramatically changed the kinds of resources that
they could take in and in fact the ecologists who studied this called this an impact of nonhuman
junk food if you will because the sea lions went from a population of about 250,000 and in about a
30 year period of time the numbers dropped to about 50,000 individuals and there appeared to be no
other cause other than essentially a failure to thrive because of a reduction in the quality of
their diet. It's a very powerful set of data that indicate just how critical these food webs are so
the habitat as far as the sea lions were concerned hadn't been changed they still had all of the
previous habitat to forage in but the food availability changed and so they had to go from
very very high quality food to lower quality food and the impact was lower reproduction rates,
lower growth rates and ultimately a near crash in the population. So food webs play a very important
role in what we call ecosystem resiliency and there is much debate about the notion of whether
simple versus complex food webs are more resilient and by that remember back to the graph that we
looked at just a few moments ago where there were only a few connections we call that a simple food
web versus multiple connections. So food webs with many interconnections are considered more
resilient to the impacts of disturbance than food webs that resemble linear chains. So simple food
webs such as those in Arctic marine ecosystems are easily damaged from human over consumption of
resources. Remember our investigations earlier of ocean ecosystems with Jeremy Jackson who
looked at the historical impacts of overfishing and the recent collapse of coastal ecosystems.
There was an historic abundance of large consumer species the fish populations were
fantastically large with respect to recent observations. It's almost unimaginable that
those fishing reserves could be depleted but overfishing remove specific species allowing
other species to become dominant and so what we saw remember that the cod fisheries collapsed as
a result of overfishing by humans. Remember the average weight of cod dropped from over 100 pounds
to a little over 20 pounds. We also saw that as a result of a variety of factors the coral
communities failed in the sites that he was measuring and that oyster landings also plummeted
as a result of eutrophication caused by humans. I also want to take a look at this issue of food
webs and animal migration and we're going to look closely at animal migration the ecology of
migration in a later lecture but here I want to talk about some of the fundamental reasons
that animals have to move in relation to food webs. Often the largest consumers in an ecosystem
have to leave the area that they rely on on a regular basis as they deplete the resource. So one
example of a long-distance migratory species are humpback whales and they migrate on an annual
basis between the cold high water latitudes where they feed and the warm tropical latitudes where
the females give birth during the winter and made again as part of their reproductive cycle. It's
interesting because they feed in the cold waters but during the period of time that the males and
females are in these warm water environments they actually don't feed at all and they live off their
fat reserves. Now the issue of whales especially the humpback whales is particularly interesting
because this long-distance migration which is driven by the need for additional resources imposes
all kinds of interesting ecological impacts on their behavior and if you remember humpbacks
are the whales that have that extraordinarily complex and beautiful vocalizations that they
produce and they're actually designed to go very very long distances through the water so that males
and females during the courting season can actually stay in contact with each other because the males
come down to these warm water areas earlier than the females who because they're pregnant have to
stay in the cold water areas longer in order to gain more weight so that they can give birth to
healthy offspring. So one question is you know what makes these these colder waters so rich? Well
part of the reason is that they're more oxygenated in higher latitudes. The upwelling brings rich
nutrients from the benthic zone and this enriches the trophic dynamics of the ecosystem and this is
an important thing if you're a whale. I mean they eat 2,000 pounds of food a day which seems
extraordinary but later on we're going to talk about for instance just how much food humans eat
in their lifetime and I think you'll be very surprised. So in the northern waters which are
rich in it rich in krill they'll eat a ton of krill a day. As they move farther to the south the
waters are still cold off of the Gulf of Maine they switch to copepods herring if they can get it
and herring like to swim in these tight balls which protect them from from other fish predators
but it actually makes it easier for whales to catch them because they can actually get a whole
mouthful in one in one surge. And then off of Cape Cod on Stellwagon Bank one of the richest
fishing fishing areas in the world the whales will feed on copepods and sandlands. Other examples
of migration include the large ungulates such as caribou in North America and wildebeest in
Africa. Again we're going to devote a whole section of our conversation to wildebeest later but I
want to talk about the energy dynamics and we're going to do so today by talking about caribou.
And the caribou that we're talking about are the porcupine caribou which are the ones with the
with the really big antlers that that you're used to seeing in in nature programming. They're
what we call barren ground foragers and they feed mainly on lichen and low bush cranberry moss and
other small shrubs. The current population in the Alaska area is probably about 130,000 individuals.
Researchers keep a very tight data set with respect to this species and they're sent
sustainably by the Alaska Department of Fish and Game and they use radio telemetry and spotter
planes. It's really a huge effort and it's interesting to us it's really the last of the great
migration of terrestrial ungulates in North America. Most of the other large ungulates like
buffalo have been removed. So these caribou cav or have their offspring on the summer part of
their range which is on the coastal plain in Alaska and they move they often form in the
summer these really tight bunches of females in offspring because they're trying to ward off the
attacking insects the warble flies and bot flies which are seeking their blood meals in order to
complete their life cycles. Now the wintering grounds for these caribou are to the south in the
Brooks Range and that creates an annual journey of 800 miles. The summer grounds are useful because
they offer early vegetation and relative safety from predators. Turns out that the biggest
predatory threat to caribou is to their young calves and it's from golden eagles which are large
and strong enough to tackle to tackle a caribou calf. The wintering grounds provide cold weather
forage they still have to dig through the snow and it's quite an ordeal but it does provide those
resources for them. Now will the beast which we will investigate in more detail later they're
nearly a million of them that migrate each year and they do so in a trek that takes them more
than a thousand miles through East Africa really for similar reasons that similar reasons as the
caribou. We will come back to the wildebeest later but I put them in the caribou into this
conversation because I want you to just ponder and have really a little bit of time to think about
the notion that you've got animals that are moving over a thousand miles on an annual basis in order
to make sure that their place in the food web is secure and migration for most animals is the most
dangerous thing that they do in their lives because they're moving through areas in which they're
unfamiliar and if the migration routes are used consistently predators are there waiting for them
to come by. I also want to take a moment and talk about the great migrations that have happened
in humans and thinking about Paleolithic human human tribes whose migration ultimately led to
world colonization. Remember the earliest Homo sapiens left Africa approximately 70,000 years
before the present and they spread to Europe and Asia and Australia by about 40,000 years before the
present. Migration to the Americas was much later only about 15,000 years before the present time
and the Pacific Islands were colonized much much later only about 2,000 years ago.
This is rather extraordinary because we think that much of the engine driving the migration
was probably related to reaching areas that had better food resources and remember we were just
talking about deer at the beginning of this conversation. Deer and humans actually came to
North America at about the same time they crossed the land bridge across the Bering Strait
somewhere in the vicinity of 30 to 40,000 years ago and humans have always been important predators
of deer. As fewer and fewer humans are hunting that predatory pressure is removed and it's one of
the reasons that deer populations are increasing. You know when I was thinking about this issue of
migration and thinking about human migrations I was struck to remember the gorgeous early art
examples we have from the Lascaux cave paintings which date back almost 16,000 years. It's a cave
system in southern France that is important for us in understanding the early human culture.
I brought along an example of some of the paintings that were done and they really
represent an incredible sensitivity of these early artists to the nature of the animals that they
were portraying. But what's extraordinary to me as an ecologist besides of course the beauty of
the images an extraordinary idea that this is an effort put forward by a human 16,000 years ago
but is the idea of what organisms they chose to render or what objects they chose to render. Most
of the Lascaux cave paintings are actually of large ungulates which suggests just how important
these organisms were to their lives and the fact that they were rendering them whether it was part
of a sacred ritual or part of their expression or teaching we don't exactly know how it was used.
But what we do know is that these images were probably very important and probably represented
a critical component of the food web in which these these early humans were integrated.
One of the things that we are most concerned about with respect to climate change
we touched on this in our climate change conversation was what is the impact of climate
change on food webs. There's a tight linkage among organisms in temperate ecosystems and so if these
if climate ends up changing the nature of these ecosystems what kind of impact will that have.
You know a 40-year study of wood duck and hummingbird arrivals in the Boston area suggested the
climate change has shifted the migratory pattern quite a bit in the case of wood ducks by nearly
four weeks and hummingbirds by nearly two weeks. This kind of change is going to have significant
impact on the nature of how these food webs play out. For our next gathering we're going to look
at the human side of the equation and we'll look at why human acquisition of food has such a dramatic
impact on the planet. Until then thank you very much.
