Hello, and welcome back.
You know, it's an incredible challenge for the six billion people on the planet to get
enough food each day to survive.
An extraordinary thing, especially developed nations, is we actually can complete that
task.
But the current model for food production and distribution in highly developed countries
is leveraging huge environmental burden onto the Earth's biosphere.
This is because food typically travels thousands of miles between the site of production to
the factories of processing and finally to the consumer.
This huge geographical separation creates an unsustainable relationship, and it's particularly
pronounced for underserved urban communities.
We're going to consider the human food web from an ecological perspective and as an ecological
phenomenon.
We will investigate the changes that have occurred over the past five centuries.
We'll investigate modern, large-scale agriculture and the role it plays, which is critical in
the dynamics of ecosystems.
And we will consider alternative models for food production and delivery.
Now, when I was growing up in England, I spent a big chunk of my childhood there.
We used to get our milk and eggs and other dairy products from a local dairy that was
delivered to our doorstep on a daily basis.
In fact, we would drive by the farms that were producing the milk and eggs that we were
consuming.
And for a long time, that was a consistent part of many people's activity.
They knew their farmers, they knew their dairies, they could actually see where the produce they
were consuming was coming from.
But human food webs are dramatically altered by modern agriculture and technology, which
can be seen as a progression throughout human history.
Humans have dramatically changed the methods used for farming and agriculture over the years.
Now dating back to ancient Egypt, improving farming techniques has proven to be incredibly
valuable.
You know, the practices of agriculture since the beginning of the sort of history of human
agricultural investment about 10,000 years ago, when as a species around the world, certain
populations of humans stopped being hunter-gatherers and instead settled down and actually planted
crops, which had some profound effects on our social behavior and other aspects of our
ecology because when you plant things, you have to wait for them to grow.
And so we see the beginning of modern human culture.
The practices generally involve planting and irrigating.
And if we go back to that Egyptian model, these practices included flooding of the Nile,
which would bring fertile silt and soil into these agricultural areas.
Peasants would create canals to direct the floodwaters to their land in order to help
revive and replenish it during each flood.
Fertile tools were designed to aid with the cultivation of their land and the fertile
crescent became a major agricultural center.
The culture was centered on the ebb and flow of the Nile and their crops growing season
all dependent on this phenomenon.
Now the ancient Romans developed aqueducts that supplied cities and farmers with much
needed water.
In Rome, these aqueducts covered 250 miles and vastly improved the quality of the water
in cities.
The aqueducts made water more available and some are still in use today.
And a similar model has been used in parts of the western United States.
In Los Angeles, for instance, almost 400 miles of ducks and passageways deliver and channels
deliver water to a voracious community of Los Angeles with respect to water consumption.
Now the advent of modern farming technologies intensified the use of water and the expectations
of what the land could produce.
The discovery of grafting or joining together of different plant species and parts to create
desired traits has been very valuable in the expansion of our recent diets.
Grafting or asexual plant reproduction can be done by fusing different parts of a plant
or tree together.
In fact, seedless fruit is grown by joining a cutting from one plant with a seedless variation.
Think about this for a moment.
Seedless plants by definition are unable to breed on their own and so if we're going
to grow seedless varieties of plants, we actually have to use a grafting technology.
And many of our most popular seedless fruits are grown that way, including things like
watermelons and grapes and bananas.
Now the banana plant has become vastly popular as a fruit in western nations, but typically
a banana travels 2,000 miles to get to a grocery store in the United States.
And so this is an aspect of the ecology of the fruit we often don't think about.
Farmers have even gotten to the point where they can graft potatoes and tomatoes to grow
on the same plant.
So tomatoes are a fruit that's growing above ground and the potatoes are a tuber that's
thriving underground, providing a farmer with double the output for the amount of land that's
being used.
Orchard managers will repair damaged limbs by grafting a new limb on to a healthy trunk.
However, grafting reduces genetic diversity because in essence what you're doing is cloning
the plant and you have multiple clones of it, but you're actually reducing the normal
variation that would be existing within a population.
By combining different species to a new single species, the genetic diversity declines and
puts it at risk to disease and pesticides.
There is a potential for great diversity when we use so-called genomics-guided transgene,
the GGT phenomenon.
However, many of the traits that have been developed over this long history of domestication
and therefore they actually have the result of reducing genetic fitness.
So examples include things that we've just talked about like seedless fruits, which are
great for consumption, not so good for reproduction, and things like delayed spoilage and stress
tolerance.
As we build those into plants through genetic and specific breeding technologies, we end
up enhancing a certain capacity of a species at risk of some other capacity that's probably
related to its resilience.
It was found that when alterations were made to improve a plant's ability to withstand
abiotic stress like cold and heat and drought, the plant's fitness is not actually improved
because the plant's response mechanisms involve many pathways and physiological mechanisms.
So in this process of domestication, we have in a co-evolved relationship, we're helping
these plants reproduce, but we are altering the phenotypes that they present because we
want particular characteristics of these foods that we're growing and we get those characteristics,
but they are at the expense of other aspects of the plant's metabolism because we have
altered its genetics.
Now we had discussed this earlier before, but we're back again, I think, in a more detailed
fashion.
I want to talk about the ecology of diet choice and this notion of a vegetarian versus a carnivore
diet, and what it means to think about striking the balance between those two extremes.
There's a significant body of data that suggests that vegetarian diets can be more sustainable.
And when I talk about vegetarian diets, often, and it's a human tendency in general, to put
things into really distinct categories, like this person is eating meat or this person
not eating meat, and I think that that's probably a disservice to the conversation.
What we're really talking about here is shifting the balance with respect to the percentage
of meat versus vegetable material that enters the diet.
Now the U.S. food production system uses about 50% of the altered portion of U.S. land and
approximately 80% of the fresh water.
So food production in the United States has a significant environmental impact.
And more than 99% of all the food produced in the U.S. is produced in terrestrial ecosystems.
And each year, about 90% of the crop land in the United States is losing soil at a rate
much higher than sustainable levels.
So what happens is the soil is being depleted as a result of these terrestrial growing techniques,
and as a result, we have to replenish the soil essentially artificially.
And we do that often through fertilization, and so, for instance, large amounts of animal
manure, either as a byproduct of the raising of meat cattle or otherwise, or the use in
soils, cause high levels of nitrates, which is a carcinogen, and it often ends up in our
drinking water.
Humans often consume more meat than is healthy.
The recommended daily allowance, or RDA, of protein is about 56 grams per day, and typically
Americans consume about twice that much.
Now a significant portion of that is eliminated in our waste.
About 124 kilograms of meat is consumed each year by the typical adult American.
Now worldwide, 2 billion people on the planet have a meat-based diet, most therefore do
not about 4 billion people live essentially on a plant-based diet.
Meat-based diets in general require more energy, land, and water resources.
As an example, more than 9 billion livestock are maintained to supply animal protein for
consumption, which outweighs the entire U.S. population by a factor of 5.
So think here about our conversation that we had earlier about food webs and energy flow
and ecosystems.
When we think about eating at different levels of the food chain, we're actually sampling
into areas that have different amounts of available energy.
So the livestock that we're producing is enough to produce about 77 grams of meat to
feed each American each day, which as we said is more than we need.
And U.S. meat consumption has been on the rise for the last 100 years.
Now if we take a look at some data collected by Smeal, we see that as we look at meat consumption
at the turn of the previous century from the beginning in the 1900s, that humans were
consuming somewhere in the average of about 50 kilograms of meat per year, but over the
intervening 100 years, that measure has gone up to over 80.
And so we're seeing an increase in meat consumption by citizens of the United States, and that
increased consumption has not only health related issues that are sort of on most people's
awareness spectrum, but also ecological impacts.
So reducing meat consumption would free up cereal grain production for human consumption.
The amount of grain used to feed animals could support somewhere in the vicinity of 800 million
people on a vegetarian diet.
In 1900, only about 10% of the world's grain resources were used to feed livestock.
But by 1950, those levels reached nearly 20%.
And in the late 1990s, 40% of grain was being used to feed livestock.
Now typically, remember going back to our conversation around energy pyramids, typically
90% of the energy of cereal grains is lost in the metabolism of meat eating livestock
prior to human consumption.
The most efficient livestock production systems are broiler chickens, and only four calories
of fossil energy for every one calorie of chicken protein produced.
So it's a four to one ratio.
The most unsustainable are beef and lamb production.
Beef has an investment of about 40 calories for every one calorie of lamb of beef, excuse
me, and lamb is like 57 calories for every calorie of meat produced.
These numbers could be dramatically reduced if these animals were not grain fed.
This challenge is exacerbated because a significant amount of a steer, for instance, in beef production
is discarded as waste.
And if we take a look at some of the data provided from this meal paper, you can see
just how extraordinary this relationship is.
The conversion factors of kilograms of feed for kilograms of live weight for animals consumed
is pretty extraordinary.
Beef it's a 10 to 1 ratio.
Other animal sources of protein are somewhat more efficient.
The ratio for chickens is about 2.5 to 1.
Pork is about 5 to 1.
But beef is particularly, particularly challenging.
It's even more so when we think about how little of the animal we tend to use.
So if we take at a given 100% of the live weight of a cow as the potential for material
that we actually could consume, by the time the carcass is dressed, you've lost about
40% of the weight.
By the time it reaches the retail environment, 50% of the weight is lost.
And the actual edible weight is only about 40%.
And by the time it's actually consumed, only about a third of the weight of the cow is
actually consumed as meat.
But remember the whole weight of the cow has to be supported through metabolism and that's
where some of this extraordinary inefficiency with respect to the amount of grain fed versus
the amount of meat harvested.
Now it's fair to bring up the idea that not all beef production has to be done through
the feeding of grain.
And in fact, it's the large scale farming strategies that we've developed in this country
that exacerbate this challenge.
We grow, want to grow our cattle very, very quickly in very small areas and so we feed
grain because it's a way of bringing cattle to market faster.
But it has implications both in the management of cattle and ecological challenges that we've
talked about.
Range fed beef on the other hand are actually eating foods, grasses that we wouldn't consume
as humans because we don't have the digestive capacity to do so.
We can digest cereal grains.
We can't digest whole grasses.
And cattle that are fed using those strategies have a much different profile of energy efficiency
with respect to providing a meat for our consumption.
So one of the ways in which we have been able to achieve this amazing goal of feeding most
of the world's population has been the result of something that we collectively call the
Green Revolution.
And I want to discuss that a little bit here and some of its consequences that lead us
to begin to think about additional strategic responses to human hunger and some of the
lessons learned from the Green Revolution and how we might make changes moving into
the future.
So remember, as we've said before, we have challenges now on a worldwide basis of feeding
people but by the end of the next century we're likely to have 10 billion people on
the planet with an even larger challenge looming in front of us with respect to feeding
hungry people.
Now the Green Revolution was the transformation of agricultural technologies and research
that occurred in the 1950s.
For instance, Mexico was a leader in the development of the Green Revolution for they created new
ways for wheat production to help feed their population.
In 1943, Mexico was importing half of its wheat.
Within 15 years, the Green Revolution had made Mexico self-sufficient and by the middle
of the 1960s, Mexico exported half a million tons of wheat annually.
These new techniques included strategies for irrigation, hybrid seeds, fertilizers, new
pesticides and herbicides and mechanization helped countries across the globe turn unfertiland
into agricultural havens.
Countries like India, Mexico no longer depended on importing grain from the outside, in fact
they became self-sufficient.
This also led to the development of genetically engineered crops and pesticides and their
increased use in the world's food production.
Pesticide, fertilizer and herbicide development came as a major consequence of this revolution.
Now after decades of use of these chemicals, the soil in certain areas is beginning to
deteriorate and this is what we mean by some of the legacies of the agricultural revolution.
For instance, in India, many villages drinking water have been polluted from overuse of pesticides
and fertilizers.
Cancer and infant mortality rates have increased in areas where these chemicals have been used.
And so the Green Revolution, which has staved off so much world hunger, has also brought
with it additional challenges.
Now one of the challenges that's really an extension of this consideration of reaching
the hungry actually occurs in developed nations and urban food markets.
In the United States, the distribution of food is very much inequitable.
This is especially so for poor urban communities which have reduced access to healthy food.
Now a study in 2005 by a team led by Letitia Moore published in the American Journal of
Public Health found that underserved predominantly black neighborhoods had only half the supermarkets
of more affluent predominantly white neighborhoods.
These poor communities had higher levels of convenience stores and liquor stores, neither
of which provide adequate access to nutritious fresh food.
Now according to the Institute of Medicine, these geospatial disparities along with marketing
strategies are creating a generation of malnourished yet obese inner city children.
So it's rather extraordinary that we have a situation where there are actually too many
calories being taken in by young people in underserved neighborhoods, but the calories
are the wrong kind of calories.
They tend to be sugar and fat based.
And this has launched an epidemic of lifestyle diseases such as diabetes, heart disease,
stroke and high blood pressure.
As a population, remember we're living longer and longer and these types of lifestyle diseases
become even more important when we think about the generations of people to come who will
routinely imagine living to 100 years of age or more.
Solutions to these problems will require a holistic ecological yet market driven approach
and some of which involves local production of food and immersion of communities of need
in this process, which leads us to a consideration of what the transition from the agricultural
revolution of the 1950s, which made this huge dent in feeding the hungry millions to
what a sustainable agriculture model looks like, especially in developed nations.
Well, one model is to consider buying your food from a local farmer or artisan producer
of foods.
Remember we said before that most produce travels an average of about 1500 miles to
get to your grocery store if it's grown in the United States.
If it's grown outside the United States, the distance is even farther.
So not only is there a large amount of fuel used for the transportation of this produce,
but often these foods are stored in refrigerated trucks and warehouses, which further increases
the carbon output.
Now as I mentioned earlier, many fruits and vegetables come from other countries and must
be flown in further increasing the amount of fuel that's being used.
Now this would be bad enough if as a result of all this, we were receiving food that was
as nutritious as possible, but embedded in the strategy of globalization of food is the
fact that these, especially produce is often picked well before becoming ripe and ripe
fruits have the most nutritious value.
Produce that is grown locally is often fresher and available during its normal growing season.
Now most people feel that fresh food, especially produce actually tastes better and paying
attention to produce that is in season and only purchasing it during that time will help
reduce the carbon footprint.
But again, as I said before, this is an aspect of individual participation because thinking
seasonally about your food will in some respects force you to say, well, this is something
I eat this time of year, but I don't actually have access to this at other times of the
year.
But knowing that will help you to make the, I think, intelligent food choices.
And locally grown food allows you actually to know the farm and to know exactly what
farm practices are being used at the farms that are producing the food that you're consuming.
Organic and conventional labels are important to look for because it reduces the amount
of chemical exposure that the foods are exposed to.
Growing local supports the local economy.
Local resources and local labor goes into local food.
Now organic and enhanced conventional processes can pretty dramatically help the environment.
We know that many fertilizers and pesticides are toxic and harmful to your health.
Chemicals began to realize that if they needed protective gloves and suits and eyewear when
working in their own fields that these chemicals probably aren't good, really good for use
on our own food.
And a growing trend has seen farmers switching back to conventional and organic practices
completely eliminating fertilizer and pesticide use.
Using the amount of chemicals used not only helps the consumer lead healthier lives but
also helps the environment.
Let's take a look at an assessment of food miles and the impact of traditional agriculture
from a British perspective because that's where one of the best studies has come from.
Research by Tim Lang and his associates from the University of London as well as an expanded
team of colleagues have investigated the impacts of food production and food transport
on the total food costs for a typical consumer in England.
Writing in the journal Food Policy they cite dramatic changes in technology and food delivery
techniques have actually added both upfront monetary costs and long-term environmental
costs to the consumer.
They investigate what they call negative external costs associated with ecosystem degradation
such as the loss of soil capacity, the impact of pesticides, the impact of nitrate and phosphorus
loading, biodiversity decline and human health costs added together impose a staggering economic
toll of approximately 1,500 million pounds per year to Britain.
They estimate that a switch to organic agricultural practices would reduce these externalities
to less than 400 million pounds per year or in the vicinity of a 75% reduction.
And if we take a look at the data you can see how the different aspects of these externalities
whether we're talking about pesticides in the water which are 140 million pound burden
to Britain each year, the direct and indirect carbon dioxide emissions to the atmosphere,
another 100 million pounds cost.
You can see how this all adds up and by switching to organic practices many of those costs
are alleviated.
The production costs of cultivation and raising crops are significantly different for the
various commodities that we consume.
Remember meat is much higher than other commodities and significant variations exist within the
category.
The upfront cost to consumers of their weekly food basket was analyzed in response to this
recognition of the external costs.
The agricultural externalities added nearly 20% for the cost of food, transportation added
nearly 30%.
Now this research has led Professor Lang and co-author Michael Heisman to write a book
called Food Wars, the global battle for mouths and minds and markets where they envision the
current food production system to be a legacy of the agricultural revolution which had early
success but now suffers under a mighty ecological burden.
They argue that food production is currently understood as a productionist paradigm.
It was driven by the agricultural revolution, the chemical industries and the industrialization
of food.
Now moving forward Lang and Heisman see two possible paradigms and in between the transition
between the old and new are these ongoing social battles over diet and health and food
supply and the environmental crisis and the market battle over the consumer.
Now one of the outcomes is the so-called life sciences integrated paradigm.
Another is the ecologically integrated paradigm.
Now both are rooted in biology but at different scales.
The life sciences integrated paradigm uses an extension of the control model of agriculture
and delivery, heavily reliant to a big industry and agricultural genetics to keep the food
supply flowing and expanding.
The ecologically integrated paradigm seeks to maintain sustainable food cycles through
integrated production techniques that reflect local ecological conditions.
And this doesn't mean just organic but we're thinking about local production and it involves
the notion of environmental justice.
In other words who's bearing the burden of the real ecological costs of the strategies
that we're using for production.
The naturally variable strategies that farmers had used historically fit more directly into
the ecological integrated paradigm as does a return to the idea of a more variable diet.
And it's interesting because as an ecologist working at a university I encounter these
kind of arguments consistently because you have a group of scientists who work very hard
to come up with genetically engineered strategies for increasing crop production and then you
have the ecologists who are on the other side saying wait a minute there are other ways
to do this and it's one of the more healthy and vigorous aspects of the debate that we
see today about the management of our ecological systems.
Now in closing I just want to also mention that this whole notion of meat and vegetarian
diets are important for other animals as well and in fact our closest living relatives
are chimpanzees and although we tend to think of chimps as being primarily vegetarian that
chimps whenever they can get access to meat they do because of the incredibly rich protein
density meat provides.
Now in our next lecture we're going to investigate the way in which food webs concentrate chemicals
at the top of the food chain so until then take care.
