Hello, and welcome back.
Here we are again talking about energy, and it seems like we just can't leave the subject
alone.
And for good reason, really.
If we think about what life really is, it's about the movement of energy.
And we have been considering throughout this course how energy in one organism moves to
the next, how that energy changes, the efficiency with which it moves, that kind of thing.
The amount of energy, you know, that moves from one trophic level to the next is only
about 10% of that which was originally captured.
Organisms consume many times their own weight and food during their lifetime.
And this inefficiency of energy transfer, the massive amount of material taken in coupled
with hyper-concentration, establishes biological patterns across the trophic levels.
You know, the energy transfer across these trophic levels can serve as an explanation
for the evolution of large brains and top-order predators.
You know, the fact that top-order predators have access to such rich resources facilitates
their ability to have free time, if you will, to have complex social systems and that kind
of thing, but also to have access to the calories necessary to run the metabolic engines that
big organisms have.
But the flip side of this, and really our focus today, is that this notion of hyper-concentration
can have negative implications in an organism's life.
For instance, toxic chemicals can build up in the bodies of long-lived animals that sit
at the top of the food chain.
And that's what we're going to focus today.
I want to start by talking about an extraordinary organism, though, the Monarch butterfly, and
the image that you see before you as a Monarch butterfly who is resting atop some vegetation.
And you know they have that bright orange and black coloration.
And while poisons are really the topic of today's conversation in a negative way, because
they have negative impacts on organisms, certain organisms can actually exploit the
fact that they either feed or have access to poisonous materials.
Now Monarch butterflies in their larval stage, when they're caterpillars, feed on milkweed.
And milkweed plants produce a toxin in their leaves that actually protects them from being
eaten by most insects.
It's an anti-predator behavior that the milkweed does in order to prevent it from being consumed
by herbivores.
But caterpillars of Monarch butterflies actually have a tolerance to that toxin.
And so not only do they freely eat that toxin, and by being able to do that, they actually
feed without competition on milkweed plants.
They have actually developed a system where they sequester those toxins in their wings
and in the cuticle around their body.
And not only that, that bright orange and black coloration advertises their toxicity.
And that advertisement alerts birds and other predators that they are distasteful.
We call that alarm coloration.
We'll talk about that a little bit more.
But it's an extraordinary, co-evolved, and ecological outcome of this hyper-concentration
that we're going to investigate today.
Now the movement of energy across food webs is relatively inefficient.
As we just mentioned, and it's worth repeating because it's a figure that I think should
stick in your head today as we consider the topic.
Only about 10% of the energy in any trophic level moves to the next level.
And that means there are consequences to that outcome.
First of all, organisms at the top of the food chain are relatively rare, but they require
enormous reserves of energy.
Again, this permits the large brains and reduced foraging time that we see in top order predators
like lions and humans.
Today species such as grass-eating mammals have to spend an enormous amount of their
time eating and digesting because the food that they eat is relatively low in nutritional
value.
So in the caribou that we talked about in a previous lecture, they basically spend all
of their time eating and digesting because the food they consume has relatively low caloric
value for its mass, and therefore they have to eat a lot of it and all the time.
Compare that to the predator of the caribou, wolves, that essentially spend a relatively
small portion of their time hunting for food.
Now some of these primary consumers, if you will, like the caribou, they are very large
animals, but the fact that their food has relatively low nutritional value does limit
some of their behavioral possibilities.
Eating mammals at the top of the food chain consumes such a rich diet and spend comparatively
less time feeding, and they have more time for other activities.
I want to show you some rather extraordinary footage that we have from our field station,
and forgive me for the quality of the footage.
This is a remote internet protocol, so-called IP camera, that's mounted near the nest of
a red-tailed hawk nest that's located, in this case, on the campus at Boston College.
What you're seeing here is an incubation exchange between the two adults, and you'll see the
one adult get off the nest in a couple of moments, and the other adult get on.
Now, red-tailed hawks are extraordinary animals, they're what we call cosmopolitan across North
America, they're found almost everywhere from Northern Canada to Mexico, and they actually
do very well in urbanized areas, but they're an example of an organism that sits at the
top of the food chain, and as we'll discover today, any of the toxins that are accumulated
in any of the organisms that are part of that food chain ultimately end up in the tissues
of these hawks.
As a result, these hawks become important bioindicators, if you will, of ecosystem stress, but in
their own lives, these acquisitions of toxins can be deleterious to their survival.
Now this inherent inefficiency of energy transfer exaggerates that impact of top-order predators.
As chemicals move through a system, their concentration is increased, and thus the predators
at the top experience the greatest effects.
This effect is called biomagnification.
The biological effect is magnified as we move up the food chain.
We'll look at this in a conceptual framework in just a moment, but I think it probably
is helpful to start with a story, in fact, one of the most famous stories in ecology
about biomagnification, and that's the story of DDT.
Now DDT is a chemical pesticide that was first used to control mosquitoes beginning in the
1940s.
The pesticide was used to control areas with high malaria incidences during World War II.
And in fact, the pesticide was excellent at wiping out mosquitoes.
And in fact, DDT was credited with saving probably thousands of American GIs, saving
their lives from the impact of malaria.
So at the end of the Second World War, this production of DDT was no longer necessary
for the war effort, and so there was essentially a glut of the material on the market, and
the makers of DDT began to think about domestic uses.
And so after the Second World War, farmers began using DDT on their own crops.
So between 1950 and 1980, a 30-year period of time, DDT was extensively used in agriculture
and somewhere in excess of 40,000 tons were used each year worldwide.
The history of DDT goes back to the late 1930s when the scientist Paul Hermann Müller, who
was ultimately awarded the Nobel Prize in 1948 for his development of a variety of chemical
discoveries, including DDT, was responsible for its discovery and production.
And it was an extraordinary component of ecosystems.
When I was growing up in the 1960s, everybody had DDT, and DDT was something that you would
take out of the backyard.
And if you were having a cookout, you'd spray it like mad, and then you'd have no mosquitoes
for that period of time when you're out there.
It was considered to be sort of a miracle.
And in fact, municipalities began spraying DDT not just on crops.
They began to spray them in areas where there were high levels of humans living as a way
of controlling mosquitoes.
And so it was clearly overused.
The extent to which the impact of DDT was having on ecosystems was essentially either
unnoticed by the public or also essentially undetected.
That all changed, however.
In 1962, when a naturalist and author and scientist Rachel Carson published her watershed
book Silent Spring, which uncovered not only the toxicity of DDT, but the way in which
it moves through ecosystems, her books spurred, many people believe, her books spurred the
modern environmental movement, a significant contribution to it, and had many relevant
findings about DDT's effect on bird populations.
About the same time, researchers began noticing declines in bird population and linked it
to increased DDT use.
One of the scientists was David Peacall, who was measuring DDE, which is a variant of DDT.
He was measuring those levels in the egg shells of peregrine falcons and California condors
and finding there was a tight positive correlation with the amount of DDT in the shells and a
thinning or weakening of the shell.
It turns out that eggs that were laid by birds who had high levels of DDT in them were cracking
when the birds tried to sit on them to keep them warm.
As a result, osprey and bald eagle populations suffered significant population declines.
Now we know now that the physiology of DDT involves calcium, and in the presence of DDT,
the type of systems that are modulated by calcium are disrupted, and of course, the
egg shells of organisms have significant amounts of calcium in them, and so in the presence
of DDT, those pathways are disrupted, the shells become too thin, and they can't withstand
the weight of an incubating adult.
Now the bad part of this is that not only is DDT toxic, but it is persistent, which
means that after it's applied to the ecosystem, it doesn't just go away in a couple of days.
It is relatively stable.
In fact, in soil, its half-life can range anywhere from 22 days to over 30 years, and
because of the nature of its solubility, it can be absorbed by organisms rather quickly.
By the way, you may not have heard the term half-life before, but half-life in chemistry
refers to the amount of time necessary for half the material in a sample to lose its
chemical affinity for the particular reaction that you're interested in measuring.
So DDT ends up accumulating in the fat tissues and cells of organisms that consume it, and
the toxicity magnifies as it moves through the food chain.
So top-order predators like raptors, those are predatory birds, ospreys and eagles, have
a higher concentration than lower-level predators in the same area.
Let's take a look at a conceptual map of how this works.
And here we have a simplistic model of a food chain that involves a top-order predator,
and in this case, the top-order predator is an osprey, or so-called sea eagle, who eats
fish.
And so one of the things that had complicated our understanding of the way in which chemicals
like DDT work is that it seemed almost implausible that you could end up with concentrations,
as you see here in the water, of incredibly small amounts, I mean .0003 parts per million,
and then find it at relatively high levels in the tissue of organisms at the top of the
food chain.
But what happens is as the water is filtered by the organisms at the base of the food chain,
they're beginning to acquire levels of DDT, and they're being eaten by smaller fish that
are being eaten by larger fish that are being eaten by larger fish still, and finally those
tissues are being consumed by top-order predators.
And because top-order predators live a relatively long time, and they're going to eat more than
their weight throughout their lifetime, you begin to bioaccumulate the DDT in the tissues.
So in fact, compared to background levels, in this case the water, the DDT levels are
a million times higher in the tissues of top-order predators.
And this has implications for humans as well, which we'll investigate in the next lecture.
So this is an example of how molecules can bioaccumulate.
Another class of molecules that are particularly dangerous in ecological systems are the so-called
hormone mimics, and these come about from increased chemical use, and they're disrupting
a whole variety of ecological systems.
We're going to investigate the impact on amphibians and fish today.
These chemicals, or also called endocrine disruptors, mimic hormones and upset the normal
growth behavior and reproduction of wildlife.
These hormones act as chemical messengers, and it's worth taking a moment just to think
a little bit about the ecology of hormones.
You probably have heard about and are familiar with the various hormones that circulate to
the human body, and other organisms have different kinds of hormones, but the key aspect of the
way in which hormones work is that the signal from hormones are amplified.
In other words, within an organism, relatively small amounts of these hormones will bind
to cell surfaces, and they end up triggering a cascade of events within the cell that amplify
the signal.
An analogy would be if you are using your computer to send out an email and you use
a listserv, you can type one message, and you end up sending it out to 100 people, and
if they have a listserv, then they end up sending it out, and if only a few typing keystrokes
end up amplifying the message.
Well in essence, in a physiological sense, that's the way that hormones work.
Hormones travel through the bloodstream of organisms or the hemolymph of insects, and
they affect growth, they affect metabolism, reproduction, and other functions elsewhere
in the body.
They are communication systems that change the way in which the physiology or the pathways
of the physiology take place.
So these disruptors, which when they are taken up by organisms, are treated the same
as endogenous hormones or hormones that would be produced inside that organism, can throw
off the whole system by sending the wrong signals or also by blocking the right signals.
Now some of the first inkling that we had that amphibians were being pretty severely
disrupted by these hormone mimics came about in 1995 when a study in Minnesota found enormous
numbers of amphibians with massive deformities, like multiple limbs, eyes growing on the end
of their feet.
It was really quite extraordinary.
Work by Hatch and Blaustein in 2003 confirmed these synergistic effects when they looked
at the impact of ultraviolet radiation and nutrient loading on tadpole development.
They worked with the Pacific tree frog tadpoles and these experiments included enhanced UV
light and with and without the presence of nitrate fertilizers and the combined effects
were really quite stunning.
What they discovered was that they ran these different tests and they ran tests in which
the tadpoles were exposed to ultraviolet light or not exposed to ultraviolet light in the
water column in which there was no additional nitrate.
And remember from our previous lecture, nitrates and phosphates tend to be released from human
use of an area.
Nitrates come from fertilizers, phosphate comes from detergents and soaps.
So they ran that experiment and then they used an environment that had increased levels
of nitrate and they looked at the combination of nitrate and ultraviolet radiation.
And what they found is when ultraviolet radiation was present and the water was clean, it had
no effect on the growth and survival of the tadpoles.
However, if you added nitrate to the equation, there was a synergistic effect and the presence
of ultraviolet radiation and nitrates ended up with much, much lower survivorship of tadpoles.
Now the relationship is complicated here because it appears that the additional nitrates allowed
organisms to grow within the system that actually increased the parasite loads that
these tadpoles had to bear.
The ecology is pretty complicated.
I'm going to walk you through it on this next conceptual map.
So stay with me here.
So the model as they see it unfolding is this.
Where these freshwater habitats are located, rainwater, flushes fertilizer and possibly
manure from agricultural areas into ponds.
So that increases the amount of nitrates that are there.
The nitrogen initially provides more nutrients.
So there's an initial algal bloom which then allows a particular species or group of species
of snails to grow within the community.
And embedded in those snails happen to be a type of parasite that is particularly toxic
to tadpoles, riberioia.
Now if you add to that pesticides or any other disruptor to the system, they think that that
probably reduces the tadpole's resistance to the infection.
UV light further reduces resistance and the amphibians become easy prey or easy targets
for the parasite.
So we think that one pathway is that the pesticide residues may actually weaken the frog's immune
system.
Now other research has shown that wood frog tadpoles exposed to pesticides and the parasite
riberioia have lower eosinophil counts and high levels of parasite infection.
Eosinophils are a type of white blood cell that are essentially a surrogate measure of
the health of the immune system.
And as the exposure to these pesticide residues increases, the eosinophil counts drop which
appears to suggest that the immune system is being compromised which allow the parasites
a foothold in the body of these tadpoles and it ultimately reduces their ability to survive.
Another significant impact in ecosystem is the presence of PCBs or polychlorinated biphenyls
and they are persistent organic pollutants that are linked to environmental decline.
PCBs were used in transformers and capacitors and used as coolants and lubricants and in
pesticides, many other industrial uses.
They were readily used until 1972 when they were banned from use in open sources and in
1977 the U.S. completely banned their production.
However, because of their persistence and because you don't simply shut off an industrial
process the moment you stop producing it, there's still lots of PCBs in the environment.
In one famous case related to PCBs involves an extraordinary release of PCBs into an ecosystem
and that was the release by the General Electric Company between the end of the Second World
War in 1977 of about 1.3 million pounds of PCBs into the Hudson River.
These PCBs came from the company's two capacitor manufacturing plants and just to remind you
PCBs are so-called polychlorinated biphenyls are a class of organic compounds and they
have this long history of industrial use and their use as coolants and lubricants and
adhesives had been essentially cosmopolitan or ubiquitous throughout industrial applications
and although the production stopped in the 1970s because of the high toxicity there's
still an environmental burden and PCBs persist in the environment and they continue to bio-accumulate.
Now studies that occurred in the Hudson River involve the history of these PCBs and it's
an interesting story to engage because of the ecology but also because of the human
response to this.
In 1984 approximately 200 miles of the Hudson River was designated a superfund site as a
result of the discovery of these PCB dumpings that had occurred and remember earlier we
talked about the circular legislation that led to superfund and so the designation of
the superfund site allowed the community to tap into a billion dollar pool to initiate
a cleanup.
Attempts to clean up the Hudson River began in earnest in the early 1980s and nearly 200,000
cubic yards of sediment had been removed and the EPA estimates that in the end nearly 2.7
million cubic yards of sediment will need to be removed.
A study reported in August of 2008 in an issue of the journal Environmental Toxicology
and Chemistry found that mercury, a toxin we're going to talk about in detail in the
next lecture, which had been found in the Hudson River including striped bass and yellow
perch and largemouth bass had declined significantly over the past three decades as a result of
these cleanup efforts.
Now this story is even more interesting because of the strategic approaches used to both designate
the site and engage local stakeholders in the process.
It was a famous author and environmentalist Robert Boyle, who was also a sports writer,
who wrote the book The Hudson River, a natural and unnatural history and was a key citizen
leading a 17 year effort to stop the consolidated Edison company from building additional power
plants along the Hudson River.
The effort received national attention and grew into a non-profit organization called
the River Keepers.
This idea of the River Keepers is that an individual would be appointed to serve as
a key advocate for river sustainability.
In the case of the Hudson, the first River Keeper was Thomas Wyatt and then followed
by John Cronin.
Robert F. Kennedy Jr. was also instrumental in bringing effective legal muscle to the
project.
And today River Keepers is now an international alliance called the Water Keeper Alliance
and has 150 programs around the world.
The success of these programs is based upon encouraging local stakeholder action, leveraging
media awareness, and utilizing existing regulations to protect vulnerable ecosystems.
Another example that I think is illustrative is that even in the most pristine areas biomagnification
is occurring.
A team of environmental scientists from the University of Siena in Italy had been studying
the mercury concentrations in Taranova Bay in Antarctica.
Now, Antarctica is a pretty special ecosystem.
In fact, until recently, the ecosystem has had little human impact or contact.
Therefore it makes a great natural laboratory to study biogeochemical cycles.
Most of the biomass in Antarctica is in the marine food web.
Now measurements of the sediments discovered some of the lowest levels ever recorded for
mercury of .01 micrograms per gram of dry sediment.
However, the mercury levels in the primary producers and consumers from Antarctica were
found to be higher than similar animals in other marine food webs.
In fact, wettel seals had levels of 44 micrograms per gram of dry tissue in their livers, which
is greater than a thousand fold increase from the background.
It's suggested that it's possible that upwillings from currents and waters around the coast may
contribute to the increased mercury levels.
The bay is covered by ice for about nine months of the year and the decreased solar radiation
and high algae density during the summer may somehow contribute to the mercury levels.
It was found that the concentration of mercury's increased as one moved up the trophic period.
Now I don't want to leave this conversation by thinking that all concentrations, all bioconcentrations
are toxic.
In fact, we depend as an organism on the ability of bioaccumulation of appropriate compounds.
We don't call it bioaccumulation in that sense because we tend to reserve that for pollution,
but this idea of concentration.
And one example is to think about honey bees.
Honey bees take nectar in flour, which is at a relatively low concentration.
And they bring it back to the hive and from that they combine it with other foraging trips
that these worker bees are making and they produce an incredibly nutritious food for
themselves called honey.
That bioaccumulation, that hyper concentration of calories occurs because of the activity
that the bees go through, enzymes that they use to produce increased concentrations and
to remove the water from the honey.
So that's a form of bioaccumulation, in this case it's a hyper concentration that's actually
quite beneficial and sort of a key aspect of ecology.
We're going to continue our conversation around the process of biomagnification and
we're going to focus on the human condition as we will see when we gather again.
Thank you.
