Hi, and welcome back.
In our continued conversation about the nature of food webs and energy exchange, today we're
going to talk about food webs and ecosystems and how they act to concentrate rare chemicals
in the tissue of organisms who sit at the very top of the food chain, the so-called
top order predators.
We'll investigate how bio-magnification of toxic pollutants in humans and the groundbreaking
case that studied the relationship of chemical toxicity and bio-magnification in humans.
We'll investigate the Minamata Mercury poisoning incident in Japan, also known as the Dancing
Cats, and we'll look at the health effects of low-level pollutants and the effect of
antibiotics will also be considered.
Now I'm sure you've heard the phrase, mad as a hatter.
Well it actually comes from an historical entity related to bio-magnification, that's
true.
It comes from the hatter's use in Europe, especially in England, for the use of mercurious nitrate,
which was used in the curing of the furs that would be shaped into the hats.
And folks who were producing these hats would be working in close concentration with the
vapors of mercurious nitrate and mercury would accumulate in the tissues of these people
and it would literally lead to a series of palsies and tremors and eventually to complete
madness.
And so the notion of mad as a hatter is actually grounded in biology that is linked to the
conversation that we're going to be having today.
Now because humans are long-lived and have fast metabolisms, they are at very high risk
for toxins in the ecosystem.
That's because most toxins are stored in fat cells and therefore remain inside the body
for the life of the organism.
Because fat cells are also associated with the endocrine system, it is very dangerous
when these toxins enter the body.
DDT and PCBs are both examples of toxins that accumulate in fat cells or what we call adipose
tissues.
Toxins can be released either through the breakdown of the fat cells directly when the
body needs their contents for metabolism or through the response of the endocrine system
which triggers a release of hormones or steroids.
Our bodies can process many toxins however.
Toxins bioaccumulate through the food chain and they can have severe results.
Toxins like DDT and PCBs have more severe effects in children and infants.
In cases of high concentration, even adults can suffer.
Now a study of persistent organic pollutants in the breast milk of Canadian women was undertaken
by Eric DeWaley.
Initiated in the 1980s, DeWaley found low levels of PCBs and other contaminants in the milk
of mothers living in southern Quebec.
Now these populations were exposed to a wide range of industrial pollutants due to the
geography of the population.
Now he was looking for a pristine control in order to assess the impact of living in
industrial regions in Canada and here's where the story gets interesting and it reminds
me of the Robert Browning poem in where the adventurer is searching for this emerald isle
that is in distant ocean lands and somehow connecting to the wild brings you back to
more primal state.
Well he actually went and studied Inuit women living in northern Canada assuming that they
like in this far distant isle would be the benchmark for pollution free tissue.
However, to his surprise the Inuit women had levels seven times higher than the women
in Quebec and in fact if you take a look at the data that we have from his study you'll
see that if you look at PCB levels they are much, much higher in Inuit women than they
were in the women living in the industrial centers in Quebec.
And so this was quite a surprise.
Now it turned out that the high levels of PCBs were linked to a diet that these women
were engaged in which was rich in seal meat and the seals had sequestered the PCBs from
their environment.
Now the longer we live the greater risks we face and as a modern society now expecting
to live into our 90s or 100 or beyond these problems become that much more significant.
As I was talking to some of my colleagues and students if we could imagine a time when
our life expectation was only 35 or 40 years these issues of sequestering toxins over a
long period of time was a very different conversation because our life spans were much shorter.
But long live animals such as ourselves process enormous amounts of organic material in our
lifetime.
A typical human eats about 500 pounds of food a year so that works out to about 17 tons
of food in a 70 year lifespan.
During that period of time we'll consume 15,000 gallons of water.
So persistent chemicals build up in our tissues through a process we call biomagnification.
So if you think about our own metabolic systems we have organs like our kidney and our liver
that act as filters to remove toxins from our bodies.
And many of these toxins which are water soluble can be pretty easily removed but those that
aren't every time they pass through our body the water and the food that carries those
materials in are removed from the system the water is filtered out but we're capturing
the toxins.
So the longer we live the more the toxins build up.
Now one story that I think is worth telling with respect to our understanding of toxins
is the so called Minamata Mercury disease which was first discovered in Japan in 1956.
And much of its history has been chronicled by the work of Timothy George in his book Minamata
Pollution and the Struggle for Democracy in Post-War Japan.
In this case he was investigating severe mercury poisoning and it affects the nervous system
it's a very very serious for any mammal.
The first reported patient was a 5 year old girl who exhibited seizures and difficulty
walking and speaking.
Now another 8 patients from the same area were hospitalized with the same symptoms only
days later.
Now after more investigations it was discovered that domestic house pets cats and dogs had
been known to just drop dead in this area.
Dead fish were routinely floating to the surface of Minamata Bay and seaweed was rarely growing.
Birds and other wild animals began to die off in areas near the bay and the human toll
began to mount as well.
By the fall of 1956 14 deaths had resulted from a diagnosis of 46 people.
The initial diagnosis was food poisoning as a result of heavy metal ingestion however
as the data mounted there grew a haunting similarity between the human symptoms and those
of the dancing cats.
The connections were drawn tighter when the sick cats and humans were in a very tight
geographic cluster and actually had similar diets of fish.
By 1958 the idea of mercury poisoning as the likely lethal contaminant emerged through
the work of Douglas McAlpine a neurologist from Britain who was there investigating his
own work in multiple sclerosis.
He reviewed the data and discovered that there was a likely connection to methylmercury poisoning.
Now working as a detective he contacted colleagues back in England in order to determine if there
was evidence for any methylmercury sources in the bay.
Well there certainly was because vinyl production requires mercury as a catalyst and CHISO was
the likely target.
Humans found mercury levels within the sediments of the canal to be in excess of 2 kilograms
for every ton of sediment.
At that level you could actually commercially extract the mercury and it would be profitable.
It was like a mercury mine located right in the bay which was an active part of the ecosystem
delivering food to that community.
Now through the trophic cascade in the ecosystem mercury entered the food chain and into the
fish that people ate in the community resulting in blood levels of mercury that exceeded 700
parts per million for people who ate the fish.
Now that compared to control samples outside that community of just 4 parts per million.
Ultimately the source of mercury pollution in Minamata Bay was traced to the industrial
polluter the CHISO chemical factory.
CHISO produced a variety of chemicals including fertilizers and in this toxic soup included
acetic acid, acetylene, acid aldehyde and vinyl chloride.
And remember some of these require mercury based components in order to be produced.
And the wastewater from production of these chemicals was released directly into Minamata
Bay and the production of these chemicals had released the methylmercury.
The highly toxic chemicals accumulated in the fish and shellfish from the bay and the
effect was magnified at various trophic levels this phenomenon we call biomagnification and
ultimately ended up in the tissues of humans who were eating the fish.
Now mercury levels in the United States are also a serious concern.
Now in the example of the CHISO factory it was a very complex political and economic
time in Japan.
It was coming off of the enormity of their loss of the Second World War.
There was a tremendous desire for the nation to get back on its feet and become an industrial
giant again.
And as it turns out there was knowledge within that CHISO factory of the damage that was
being caused and it was a significant not only ecological impact but a huge embarrassment
to the government of Japan and actually led to a variety of environmental regulations and
oversight that ultimately have led to a more stable and sustainable management of Japan's
various ecosystems.
But at the time it was a huge embarrassment as well it should have been.
So in the United States we also have mercury concerns and they're coming from a variety
of different industrial sources.
And in fact mercury is the leading cause of environmental impairment of U.S. estuaries
and lakes.
I mean more than 10 million acres of lakes are closed or under advisory.
Almost 400,000 miles of streams are either closed or under advisory.
And almost every state has advisories about mercury-tainted fish.
And if we take a look here at the map you can see that from this is from the U.S. Geologic
Survey and you can see that in the red there are formal state level advisories related to
the dangers of mercury-tainted fish.
And in the states that are colored in green there are local and other forms of advisories.
Now lead toxicity also remains a daunting problem for humans.
It's the most widely distributed of the toxic elements.
And it enters the environment in a variety of ways including the smelting of ores.
It also enters through batteries, pipes, conduits, pewter, solder and most importantly
from an historical standpoint tetraethyl lead which up until the 70s was used in gasoline.
Lead tetroxide is a corrosion resistant additive to paint.
Lead monoxide is an additive in leaded crystal.
Lead arsenate is an additive in many pesticides.
And most damaging by far as we said is the form of lead called tetraethyl which was up
until relatively recently in the history of combustion technologies used in gasoline where
it would moonlight as both a coolant and a lubricant.
But modern gasoline engines can survive just fine without tetraethyl lead and for the past
30 years or more unleaded fuel has been the primary combustible propellant for engines
in the United States.
Now lead has many chemical forms which make it both water soluble as lead chloride and
fat soluble as lead acetate.
Therefore it can enter the body in many different ways.
Once in the body there are a whole series of metabolic complications that are associated
with lead.
Lead blocks the pathways to the biosynthesis of heme which is the key oxygen carrying part
of hemoglobin and that disrupts the transport of oxygen throughout the tissues and the activity
of a molecule ferro chelotase which is disrupted in the process of heme biosynthesis.
Lead can also replace calcium in bone and disrupt the activity of osteoclasts which
are the stem cells that you have that produce your bone.
Now this sounds problematic and of course you would say oh my goodness for children
it must be horrible because they're growing so fast and of course that's true but remember
even as adults within a given year you will turn over all of your bone cells typically
at least once and so your system of bone is growing and replacing itself throughout its
life so lead poisoning has implications for adults as well.
Lead also disrupts the process of the formulation of acetyl-CoA which is a critical intermediate
and sort of clearing house, wheel house in your metabolism.
Without that you have trouble metabolizing almost any of your food sources.
Lead disrupts calcium function in nerve cells which disrupts the central nervous system function
leading to illnesses like lead and encephalopathy and it also has negative relationships with
kinase C, protein kinase C or PKC which is also a critical communication molecule within
the body.
Lesser effects of lead include hyperactivity, decreased attention span, reduced measures
of IQ and there also is some linkage to criminal and other maladaptive behavior.
Now lead levels in children vary considerably and as a nation we are legitimately and appropriately
concerned about the exposure of young people to lead.
Typically in rural communities the level will be somewhere between 7 to 11 micrograms of
lead per every 100 milliliters of blood.
In urban settings that can be much higher 9 to 33 micrograms for every 100 milliliters
of blood but children growing up near industrial sites such as smelters where lead particulates
are common those levels can get from 35 to 70 micrograms per 100 milliliters of blood
and anything above 25 is considered to be highly toxic.
Now historically leaded paint is the primary root of poisoning for children and you might
think that it's a simple problem to solve all you need to do is to make sure the children
aren't sort of chewing on paint but it's more complicated than that because paint tends
to wear by powdering that as paint wears off if there's lead in it it produces lead powder
and so that lead is ingested and it tends to be collect on surfaces and one of the things
we tend to forget about children especially young children is how much shorter they are
and how much closer they are to the floor and so the air it's amazing to think about
it from an ecological standpoint but the air that a toddler breathes actually has a different
composition than the air that an adult breathes because we're at different heights above
the floor and the floor represents a very different ecological community with respect
to exposure to chemicals and mildew and bacteria and so forth.
Now getting back to lead homes built before 1950 are very very likely to have lead paint
and in Massachusetts about half of the housing stock was built before 1950 and also at least
50% of the rental housing in Massachusetts was built prior to 1950 so you have the recipe
for a very high risk environment and an even higher risk is that housing stock which is
in urban areas which in Massachusetts represents two thirds of homes built before 1950.
So that leaves approximately a third of the children in Massachusetts living in the urban
areas of highest risk.
Now because of increased intervention and rules regarding the use of leaded paint which
is no longer legal to be sold and strategies for removing lead paint blood levels of children
in Massachusetts have fallen dramatically as a result of this enhanced vigilance and
intervention.
In 1994 when some of these data were most intensively collected in excess of 32,000
children had toxic levels of lead in their blood and by the end of the century that
number had dropped in half and I encourage you to think about those two numbers for just
a moment because you might say wow that's still an awful lot of kids and maybe we need
to do a better job but also remember that early on in any public health crisis if you
will in this case it was detecting lead in children the number of children being screened
is a smaller proportion of the population than as more people become aware that it needs
to be done.
So that 32,000 is probably a very low figure of the actual number of children that had
toxic levels in their blood but by the end of the century a higher proportion of children
were actually being tested and that 13,500 figure represents a higher proportion of the
real number of children that had the lead exposure.
So it represents really a tremendous decline.
By 1987 rates were nearly 6 children for every 1,000 tested had toxic levels of blood and
current rates are well below 2 for every 1,000 tested so you can see that there's been a
significant improvement.
The Centers for Disease Control through their intensive national health and nutritional
examination survey so-called NHANES estimated that nationally over 300,000 children have
high levels of lead in their blood and so this still remains a challenge, a significant
challenge for us to approach and as we think about the challenge of removing additional
lead from the ecosystem it only becomes more complicated because you move from regulations
such as removing the lead from gasoline which had a huge effect.
So a single sort of regulatory act that impacts an industry in this case the automotive industry
and the petroleum industry it's relatively easy to enforce.
You can remove an enormous amount of lead in that way.
That's how you make some of your first impacts.
Then you're talking about removing lead from paint and that's another significant impact.
Now the challenges of getting lead levels low become more diffuse because you're looking
at either much smaller industries that are producing in a cumulative sense much lower
levels of lead or you're talking about actually changing individual behaviors around certain
kinds of risk.
The recent concern for instance around lead in toys.
Fixing that is a little bit more complicated because so much of the toy industry is actually
driven by imports.
So it's an any ecological transition.
There's the so-called low hanging fruit which are relatively sort of easy to pick and therefore
represent relatively easy transformations in this case getting the lead out of paint,
getting the lead out of gasoline, those are the low hanging fruits.
Now do we get the rest of the lead out much more complicated but incredibly necessary
especially as it impacts the health of young people.
Now in addition to thinking about this idea of lead exposure we're also have our challenge
in our ecosystems right now by low level antibiotics in our water which is another emergent and
increasing problem.
Now bacteria found in the water exposed to these low levels of antibiotics are actually
becoming more resistant to the drugs and an increase in bacterial resistance makes
it more difficult for doctors to cure patients who are being exposed to these resistant bacteria.
For example most strains of staff the Staphylococcus aureus which is the staff infections we worry
about in hospitals are resistant to penicillin and are also showing resistance to the newer
antibiotics.
So in fact it's forcing physicians to return to the early sulfa drugs that were used prior
to the development of antibiotics and although they have some efficacy they are not very
pleasant to use and they have significant side effects for humans.
Antibiotics come not only from human use and improper disposal but a large source comes
from animal feedlots.
Factory farmers typically mix low doses of antibiotics into animals feed in water and
they do this to promote their growth and to prevent outbreaks of disease and often overcrowded
facilities.
In fact about 70% of all the antimicrobials used in the United States are actually fed
to livestock and this accounts for more than 25 million pounds of antibiotics annually
and that's more than 8 times the amount used to treat diseases in humans which is according
to the Union of Concerned Scientists.
Now let's think about this for a moment because this has some pretty significant implications
and if you think to the conversations that we're having around food supply we have talked
about the fact that in general there is a tremendous cost both functionally and ecologically
to raise beef cattle on cereal grains because these intensive cereal grains and the use
of corn it's not a normal food for these animals to be ingesting it's actually too high quality
for their fermenter systems to use.
So in response to being grown in very cramped conditions and to consume food that they haven't
actually evolved to consume these animals are essentially sort of sick all the time
and in order to respond to that we're giving them antibiotics to suppress any infections
when if we considered an ecologically integrated approach to growing these cattle we wouldn't
have them in such high concentrations we wouldn't be feeding them the same concentrations
of cereal grain and as such we wouldn't need the antibiotics to compensate for the factory
farming techniques that we've been using.
It's part of this integrated awareness I think that is helpful in understanding what are
the real external additional costs associated with the cheap meat products that we have
become used to having access to. Remember this is a classic example of Harden's tragedy
of the commons whereas the individual costs of producing cheaper beef end up providing
immediate profits to those corporations that are producing it there is a societal cost
that we are all paying at some point.
Another I think interesting and important factor associated with the growth of cattle
is the insulin growth factor IGF-1 is also injected into cows to enhance their growth
and these elevated levels of IGF-1 in humans have been linked to colon and breast cancer.
Now the question is how do these get into humans well they get into them a couple of
ways one they can get into the direct ingestion of the animal tissue but often these compounds
are given in such excess that the animals can't even consume them all so much of it
passes through the animals filtered out into the urine and through the feces and enters
back into the water supply so that even our water supplies have low levels of a variety
of chemicals that include antibiotics and growth hormones and other endocrine mimics
that have significant implications for human health.
Now I want to finish today with a bio magnification story that's actually I think on the positive
side and it returns to an animal that we've talked about called the monarch butterfly.
Our monarch butterflies are bright orange and black they're advertising their location
because they're advertising that they are poisonous and so they survive the impact of
predation by signaling mostly to birds that if you bite into me I'm going to be distasteful
I'm going to make you sick. Well they do that by bio magnifying the toxins that they're
taking in from the host plant that they feed on is caterpillars which is the milkweed.
Now milkweed plants produce these toxins in order to prevent themselves from being eaten
by other insects and mostly it works. They're only a handful of insect species that can
feed on milkweeds but those that do like the monarch actually have adopted this bright
coloration because if you're going to consume these toxic chemicals and survive it you
can turn around and advertise that which gives you additional survival advantage from
other predation. So fascinating example here of co-evolution. So from here we're going
to investigate ecology at the community scale and we will do so in our next lecture. Thank
you.
