The last couple of lectures, we've been focusing on the energetics of the way that molecules
move through ecosystems, the thermodynamics, if you will. But you know, ecological communities
are made up of organisms, and the reason that they move in the way that they do has
to do with the interrelationships. Local ecological communities are complex aggregations of living
and non-living forces. And we're going to look at these factors, such as competition
and predation and disturbance, and look at how they play a role, an important role in
the structure of ecosystems. These interactions help us to understand ecology at the local
level, the level of the communities. We're going to investigate a variety of studies,
some from the Scottish ecologist, Joseph Connell, which helped us to create the theoretical
foundations of community ecology. And we will examine predators and their prey relationships,
competition and cooperation, plus the role of disturbance, such as fires and floods,
and long-term community stability and resilience. Also included will be models of how ecological
communities replace themselves over time, a process we call succession. But I want to
begin by talking about butterflies again. They're an extraordinary system to investigate, and
researchers have been studying butterflies for as long as people have been thinking about
ecology. You know, Darwin saw communities of organisms locked in a struggle for their
survival, each organism pursuing its selfish best interest. But these relationships are
likely to be much more complicated. Consider the notion of signaling, honest, deceptive,
targeted, broadcast signals, and that's where these butterflies come in. If you notice we
have three different butterflies here, each displayed with their wings open and their
wings closed. We have two representatives from the genus Ania, and one from the United States,
and in the middle from Brazil, and then one representative from the genus Nymphalis, also
from the United States. And when their wings are open, notice that they resemble traditional
butterflies, in fact have some rather extraordinary color variations or morphs, as we say. But when
their wings are closed, notice how much they resemble leaves. This is an evolutionary adaptation
to avoid predation. They're attempting to fool predators, mostly birds, by having a
visual presentation that makes them appear to be a leaf. This is a complex, co-evolved
relationship between the predators and their prey. This works for a visual predator, which
most birds do hunt visually. And so, by looking like a leaf and being very still, they can
reduce their risk of predation. Because a butterfly's life really divides into two components.
Remember, the first part of a butterfly's life is in the form of a caterpillar, and it's
really an eating machine. And it's essentially eating at maximum rate in order to gain as
much weight as possible. But then after a period of metamorphosis, this organism reemerges
as a butterfly. And most butterflies are actually incapable of eating as adults. Some can take
in some water, and a few can take in other kinds of nutrients. But for the most part,
their only sole purpose in life as adults is to find another individual of the opposite
sex and reproduce. But reproduction is dangerous because it gets you out into the open. The
courtship displays that butterflies go through also put them at some risk. And so, a lot
of what a butterfly does is just sort of sit still and wait for the right opportunity.
And if you can be hidden like this, then it's one way of protecting yourself. Now, compare
that to a previous lecture when we looked at a monarch butterfly. Remember, the monarch
is anything but cryptic. The monarch is actually displaying through a bright coloration the
fact that it is actually poisonous. So those are two distinctly different pathways, evolutionary
pathways, to avoid disturbance. In this case, looking like your background, a phenomenon
we call krypsis. In the other case of the monarch butterfly, we call it aposomatic coloring,
meaning not like the background aposomatic, two different strategies. And the reason we
bring this up now is because this is the context of community. Community is the interaction
among these organisms of different species. If these butterflies weren't being preyed upon,
they wouldn't have to have these colorations. So these local ecological communities are
really complex aggregations of living organisms impacted by nonliving forces. The persistence
over time of these communities is dependent on many factors, such as competition and predation
and disturbance. Communities are the result of what we call ecological legacies. And I
have to take a moment here and just remind you about the science of ecology. Remember,
we've compared ecology to other sciences such as physics that use a more reductive approach.
But ecology has to take a holistic application to the science. We have to be thinking about
what the history was, what the present is, and how it will help explain the future. So
that's what we mean by this notion of legacy. But what do we mean by community? So we have
ecological legacies. What's a community? A community is defined as an assemblage of
species living close enough together for potential interactions. So communities differ in their
species richness, which is the number of species they contain. And they also vary with respect
to the relative abundance of different species. In other words, how many individuals of each
species are there. That is a whole field of ecological study called biodiversity. Now,
there are really two views of communities when considering plants. And there have been
two historical approaches, the so-called individualistic and interactive hypotheses.
The individualistic hypothesis was developed by H.A. Gleason. And it depicts a community
as a chance assemblage of species found in the same area because they happen to have
the same abiotic requirements. Remember our conversations about Liebig and other scientists
who said that these sort of limiting factors and things that plants need. Long-term data
that have been collected from studies that have been done in the Santa Catalina Mountains
in Arizona actually suggests that this individualistic hypothesis may actually be very powerful
in describing the distribution of species of plants. But the debate is clearly not closed
because there is another alternative hypothesis developed by F.E. Clements called the interactive
hypothesis. And here the model depicts a community as an assemblage of closely linked species
locked in by their mandatory biotic interactions. In other words, if you have a certain set
of species there, you can predict that others will be there as well.
Now animal distributions tend to follow two models, the rivet or redundancy model. The
rivet model of communities is a reincarnation of the interactive model, but this time not
applied to plants, but applied to animals. It was championed in the early 1980s by the
ecologist Paul Ehrlich, who is best remembered publicly for his work on population growth
and human populations in particular. But he suggests that animal communities are in
a metaphorical sense like rivets in the wings of an airplane. They're tightly linked and
likely to cause a crash if the population is altered to any major degree. Pull some rivets
out and the plane is likely to come down. Now the redundancy model, which was developed
by Brian Walker, states that most species in a community are actually not tightly linked
to one another. And using this airplane analogy, they say that most species are actually like
passengers on the flight. And really the only critical members of the flight on that flight
are the pilots and the attendants. And by extension, only certain species are actually
critical to the survival of the community. And those are such species as keystone species
or ecosystems and engineers. Let's take an example of a classic keystone species and explore
this idea. An example is the beaver, which is a common rodent to the North American landscape.
Now just a few beavers can have a dramatic impact on the landscape topography and hydrology.
Because remember, beavers fell trees and they create dams that impound water, making wetlands
that ultimately will increase the capacity for flood storage. Remember, we're looking
at this from the standpoint of ecosystem services. So in most instances, beavers create
environments that enhance ecosystem services. However, in many parts of the United States,
beaver dams were dynamited and the beavers themselves were trapped out nearly to local
extirpation. And this was done primarily because it allowed folks to recover lands that could
be drained and then used for farming. And of course, since these lands had been wetlands
for so long, the soils were incredibly rich. So in the short term, draining those impound
areas provided incredible opportunities to exploit the land. But there were long term
costs. On the Cabetta Gama Peninsula in Minnesota,
Nyman and colleagues conducted an analysis of the watershed changes as a result of beaver
influence. Now in 1940, at probably the peak time in that in that state when beavers were
being removed, there were only about 500 left. I'm sorry, there were only about 500 acres
of land that was impounding water created by beavers. Now with sort of a reeducation
effort and a reconsideration by the residents of the role that beavers play, hunting and
trapping of beavers was reduced and the beaver population recovered. And by 1986, there
were 6,500 acres of wetlands that had been created by the impounding activity of these
beavers. So here you had an entire community that was essentially built by the activity
of one species, in this case the beaver. So no matter which of the models that we have
for animals that's more robust for any given ecosystem, it's really important to study
the interactions among these species in their communities.
One of the most fundamental interactions that happen in communities is competition. And
competition is a very dynamic relationship between species that tends to create outcomes
where individuals become specialized, something we call a niche. An ecological niche is the
sum total of an organism's use of its abiotic and biotic resources in an environment. I
like to tell my students that an organism's niche is sort of like its resume. It's all
the things that it does and all the things that it has done. An organism's niche is
its role in the environment. It's its occupation.
So Joseph Connell was one of the first individuals to investigate this whole issue of competition.
And he did so by looking at barnacles living off the Scottish coast. And here, the investigation
of competition resulted in a theory of what we call the fundamental and realized niches
that organisms have. Fundamental being the niche that could be occupied by the animal
and the realized is sort of the real part. What is the niche that the animal actually
can occupy given the competition that happens around it?
One of the species of barnacles that he studied was thamilus. And it's a barnacle found at
or above the high tide mark and can stand more desiccation. So the range reaches very
high into the intertidal zone. However, it tends to be outcompeted by balanus in areas
of physical overlap in the middle and lower tidal zones. Thus, the distribution of these
two barnacles is limited by physical and biological factors. The fundamental niche is the full
range of environmental conditions, both biological and physical, where an organism can exist
and potentially inhabit. Realized niche is that part that is due to competition pressure
in interaction with other species. An organism is only able to occupy a smaller niche than
the fundamental. And let's take a look at this relationship between thamilus and balanus.
We take a look at an idealized distribution of the intertidal zone. You can see that for
thamilus, the fundamental niche goes all the way to the various high tide line, all the
way down to the low tide line. But in reality, because it doesn't live in an uncompetitive
world, it actually has to compete with balanus. And balanus is more aggressive and actually
pushes thamilus out of its fundamental niche. And so in reality, the only part that thamilus
can live in is the niche that is available because balanus can't live there. So the in
reality or the realized niche for that barnacle species is actually much smaller than its
fundamental niche. So what we see here is the role of competition shaping pretty dramatically
the structure of the community. Another example of the role of niche is to consider some of
the fascinating work that's been done with warblers in northern climates in this phenomenon
of niche partitioning. And what happens in this situation is that there are a number
of species of warblers that use a particular area. And if you take a look at the chart
we've provided for you, you can see the different species of warblers actually use different
parts of the same kind of trees. So although they're physically found in the same location,
they're not actually directly competing with each other. So for instance, the yellow rump
warbler feeds closer to the ground and towards the edge and middle of the tree, but very
close to the ground, where the Cape May warbler tends to feed at the top of the tree. And so
even though they're both using the same resource, they're using in different areas. And this
has a way of reducing the overall competition because they're creating different niches.
And you can see the other species have essentially partitioned the tree up. Now another form
of interaction is one that's not competitive, but is mutualistic and cooperative. And mutualisms
and cooperation are very important relationships that benefit those individuals involved. These
organisms are entering into these mutualistic relationships because there is a selfish best
interest that's served by both. A mutualism is a biological interaction between individuals
of two different species, where both individuals benefit and neither is harmed. And one of
the most extraordinary interactions, mutualistic interactions involves the ant-Akesha mutualism
that has been studied in the New World Tropics. A particular tree that grows there called the
swollen thorn Akesha, Akesha colonsae, is a classic example of this mutualistic relationship. Now
the swollen thorn Akesha's benefit from their relationship with the Akesha ants in the genus
Pseudomirmax, as do the ants themselves. Now the ants live in the enlarged thorns and feed off
the tissues and oils in the plant. In return, the ants defend the trees against invading insect
pests. And they remove any vegetation that grows in contact with the plant. So in return for the
plant hosting these ants, the ants act as gardeners tending the plant, tending the tree,
removing other insect pests and other competitive plants that would be growing around it. Now
experiments done by Dan Janssen and his team at the University of Pennsylvania show that these
Akesha trees with their ants survived much better than the experimental components where they
removed the ants. So in the year-long study that they conducted, there was essentially a 43%
survival rate if the ants were removed compared to a 72% survival rate in the natural situations. So
this relationship suggests that there are considerable additional benefits that both
species get by cooperating. Now another important mutualistic relationship occurs between some
species of ants and aphids. They are mutualistic symbiotes. The ants and the aphids are in a
mutualism that benefits both species. And the mutualistic relationship goes something like this.
The ants tend the aphids and protect them from predators in exchange for a share of the nectar
called honeydew that they've harvested. Now for those of you who are gardeners, when I say the
word aphid, you may shudder to think of it because you know aphids can take over a garden in a short
time, which by the way is a fascinating reproductive strategy that is part of this lecture series.
Remember aphids are a species that can reproduce sexually or asexually. So in your garden, when
conditions are great, they simply make clones of themselves because it's fastest way to reproduce.
When it's the end of the season, they reproduce sexually, which takes more time, but generates
genetic variation. But here's the mutualistic part. It's really cool. So aphids, right,
have the stylus that comes out of their proboscis and they push it down into the plant. And from
that, they're parasites. They take out the fluids that are moving through the vasculature
of the tree and the fluids have sugar in them. And so they're able to get their nourishment
from that. But the pressure gradients are such that as they're taking in this nutrients
from the plant, it's actually just a lot of it's passing out unused through their bodies
and going out their back ends. Well, the ants have evolved to make use of that fluid because
the calories are still there. So they're actually consuming those calories and they then don't
have to forage for themselves. So it's clear what's in it for the ants, but where's the
mutualism? Where's the benefit for the aphid? Well, as you can imagine, if you're an aphid
with your proboscis stuck inside a plant, you're pretty vulnerable. It's not easy for
you to move around. You're anchored to that position. And so the ants literally guard
and care for the aphids so that they're not taken by other predators. And in fact, when
the plant wound response ends up clogging the location where the aphid is injected its
stylus, the ant will actually help move the aphid to a new location. So they're clearly
working in in in synchrony. Now, some interactions at the community level are not only they're
complex, but they're asynchronous. Remember the conversation we had about the research
that Bruce Mahal and Klaus Halsoffel were having the University of California in Santa
Barbara pair that studied the desert shrub and Brogio de Mosa and its relationship with
local grasses and they worked on these two different treatments. In what experiment the
annuals were moved in the other the shrubs were removed and the growth rates were measured
in each experiment. And they then check the net changes in the biomass. These date appeared
in the journal ecology and the effect that remember the effect of the shrub was positive
on the annual plants. The shrub probably provided some some shade and water retention
to the soil. But remember the effect of the annuals on the shrub was negative. Probably
the result of the annual plant probably stripping the nutrients right out of the soil. We call
this a facilitation interference relationship. It benefits one species, but is costly to
the other. I told you it gets complicated, but that's where I think the interesting research
questions come from. Another process in communities is how communities change something we call
ecological succession. And ecological succession is an important quality that enables an ecosystem
to recover. Remember we looked at the Clements Gleason model in the beginning. And the changes
in a community occur after major disturbance like fire or flood or lava. And we can think
of these processes in plant communities as primary succession. This is the establishment
or development of an ecosystem. And remember we talked about nitrogen fixing bacteria and
lupins that help make this that allow that allow those plants to go into virgin soils
that don't have much organic material. This occurs when the environment in which a new
substrate devoid of vegetation and usually lacking soil is first deposited. So you have
a primary succession. And then forest develop, the example for instance is the way that forest
develop in the edge of a glacier melt or next to lava flows. Now secondary succession is
the reestablishment of an ecosystem where there has already been remnants from a previous
ecosystem such as regrowth of a forest after a fire or the transformation of a field into
a woods. Now successional stages can be classified into early, middle and late stages of development.
During the early development the initial vegetation is classified as early successional species.
These species have adapted to the hard conditions and they help to stabilize the ecosystem.
The middle stage involves plants that can grow quickly and spread profusely. And this
can include small trees like white birch in temperate areas. These plants thrive in
direct sunlight. Now the late stage of succession is when a mature forest develops. These late
successional species are slower growing and longer lived. We see a shift from deciduous
to conifer trees in certain forest communities. So what is the essence of interactions among
organisms in community ecology? Well the interactions among distinct populations of organisms can
include mutualism and commensalism, predation and herbivory, competition and parasitism.
Now I want to talk about a couple of interactions that we've been studying consistently over
the past couple of decades. In our study area we actually began working in the 1980s with
the wild dog like predator, the canid we were studying was red foxes. And we're interested
in the role that red foxes played in the transmission of the Lyme disease system. So we were capturing
red foxes and putting radio collars on them and looking at their territorial behavior
and their movement and distribution. But beginning in the mid 1990s the red fox population began
to decline and it was declining because of the influx of coyotes that were moving east
in their range expansion. And this is a very interesting community dynamic because as coyotes
moved in they would outcompete foxes. Foxes had essentially two choices when encountering
coyotes, leave or be eaten. And so red foxes took the choice of leaving. And so what happens
is as red foxes moved out coyotes moved in and in the arc of time that we've been working
within that study system we've seen a change in the top order predators as a result of
a change in community composition. And that was probably driven by into at least some
degree by the impacts of suburbanization of the area. Now the last example of community
that I want to engage in actually takes us back to a previous lecture. Remember we left
I think the last time talking about the role of antibiotics in systems and we were talking
about it from an energetic standpoint. And we were saying that we were using antibiotics
to talk about an example of bio accumulation. But let's think about that from the standpoint
of the community. Now one of the trends that we're seeing in modern consumer behavior for
instance is the use of antibiotic soaps and other products like that. You know in only
a few years we've gone from an environment where antibiotic products were the domain
of hospitals and professional kitchens to something that we're all using on a regular
basis. There are now somewhere in the vicinity of 700 products available that claim to have
antibiotic capacity. And what we're doing essentially when we're using antibiotic soaps
and things like that is we're putting a mild selection pressure on the microbial community
that lives on our skin, that lives on our surfaces of the world in which we live. And
we tend to think of that as germs and so we want to get rid of them and it makes us sort
of uncomfortable to think about that. But in reality the surface of your skin which
is a community for microorganisms. The fact that you have those microorganisms on your
skin for the most part is part of the healthy ecology of your body. And by constantly exposing
yourself to low levels of antibiotic product there are data that suggests that it's changing
the microbial community on your skin or in the surfaces of your home. And in fact that
change in the microbial community might actually be detrimental. And there's a significant
amount of work now going on trying to look at what the impact of these low level antibiotics
are in the microbial communities in which we all live. So in our next lecture we're
going to be investigating how community structure in areas where humans dominate the landscape
often bring humans in contact with wildlife and some of the adventures that occur when
that happens. So until then take care.
