Hi, and welcome back.
You know, in our last conversation, we were talking about the ecological mosaic, and we
actually left off talking about the change in population dynamics between coyotes and
foxes.
And we're going to pick up that challenge again today by thinking about the relationship
of humans and urbanized areas and this whole notion of attracting wildlife into human-dominated
landscapes.
You know, as humans expand their numbers, we often find ourselves, shall we say, reacquainting
with wildlife.
We stories such as coyotes eating cats and bears on the porch, mountain lions in the
park are scenarios that are becoming more common across America.
The development of suburban lands following the end of the Second World War created this
patchwork or fragmented wildlife habitat that is interspersed with areas of high density
of human habitation.
This land use pattern has created a new ecological mosaic that brings humans and wildlife together
in ways that has never happened before.
Now our lab is particularly interested in this interface between human-dominated landscapes
and wildlife and the focus of our research, although we work on a variety of different
species, is to understand how the presence of animal systems in urbanized areas alters
the social structure and ecology of these animals.
And one of the challenges is to figure out how to study them in ways that provide the
information that we need, but at the same time don't disrupt their behaviors.
So the focus of our research tend to be on whitetail deer and also on urbanized coyotes.
And one of the strategies we use, as we mentioned before, but I'll mention again is radio telemetry.
This is a radio collar that would be fitted to one of our adult deer that we study.
They wear it around their neck and essentially it makes each of the animals an individual
radio station broadcasting on their own frequency.
And this particular collar includes the battery and all the electronics and here's the antenna.
And so what happens is that the animals are broadcasting, they don't hear it of course
because it's radio frequencies that are being produced, but it produces a series of beeps
that have a certain rate and depending on how the animal holds its head that rate changes
whether the animal is moving or not.
And so we can get an idea of the behaviors the animals are going through, but more importantly
we use directional antennas and multiple sampling points that allow us to figure out geospatially
where the animal is located because we're very interested in how these animals change
position with respect to season and time of day and presence of humans and so forth.
In fact some of our more modern collars that we're using actually have GPS monitors on
them as well so that when we recover the collar or even sometimes electronically this information
can be sent to us.
So we put a similar but much smaller collar and radio system on the coyotes that we study
as well and it allows us to gather information remotely and not disturb the animals behavior.
The only time we have to disturb them of course is when we capture them, when we use these
animal friendly traps and we bait them in and so at least once in their life they have
to be acquainted with us.
Now human urbanization and agriculture have changed the composition of ecological communities
and the characteristics of urban ecological systems are that first of all the habitats
are extraordinarily fragmented and this example, this is exemplified by the history, natural
history of oven birds in North America.
At one time at least in New England they were the dominant avian species in mature woodlands
but because of the fragmentation of these habitats their populations have declined in
many parts of New England.
We've actually seen an increase in the northeast of nest parasites such as cow birds and this
particular species lives along the edges of habitats and as habitat fragmentation increases
their populations go up because the increase of edge habitat in urban areas is expanding.
Now the nest parasite story is kind of interesting because these cow birds lay eggs in other birds'
nests and the other birds raise those offspring, the chicks that aren't actually their own.
From an evolutionary standpoint that's a genetic dead end but typically the populations of
birds that are parasitized are not terribly impacted because the percentage of nests that
are parasitized are relatively low but as habitats become more fragmented and edge species
such as cow birds increase then the potential and real outcome of that is that the percentage
of parasitized nests begins to climb and a recent study that was conducted in the metropolitan
Boston area found that some songbird species in certain years had a hundred percent nest
parasitism from cow birds and over time that's completely unstable.
Now one of the other most fundamental impacts besides the increase in nest parasitism in
urban areas is that the food webs tend to be altered especially we see this in the reduction
in the total number of top predators that you find in an urban ecosystem.
So typical ecosystems in North America would have wolves or bears or mountain lions at
the top of the food chain and typically in urbanized areas the natural habitat there's
not enough of it to support their ecology.
Now avian top order predators such as ospreys and eagles and hawks can also be disrupted
especially through pollution and we've talked about pollution not only from the chemical
standpoint but also pollution from light and noise and other sources that can disrupt
their habitat.
I mean now remember our conversation we had about biological magnification how pollution
as it moves through ecosystems can be intensified at the top of the food chain and this is particularly
salient when we consider top order predators such as hawks and eagles and the reduction
in their population numbers.
Now one I think interesting exception to the trends that we've seen in urbanizing areas
with respect to birds of prey are peregrine falcons.
They've been an unprecedented urban success.
You know historically there have been about 4,000 breeding pairs in North America at least
as best as we could reconstruct but that number dropped to less than 300 in the 1960s as a
result of excessive use of DDT but as new regulations were implemented that reduced the amount of
DDT in the ecosystem and additional habitat restoration programs were begun and ecological
recovery was seen and now across North America we're back up to about 4,000 nesting pairs
and many of these peregrines are actually exploiting urban landscapes.
They hunt pigeons and gulls and other urban songbirds and as you probably know the peregrines
are extraordinary flyers and their strategy is to hunt from very high levels and they
dive at very high rates of speed.
It's a behavior called stooping and they can stoop at 200 miles an hour.
It's really quite extraordinary.
Now another impact that we see in urban areas are changes in productivity at different trophic
levels because there are not only changes in habitat but changes in species distribution.
So this habitat fragmentation and the lack of green space in urban areas tends to disrupt
the trophic dynamics.
There's less bottom up control in the cities.
Now remember that study that we investigated before that took place in Phoenix where they
investigated the brittle bush communities and they established exposure experiments
that remove the birds and what they were doing then was measuring its impact on herbivorous
insect populations and what they discovered remember is that those populations tended
to be regulated by avian predation.
In other words the presence of birds reduced the number of herbivorous insects.
Outside the city however in the desert communities that were not urbanized it was bottom up forces
such as resource availability of the bushes in general and the material necessary to support
those bushes that ultimately limited the number of insects.
So what we saw was a different set of controls that are in place.
In urban areas top down control is as important or more important than bottom up control.
And I want you to remember that concept because it has an important role to play when we think
about top order predators in urban ecosystems.
Although they tend not to be here their presence is felt because their role is even more important
in urban areas than it tends to be in areas outside of human domination.
So food webs become disrupted and fragile in urban areas and there are changes in stress
related factors such as temperature and nutrients.
And remember urban areas have what we call heat island effect where because of the reduced
greenery and the increased amount of impervious surfaces concrete and tar they tend to heat
up much more and that increase in heat reduces the available water supply and it changes
the environment so much so that we consider cities to have their own micro climates.
And these changes in micro climates will end up impacting the distribution and timing
of the breeding activities of birds and amphibians.
In fact a study in Ohio showed that cardinal breeding in these warmer locations they started
their breeding activities as much as 10 days earlier.
And remember when we think about bird breeding and we think about the onset of spring and
the beautiful song that birds have at song is beautiful to us but remember to the birds
they're actually in combat mode and especially for the males this causes additional stress
and the longer the breeding season the longer and more intensive the stress is and in fact
in these environments where they're starting early they're not living as long.
So it's a fascinating connection here between extending the breeding season as a result
of a possible climate change and heat island effect and what it does to the life history
patterns of these animals.
Now a case study in California which was led by Eric Seablum and a team that the findings
of which appeared in the proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences looked at this
whole phenomenon of extinction rates and habitat loss.
They can there they compared human impact on species richness in California using a
public data set of plants from 93 regions across the state.
Now they use some novel statistical models to account for human activity and they found
a couple of very interesting trends maybe not so surprising but statistically robust
that human development really moves on two axis axes in California.
It moves the highest levels of human impact are at the coast and they go down as you move
inland and they're highest at low elevations and they tend to become less of an impact
at higher elevations.
So as a result their modeling suggested that species richness was positively correlated
with elevation and distance from the coast.
So interesting outcome here.
The correlation is that as human impact was reduced species diversity was highest.
So as you move from the coast inland diversity went up and as you move from sea level up
diversity went up and that actually is the flip of what you would see or the reverse
of what you would see in California if you went back say 300 years ago before the largest
impact of humans.
You would have seen your highest diversity on the coastal regions and also at low levels.
Now we can take a look at this notion of fragmentation and the impact of human dominated landscapes
by taking a look at a chart here that describes the relationship between urbanization and
the distribution of organisms that are there and I've actually used three species as an
example ones that you're all familiar with wolves, red foxes and coyotes.
And if we take a look at the way in which human impact is distributed we can actually
think of it as a gradient and ecologists refer to this as the rural to urban gradient.
And we can imagine a transect which is a line that ecological research uses to establish
where to gather your data points.
And so we can imagine a transect that would run say from downtown of a major city and
run in a straight line out to a rural location that might be 30, 50 miles away from the center
of the city.
We could then establish along that transect population densities of humans and sample
aspects of the natural history in those various transect locations.
And so as we move from a rural to the urban core what we tend to find is that overall
species richness or the absolute number of species we'd find at either sample plot at
any sample plot would decrease as we go to more urbanized areas.
We also tend to find that the distribution of animals and plants will change although
the roles in the ecosystem will be all filled they will change.
So for instance if we think about wolves we tend to find wolves only in the most rural
areas.
They have a very narrow diet, they have a very structured social system and it requires
them to have very, very large territories to maintain their social structure and their
reproductive efficiency.
And so you're not going to find wolves in the city, it's just not going to happen because
of the kinds of ecological requirements that are necessary for their survival.
So as we go from rural to urban wolves are going to drop off pretty quickly.
In suburban habitats we tend to find red foxes as the dominant dog predator in the ecosystem
and they have more flexible social systems, a little bit more flexible diets, they can
hunt a variety of different things, most of their prey is very, very small and they can
survive in relatively small patches of habitat.
As you move towards that urban fringe, but as you move to even more urbanized areas pretty
soon the foxes disappear and what you find are coyotes and coyotes are able to exploit
urban environments, they have very, very flexible social systems, they can live in very different
sized groups and as a result they're able to exploit the various resources that humans
provide.
And in fact coyotes are in urbanized areas in the east coast of the United States tend
to be bigger than coyotes living in the rural American west and this larger size that coyotes
have as a result of genetic integration by both wolves and some evidence suggests that
the dog genes are there as well.
This larger size actually allows them to eat a wider variety of diet choices, they can
make very wide diet choices and they're not competing with any other dog species so there's
nothing that keeps them small.
So you go from these urban avoiders all the way to urban exploiters and it helps to understand
this as a model for investigating urbanized wildlife.
So the findings of research suggest that conservation efforts in biologically diverse
areas like high altitude tropical forests are likely to have a huge impact because of
the kind of impact that humans can have if they're in those areas.
But in the U.S. there needs to be a focus on low-lying lands that are converted for
agricultural uses.
Remember the study in California has pointed out that we're sort of using the areas that
would have the highest amounts of diversity.
Now only about 10% of the world's biodiversity is in these areas but habitat loss is increasing
at an alarming rate.
One of the impacts of urbanization is a channelization of streams and rivers which reduce the nutrient
exchange in urban water bodies and reduce the amount of habitat that's available for
riparian species.
Now typically the studies of channelization have focused on aquatic species usually fish
and macroinvertebrates.
But one particularly interesting study by Earl Passard and Wendell Dodge from the University
of Massachusetts at Amherst conducted studies in Vermont's White River watershed and they
found significant changes in avian species following the construction of channels.
Now the first year after the channelization of these streams the diversity fell by about
75% as most of the vegetation was destroyed and that's not unpredictable if you're going
in changing habitat sort of like after a fire there's going to be an immediate decline
but then what happens?
Well by year two the diversity was 50% to the pre-channelization counts so there was
actually some recovery.
And however the community composition changed quite a bit.
So after channelization certain species of birds like spotted sandpipers and some species
of swallows were actually more abundant after the channelization.
But other species such as warblers and virios and thrushes were much more common in areas
that weren't channelized.
So one of the impacts we see in the overall implementation of human construction is changes
in species composition.
So urban landscapes tend to be dominated by foragers that can thrive as generalists.
Remember think of our coyote example.
So existing urban species must be able to adapt to human existence.
So for example as we talked about wolves are going to be absent and coyotes tend to
be present in areas that are more urbanized.
And remember we've talked about the social difference between coyotes and wolves but
it's worth revisiting here for just a moment because it's so key to understanding why as
you step out into a city environment you might very well hear coyotes calling but not hear
wolves.
Wolves are pretty much locked into a social structure.
They have a breeding male and female, the alpha male and female then there's a series
of individuals some of which they're related to that make up this permanent pack.
And they tend to hunt very large game and their social structure is part of their ability
to acquire the prey animals that they hunt.
And so any part of that system that breaks down means that wolves aren't going to be
able to survive.
Now you compare that to coyotes which have a very flexible social system.
They can be in relatively large packs.
They can survive as single individuals.
They can survive as a single core breeding family.
And the fact that they have very, very wide diet choice means that they are able to adapt
to the kinds of changes that are taking place in urbanized areas.
Now one interesting aspect of our own research has been the impact of the temporal spacing
of habitat used by coyotes.
So when I chat with folks in neighborhoods that I'm doing the research, first of all
they see us driving around with antennas sticking out of our cars or students walking
around with backpacks that have antennas coming out of them.
And of course people wonder what we're up to.
And so it always generates a conversation and we carry information that we hand out
to folks as well.
But in this conversation folks will say, I never knew there were coyotes in my backyard.
And should I be worried?
And of course we talk about strategies for managing wildlife in urban areas.
And for the most part the risk from coyotes is very, very small, especially to humans.
A little bit higher risk to things like cats and small dogs.
But we say that the successful coyotes in urban areas are those that survive without
people knowing that they're there.
And so what happens is coyotes essentially use the same spaces that humans do but they
just change their time clocks.
So humans tend to punch into the outdoors in the morning after dawn and by dark they're
in their houses and so they punch out and that's when coyotes show up for work.
And so coyotes are there using the habitat when people aren't.
And so literally, especially if there's been snow or there's sand that we're tracking,
you can see these human footprints and then later in the day the coyote footprints walk
right over the top of them and they're happening at different times of the day and neither
species is encountering each other directly.
Now a study by Georgian Crooks from the Journal of Biological Conservation found a significant
variation among a whole variety of species that were using an urban park in Irvine, California.
And they found similar kinds of things that we were discovering in our own research.
Here what they did, it was a very clever study.
They set up a series of game cameras and these are cameras that you can put on a tree or
on a tripod and they will be triggered by the presence of movement around them.
Similar to the way a garage door opener, a garage door safety works.
You know, if you hit your garage door and it's starting to go down and a child is walking
out, the garage door stops.
It's tripped by an infrared beam.
You can use the same kind of interrupted signal to take pictures.
So they set up these game cameras and of course the game cameras are going to take pictures
of anything that goes by.
So they were taking a picture not only of coyotes and mule deer and bobcats, but also
humans and horses and dogs and children and bicyclists and it was fascinating.
So they had this huge data set where they had the exact time and location of when these
photographs were taken.
So when you sort them out, what they discovered was there was almost a complete temporal niche
created by the domestic organisms that use the park versus the wild organisms that use
the park.
So they looked at the overall daytime photographs and they found that for coyotes only about
a quarter of the activities were recorded during the day and same for mule deer and
about 30% for bobcat.
But then if you take a look at the data, if you see when the human activities were, it
was about 95% during the day.
And same is true for horses and same is true for dogs and the other species that were domestic
that were using it.
So really quite interesting so that the human activities in this case that included both
humans riding horses and bringing their dogs and so forth all occurred during the day and
the coyotes and mule deer and bobcats use the park at night.
And that has a way of actually reducing the impact.
So let's think about human activities a little bit more and one of the most important aspects
that humans do is that they change the character of the ecosystem in which animals are trying
to live.
Now we think of human impact as habitat destruction and pollution and those things are important
but activities in general can actually make habitats either unusable or less usable for
organisms.
And two of the things are increases in noise and light pollution.
And that can force organisms to shift either the temporal characteristics of their behavior
or leave altogether.
And it increases what we call the spatial heterogeneity of the ecosystem.
In other words, they're not only their differences in water availability and differences in land
characteristics but there are times when it's noisy and times when it's light.
And if you start to add too many variables it simply overwhelms the organisms that can
live there.
And so what happens is that green spaces become very isolated ions of habitat and really
a sea of concrete and this kind of geospatial marooning if you will can cause local extinction
of populations.
And so habitat fragmentation leads to a loss of local populations.
We call that extirpation because it's not the whole species that's going extinct, it's
the local population.
So this extirpation results in reduced gene flow among populations.
Now another aspect there are changes in spatial and temporal scales associated with human
impact.
Organisms living in urban landscapes will shift the timing and space of their social
activities.
So coyotes are using the park at a different time and under certain instances they won't
use the park at all.
One of the interesting relationships that we've found is that not only are coyotes adjusting
their behaviors associated with humans but there's another predator that's using the
same space that has to adjust to the coyotes and those are the feral cats.
And feral cats are house cats that have escaped and are living free and are actually have
sustainable urban populations in a city like Boston.
It's estimated that there are in excess of 25,000 feral cats and so it's an entire predator
community and these coyotes and feral cats are also dividing up their time to avoid competing
with one another.
So they can't hunt at the same time because they tend to be hunting in the same space.
So scientists in Phoenix and Baltimore are part of this long term ecological program to
study urban ecology and one of the things that the scientists in Phoenix are doing is
studying the effects of humans on biodiversity and nutrient cycles and productivity.
And at the Phoenix location they're studying the impact of bird exclusion on urban and
rural trophic dynamics.
We've investigated that before and remember when these birds are excluded from the brittle
bush in these music yards and desert remnants the insect herbivores increased in the urban
areas suggesting that top down control in the rural areas no such relationship existed.
And so when we think about comparing the trophic dynamics in urban versus rural systems in
the surrounding rural areas remember we had this bottom up force and in the urban areas
we had a top down and so if we think about this challenge it reminds us again that these
urban areas are so different in fundamental ways from more rural areas.
So you know coyotes they're increasing in urban areas partly because they're able to
find what they need and their generalist enables them to survive in these urban areas.
They can survive in a variety of environmental conditions you know urban areas have large
concentrations of refuse or waste.
So this garbage ends up being a free lunch for the coyotes who have a really varied diet.
Now mountain lions are very interesting and challenging and potentially complex challenge
for us to manage in urban areas.
You know as humans move farther outside of the city and the density of humans increases
the amount of suitable habitat for mountain lions is really decreasing and mountain lions
require a large amount of undeveloped land for their territory and they are not adapting
well to the increase of human activity in their territory.
You know human encroachment on suitable mountain lion habitat has increased and mountain lions
have to travel farther out of their territory to find food and human population in the west
has exploded.
You know in 1940 the population was about 14 million and by 2004 in mountain lion territory
where there are 60 million people that are living and only about 6 to 9 percent of the
mountain lions total range actually lies within protected areas.
So and many of these areas are too small for even one animals home range.
Mountain lions retreat out of their normal space and into cities for suburban areas in
search of food and California's lion population has been stable at about four to six thousand
for a decade and so this is in consideration of expanding a human population.
So reported sightings of tripled and fatal human attacks although remain rare but between
you know 1890 and 1990 there were about 43 mountain lion attacks and that's a significant
amount 11 of those are fatal.
Now statistically snakes, bears, sharks, alligators are more likely to cause injury to humans
and you're a hundred thousand times more likely to be injured in an automobile than you are
attacked by a mountain lion but these perceived risks can be very very high.
Now as we think about strategies for investing in this challenge around urban wildlife it's
clear that our response is going to have to be to live with wildlife as opposed to simply
trying to remove them because removal strategies tend to be counterproductive.
Now in our next lecture we're going to be considering ecological resiliency and in that
lecture and in other lectures to follow we're going to pick up on this strategy of how to
manage these wildlife challenges in urban areas.
So until then thank you.
