Hello, and welcome back. In our previous lecture, we investigated how the human impacts on ecosystems
and how changes in human land use practices can have pretty profound effects on the ecology
of a system. On today's lecture, we're going to consider why that really matters. We're
going to look at the issue of community stability over time. You know, community measures such
as biodiversity and disturbance, habitat fragmentation, and invasion by non-native species are important
metrics that we use as ecologists to judge the health of a habitat. Pulsars and presses
in ecosystems combine to make these systems dynamic. Now, some disturbances such as fires
and floods can actually enhance ecosystem diversity. We'll also investigate how anthropogenic
additions to these ecosystems can threaten the delicate balance of ecosystem resiliency.
We'll look at the fire ecology of temperate forests and consider the current crisis of
forest fire management. Now, to begin this conversation, I want to share with you a story
about my first encounter with sand plain grassland fires in our local community. The
idea of managing sand plains, which are rare vegetated habitats and coastal communities
in Massachusetts and New York, they're particularly novel to places like Cape Cod and Long Island
and the island systems in between. And sand plain grasslands basically come up because
there's so little organic material in the soil, it only supports a certain community
of plants. But those plants become endemic, meaning they're found only in these kinds
of ecosystems and insects and birds that live there also become relatively rare. So there's
an effort to maintain those because over time, especially in human dominated landscapes where
the nitrogen levels tend to go up artificially because of fertilizer runoff and so forth,
sand plain grasslands get taken over by herbaceous shrubs and eventually woody areas. So the
question is, how do we go about managing them? And when one of the first management
sites to be used was a little area on Cape Cod, it was actually adjacent to a local grass
strip airport. And one day I was driving through town and I saw the smoke pouring up and it
was right near the airport. And so my first impression was, oh my goodness, one of the
small plains that flies out of there has gone down. So I tore over there and of course it
was, it was biologists who were carefully burning the grasses around the airport, which
is the traditional way in which these sand plain grasslands are maintained. It was actually
an interesting foray into management because it turns out that areas like airports and
golf courses and other human dominated landscapes are actually perfect places to put in sand
plain grasslands. And now across these coasts, we tend to see that these grasslands are maintained
very close to areas of intensive human use. And you can intersperse areas of golf courses
and around the roughs, areas around the edges of airports are perfect for the grasses because
you can't have trees in either instance. So let's think about this issue of community
stability. Stability describes the number and distribution of species within an ecosystem.
You know, biodiversity is the result of all of the colonization and local extinctions
that take place. Colonization adds species to systems, extinction removes them. And we
should begin our conversation of stability by examining biodiversity. You know, biodiversity
is a measure varies considerably among various taxonomic groups. Now, I think the most durable
definition of biodiversity comes from calicot and biological diversity is the variety of
life at every hierarchical level and spatial scale of biological organization, meaning
genes within populations, populations within species, species within communities, communities
within landscapes, landscapes within biomes and biomes within the biosphere. And I direct
your attention to a graphic that helps you to see this as we move through these different
scales. We have relatively small scales all the way up to the global scale in which we
can measure and assess biodiversity. And it's important that these are measured in all the
different scales. Now, what biodiversity assessments are really measuring is something we call evenness.
And I direct your attention to another graphic here that helps us think this through. Now,
you'll notice in these two graphics and two examples, there are four species that are
inhabiting this make believe ecosystem. So the four species in both. So the absolute number
of species is the same. But I think you'll notice when you look at the graphic that the
distribution of the species is quite different. In one of the graphics, there's a dominance
of one species at the cost of the distribution of the other. In the other graphic, you see
they're much more evenly distributed. Now, from the standpoint of biodiversity, the one
in which there is a more even distribution is considered to be the healthier one. And
the analogy we use is that of a comb. You take a comb and you turn it on its back. The
tines or the teeth of the comb are even. And if you lay a piece of paper across that, those
tines would all touch the paper. In a theoretical ecological sense from the standpoint of biodiversity,
the fact that each time supports the paper is a healthier system. One time can be removed
and the paper still supported. However, if the tines are at very, very different lengths,
that paper is not supported very well. And a single time removal, if it's a critical
species can cause the system to fall apart. So understanding that ecosystems vary over
time and that there are dynamic forces of pulses and presses at work, we assume that
at any time that an ecosystem is at maximum evenness, it is able to withstand future impacts.
And there are essentially two different quantitative measures of biodiversity and all measure the
degree of evenness in the group. There's the Shannon Weaver Index. There's the so-called
Simpsons Index. And both of those are indices that we apply statistically to ecosystems.
And in doing so, we can get some measure of the degree of evenness. And the different approaches,
the different statistical tools are sensitive to different kinds of changes. Now, existing
biological diversity is literally what happens when evolution runs its course. This typically
takes place over very, very long periods of time. Remember, life on Earth is at least
three and a half billion years old. Now, one measure of biodiversity, the most fundamental
measure, is species richness. And that's the actual number of species that are encountered
when you sample a particular habitat. And typically you're measuring one taxonomic group
at a time and comparing it. So for instance, tree species diversity follows a distinct
pattern of increasing diversity as you sample closer to the equator and in an easterly direction
as the climate becomes warmer and wetter. Lower latitudes are more species rich for
almost all taxa, especially birds. And lower latitudes are warmer and typically more stable
because the lack of a true winter creates extraordinary opportunities for co-evolution.
Co-evolution is a subject we cover in real detail in another lecture. And it's co-evolution
relationship between the degree to which species interact with one another and the stability
of the ecosystem is our key aspects of the relationship with each other. Now, relative
abundance is the measure of individual, number of individuals of each species. And heterogeneity
is highest when there are more species and they were equally abundant. Now we also have
other measures of diversity, so-called alpha diversity, is the number of species in a given
patch or community. And beta diversity is the degree of variation be from patch to patch.
Now, genetic diversity is actually a critical part of gene pools. And when we think of genetic
diversity, it's actually held in gene pools, not as individuals, but as populations. And
we've encountered this and will encounter it before again in the course. But when we
think about ecological processes, we in some respects have to give up a little bit about
our understanding the importance of the individual. Remember, we're important in ecological stage
play because of the genes that we hold and the impact that we have during our lifespan.
But our lifespans are short compared to the history of the information carried in our
genetic material. So what we're really measuring at the population level is the ability of
genes to move from generation to generation. The understanding of biodiversity got an incredible
boost in the arm. In 1982, when a young biologist at the time, Terry Irwin, who was with the
National Museum of Natural History, developed a fogging technique for assessing insect
biodiversity and tree canopies. So what he did, he literally had this device that had
an insecticide and like a giant bazooka, he was able to spray into the trees and down
like rain would come the insects that were living in those trees. Now, yes, those insects were
sacrificed, but traditionally when insect surveys are taken, you take samples from them.
And it's part of what you do. So what was amazing is that from one particular forest tree in the
tropical rainforest, Irwin found 163 species of beetles that were endemic only to that tree species.
And no one had expected that extraordinary level of biodiversity. Now, from these counts and others,
it opened up an entire world of new understanding about the complexity and interrelatedness of
organisms and current assessments have counted approximately 1.4 million named species.
Now, species diversity is highest among the insects, about 750,000 named species so far.
Other animals are about 280,000. They're a quarter million species of plants, somewhere in the
vicinity right now of about 70,000 distinct species of fungi, 60,000 species of protists,
and about 5,000 distinctly different species or strains of prokaryotes.
So the key question besides the wonder at those extraordinary numbers, and by the way, those are
very, very conservative numbers. That's just what we've been able to catalog so far in the complex
environment. Most conservation biologists or folks who work in biodiversity think that that number
represents somewhere between about 10 and 30% of the actual diversity that's out there.
But some of the key questions related to our understanding of the system involve ideas like,
what are the forces that drive the diversity of organisms we see on the planet?
And there are essentially six theoretical models that drive biodiversity.
First of all, there's the evolutionary speed model that demonstrates that more time and rapid
evolution permits new species formation. In other words, the longer an ecosystem's there,
the more opportunity there is for additional differentiation.
Another revolves around geographical area or the fact that larger areas allow for more complex
and varied habitats that provide additional niches or opportunities for specialization
for organisms to inhabit, and hence evolve new species.
There's the ambient energy hypothesis. This kind of rationale or idea is that fewer species can
tolerate unfavorable conditions.
And so this kind of force works to either create speciation or suppress diversity.
It's believed that productivity or richness is probably limited by the partitioning or production
of energy movement among species.
Now, another model suggests that some level of disturbance, some sort of moderate natural
disturbances, will tend to retard competitive exclusion.
So that, for instance, if there's enough disturbance not to destroy the system but to keep any one
species from becoming dominant, then you maintain higher levels of evenness.
Competition also affects the development of niches, and predation also retards competitive
exclusion. So competitive competition and predation at appropriate levels also help to
maintain evenness.
Now this is a course about a planet in trouble, so we wouldn't be having this conversation
about biodiversity if there wasn't some compelling reason for us to take action around the ecological
knowledge that we're gaining.
And disturbance and habitat fragmentation, both of which are current extraordinary rates,
are the world's largest threat to biodiversity.
Now, extinction, which is what happens when biodiversity collapses,
extinction is not new to ecosystems.
Our historic data suggests that somewhere in the vicinity of 99% of all the species that ever
evolved on Earth have become extinct.
And there have been five major extinction events in our history.
We're actually in the middle of a sixth, and the sixth one is anthropogenic and origin.
If you take a look at the figure in front of you, you can see the peaks as they occurred
back through history.
About 400 million years ago was a particular peak in extinction.
Again, about 250 million years ago, another smaller peak after that.
Finally, about 65 million years ago, an additional peak that most of us are familiar with.
It's the peak of extinction that ultimately spelled the end of the great era of dinosaurs on the planet
and actually lucky for us, the emergence of the available niches for the evolution of mammals.
We're in the middle of a sixth extinction phenomenon that is as impressive and rapid as any of the
previous ones, and that one happens to be caused by anthropogenic impact,
our own destruction of ecosystems.
Destruct deforestation, which is one of the key contributors to biodiversity loss,
is a very complex problem with deep roots in both developed and developing nations.
This problem, these deep roots, are distributed worldwide.
One of the key things is overconsumption in industrialized countries.
Foreign debt, which is owed to rich nations.
Human poverty in ecosystems leads to over extraction, unequal ownership of land,
human overpopulation, and many underlying social problems that give impetus to deforestation.
And this results in significant world declines in birds and mammals, especially in tropical forests.
Now, one of the tools that helps us to understand this is a program called the Living Planet Index,
which measures various populations of over 1,600 vertebrate species around the world.
And if we take a look at a few of the indices, we can get an idea, a glimpse of the impacts that are taking place.
First, let's take a look at the Living Bird Index.
You can see that the beginning of the index as it was being measured was in 1970,
and you actually see for a period of time the Living Index improved as endangered species acts
and reduction in the use of pesticides began to be implemented into the world community.
And as such, we saw the actual Living Planet Index of Birds increase for a short period of time,
but by the mid-1980s, the levels began to decline significantly,
and we are seeing continued decline in the conditions around the world for birds.
And much of that is actually around migratory songbirds, which are having a tremendously difficult time
as certain areas in their migratory root become disrupted.
And this is something we talk about in detail in some of our other lectures.
The Mammal Living Planet Index also indicates a brief recovery in the 1980s,
followed by consistent decline as habitats continued to be degraded worldwide.
And probably the most shocking and, as an ecologist, the most worrisome aspect of the Living Planet Indices
is the decline in tropical forest ecosystems.
They have been in steep decline, and tropical forests hold most of the world's biodiversity,
or at least a very significant portion of the world's biodiversity,
and the ecosystem services provided by tropical forests,
the capital that that provides to us is almost uncalculably high,
and loss of tropical forest is really a significant problem for us.
Now coral reefs have been particularly hard hit over the past two decades,
with as much as 20% physically lost and an equal amount degraded.
Other areas of significant degradation include our warm water marshes,
which have been devastated by development,
and a third of all the world's mangrove swamps have been destroyed.
Now fire is an important driver of changes in ecosystems,
and many ecosystems have actually evolved to rely on periodic burns.
Remember we said that some level of disturbance is actually helpful
in maintaining this notion of evenness within ecosystems.
Now some abiotic components of an ecosystem are actually activated by fires
in those ecosystems that are so adapted.
Now when fires move through a forest, they remove leaves,
which typically prevent water from reaching the ground.
Now the raindrops actually hit the ground, penetrate the soils,
and begin to alter the geochemistry of the soils.
This changes the temperature regimes, alters the soil geochemistry,
and sometimes this results in nutrient loss,
but in fire ecosystems this also mobilizes the resources and shifts them around,
changes their storage compartments if you will.
And this release of nutrients and ash tend to sweeten the soil,
making it less acidic, which makes it more palatable for new plants to grow.
Now fire also impacts the biotic components of an ecosystem.
In fact some plants can't even complete their life cycles
unless the heat of fire is there to roast their seeds.
Actually in this case it's just to allow them to initiate germination.
You know trees that are shade intolerant can't even grow unless they get a light gap,
and fire can provide that service for them.
And this includes some of the slowest growing trees such as the giant sequoias.
They need assistance from fire to have a suitable light gap in order to grow.
These gaps that are created by fire tend to reset the clock of competition,
and they give sun loving trees a new chance to compete with the shade tolerant seedlings.
And this helps to maintain the diversity, the so-called evenness of an ecosystem,
which is a key measure of how we consider healthy ecosystems, which we will consider later.
You know this allows new seedlings, this light gap allows new seedlings to compete
with more shade tolerant seedlings of other species and establish themselves.
Now if humans choose to alter these processes which we have consistently done,
then the suppression of normal fires sets up ecosystems for trouble later.
Invasive species are actually a hallmark of ecosystems not allowed to burn.
Because the invaders do not have to adapt to fire, they carry none of the burdensome metabolism
of fire resistance and can grow faster out competing the fire tolerant species.
And over time, the species mix begins to resemble a completely different forest.
Then if fire does happen, the fires burn hotter because of the buildup of fuel and causes tremendous damage.
Now let's look at a case study.
Tivo Toinenin and Janet Cotejo from the University of Jarviscola in Finland
published work in the Journal of Biodiversity Conservation.
And what they did for this work is they set up a series of experiments
where they could recreate the natural disturbances of their native boreal forests.
What they did was to measure the effects of controlled burning
and dead wood availability on the impacts of beetle diversity.
Now remember, insects tend to be very, very important indicators of ecosystem health.
And so when we measure evenness, you want to go into a community that has multiple species to begin with.
And so we tend not to measure top order predators, we tend to measure birds or insects or plants
because there is a wider variety of them to begin with.
So in the area of feniscandia that they're working, there are at least 30 species of insects
that are entirely dependent on forest fires to complete their life cycles.
And these young, successional stages of forests, those emerging after a burn,
are critical habitat for saprocylic beetles.
Saprocylic is a fancy word meaning that they eat dead wood.
So these habitats are built by forest fires and the large amount of dead wood that builds up in light gaps.
This is the kind of environment that occurs naturally in the feniscandian ecosystems
that are exploited by these insects.
So they investigated two restoration practices on beetle diversity.
First was the strategy of partial harvesting and controlled burning.
And they also then created two different volumes of dead wood.
Well, the results were pretty interesting and I think quite engaging.
First of all, species richness and abundance was higher for both the saprocylic
and surprisingly non-saprocylic beetles once these light gaps were opened up.
And both manipulation strategies had strong positive impacts on biodiversity.
Now the rarer species, especially those dead wood eaters, were most abundant on the burn sites.
And species richness was positively correlated with burn intensity.
These plots had the most rare and the red listed, which are the species of special concern in Finland.
According to these and many other studies, fire can be successfully used to restore degraded systems
that once depended on natural fires for rebirth and renewal.
Now another study by a team from Lithuanian University was led by Vitis Marosas
and studies the dynamics of vegetation regrowth in pine forests
after the surface fires that will naturally move through them.
Now they investigated the changes in ground vegetation.
They looked at the field layer, which are the herbs and the tree seedlings, saplings, the mosses, the lichens.
And they're interested also in the regeneration of tree species.
Now biodiversity in pine forest ecosystems is typically fire dependent
and fire had the following fundamental impacts according to their research.
First of all, just decrease the shrub layer as you would expect as it burns across the surface.
Now the early successional stages after the fire actually boosted species richness as new species were recruited,
especially in the areas of the highest burn impact.
There was a decline of the herbaceous and shrub species early on, remember, because a fire had its biggest impact there,
but that was all mostly recovered after five years.
The mosses, which have a very complex life cycle, required a little bit longer to recover about nine years.
Now invasive species are also an important consideration when we think about maintaining biodiversity.
Now unfortunately approximately 50,000 exotic species have made their way into the United States
and about 5,000 of those species are plants.
In general, invasive species tend to degrade local ecosystems.
Now a really cool study by a researcher from Yale University, Kristen Saltenstahl,
which was published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
investigated this impact of something called cryptic invasion,
in this case by a non-native genotype of the common reed fragmites Australis into North America.
Now cryptic invasion is a kind of interesting.
They typically go undetected because the outward phenotype of the invasive species matches the native strain.
We don't think there's a problem going on, but when you look at fragmites or Asian reed,
it's been marching across North America undeterred for the past 150 years, essentially trashing coastal ecosystems.
And what Saltenstahl found was that it was the mobile or cryptic species that was the invader
and the interloper strain was displacing the native variety and taking over novel habitats.
Now Saltenstahl used some non-coating regions of DNA in the chlorophyll genes for the species
to track the movements of the different populations.
Now in New England, where fragmites dominance of coastal ecosystems is most severe,
the invasive strain has completely replaced the native strain.
Now in my own home community, we are forever chasing invasive species.
Our marshes are being choked by fragmites and our uplands are being completely overtaken by bamboo.
And in part of my work in the community, I've served on conservation commissions and so forth.
And a significant portion of what we do in ecological restoration in human dominated areas like Massachusetts
are simply to try and undo some of the things that humans have done.
And let me tell you, it's a lot easier to try and manage ecosystems before the invasive species get there
than it is to go through the process of removing them.
It can be done and in fact very recently a federal grant allowed for the development of a new underpass
under a road that was going over a tidal creek and it allowed the volume of the tidal creek to reach its historic volume.
And that extra salt water that was coming in twice a day on the tide allowed the back areas of marsh to flood more
which made them more salty, which drove the fragmites back.
So we actually recovered something like 17 or 20 acres of salt marsh that had been lost to the invading fragmites.
It's sort of a small but I think valuable victory in maintaining the biodiversity of evenness.
Now the impact of humans can be overwhelming and in the next lecture we will investigate the human impacts in ecological communities.
So until then, thank you.
Thank you.
