Hi, and welcome back.
You know, in our last lecture, we investigated the basics of biodiversity, and sort of considered
how the systems operate, what are the ways we measure, what are the different scales.
Well, in this particular conversation, I want to take a look in some more detail at the
impact of humans.
You know, human populations have surged over the past 100 years.
There's been a demographic shift from rural areas to the cities.
Changes in human demography, these urban areas have expanded to accommodate additional
residents.
You know, human land use practices can have a significant positive or negative effect
on local and regional biodiversity.
We're going to investigate the role of green space and habitat restoration will be considered
as tools of mitigation and enhancement.
You know, the impact of non-native species in rare ecosystems can be a challenging problem
for both the stakeholders, the people who live there, and also for land managers.
You know, I want to begin our conversation today by trying to create a linkage between
human impact, biodiversity, and even the notions that we have about trying to protect species.
As I mentioned before, our research is focused, at least part of it, on a barrier beach system
on the east coast of the United States called Sandy Neck.
It's on the north side of Cape Cod.
It's the cold water side of Cape Cod.
It's the southernmost extreme of the Gulf of Maine.
It's where the Arctic water makes its final southern plunge along the east coast of the
United States.
It's a very, very dynamic and beautiful ecosystem.
Well, on the barrier beach system that's there, it is inhabited by the toad that you see there.
It's a fowler's toad.
And fowler's toads live in this very harsh environment.
They need breeding pools in order to complete their life cycle in the spring.
And one of the challenges in areas like Cape Cod that are so heavily visited by tourists,
we have a full-time population of about 150,000 people, and that goes up to close to a million
people in the summer.
So you have all these people coming to Cape Cod and where do people want to go?
They want to go down to the beaches.
That's what we're known for, and that's some of the most beautiful habitat in America.
But for the critters that are trying to live there, especially animals as rare as a fowler's
toad, it's a particular challenge.
And so in trying to mitigate the impact of humans, it has become a practice to plant
additional beach grass to try and stabilize the dunes.
That all sounds great, right?
The problem is that these toads need open sand.
And if you plant too much beach grass, you actually can have a negative impact on the
species you're trying to protect.
And so I think it's an opening volley in a conversation that we will have about the
impacts, both positive and negative, in the way that humans have in ecosystems, even when
they're trying to have positive impacts.
These human land use practices can have significant impacts, as we've said, both positive and
negative.
And this can occur all the way from local to regional biodiversity scales.
Now habitat fragmentation poses the largest threat to urban habitat.
As we said before, there were nearly one billion acres of mature forest habitat when the pilgrims
first set foot in North America in the early 17th century.
Now about two-thirds to three-quarters of that remain, but most of the old growth forest
is gone.
And what remains is quite different in structure.
This reduction in habitat severely limits bird populations.
And typically, parks in human-dominated areas are designed either with an impervious landscape
at the bottom, or they can be designed with a naturalistic relief.
Why are we talking about these two things together?
We're talking about the loss of ancient forests and parks, because it turns out that as we
have lost this native habitat, we are compelled to try and rescue, if you will, some of these
lost ecosystems by creating them through human processes.
So the latter design philosophy, where parks can be more naturalistic, can actually enhance
avian biodiversity by allowing for a more heterogeneous environment.
Now a study that was conducted in Spain investigated bird species richness in the city of Madrid,
and it found a negative association with the amount of paved ground and the park boundaries.
The biodiversity declined as the fraction of pavement increases.
Now that shouldn't come as all that big a surprise as you pour more concrete.
You have less room for your shrub and grass layers, and therefore you have less habitat
available for birds.
But if your primary concern in designing parks is only about the movement of people through
the park, or the ability of law enforcement personnel to be able to see from their patrol
cars all the way across the park, so there's nothing in the line of sight, well then your
response is going to be, well, we need to put down mostly hard surfaces with very little
herbaceous or shrub layers.
And that's the point.
If we can add to the equation the importance of biodiversity and the ecosystem services
that those animals provide when they're there, then that becomes a factor, and I would argue
as an ecologist and a citizen of my community, a critical factor in thinking about what our
park design should be like.
And the study from Madrid and from other cities indicate that you can have a powerful
effect on local biodiversity based upon the way that you design your landscape.
Plant biodiversity in cities can be influenced by a variety of factors, and one of the most
extraordinary investigations that we'll talk about in this series has to do with linking
of social issues to biodiversity, in this case human wealth.
Now variation of biodiversity has long been attributed to resource availability, and when
we talk about resource availability, we're talking about the resources to the animals,
the abiotic and biotic components.
But in human dominated landscapes, family income and housing age actually have been powerful
explanatory forces for understanding biodiversity.
Diane Hope and her colleagues have been studying at the Phoenix Long Term Ecological Research
Site, and their findings have been published in the Proceedings of the National Academy
of Science, and they are called, they refer to the study or the impacts, what they call
the luxury effect.
And what they did here was to investigate various neighborhoods and look at the median
family income in those neighborhoods, and then look at the degree of variation or the
degree of biodiversity of perennial plant genera in the public spaces in those neighborhoods.
And they measured at the level of plant genus as opposed to species, because of the species
level especially plants in highly urbanized areas or many different strains, so it can
confound your measure of biodiversity.
Think back to these indices that we talked about in the last lecture, we have to be very
clear about our taxonomic group.
So they measured to the level of genus.
What they found is that as the neighborhoods had higher wealth, the plants, the community
had higher plant diversity.
And this was not in the private gardens, this was in the public space.
And this was actually a very, very interesting finding, because it's suggested, and they
took many samples, it suggests that human social forces can have a significant impact
on something as fundamental as plant biodiversity.
And for those of us who have for a long time been considering how important it is to think
holistically in ecology, and to think about the biogeophysical and the human social forces
together, this was one of the very first analyses that allowed us to look at human social dynamics
and the effect on biodiversity.
And the proceedings of the National Academy is one of the most prestigious journals.
So I think most of us who work in the field had a sense of pride that this paper was published
there and the work was recognized as being groundbreaking, not only in the direct findings,
but groundbreaking in that it was analyzing data in a new way.
Now in the same city, Kinzig and her colleagues studied both the effect of neighborhood wealth
on animal and plant biodiversity.
Now previous studies along these lines were structured on what we call an urban to rural
gradient, and the focus was always on the biogeophysical variable, in this case the
degree of modification to the landscape.
So typically if scientists were doing these kind of studies they would lay a transect,
and a transect is the physical space that you're going to take your samples from, sometimes
transects are straight lines, I mean the formal definition of a transect is a straight line,
but in ecology the transect is the root that you lay out when you're going to take samples
within a system.
And traditionally that in an urban to rural gradient you'd sort of put your imaginary
tape measure down in the center of the city and you'd go straight out for some amount
of time.
We're going to see that later on today when we look at some additional amphibian studies,
and you would gather data from in the middle of the urban area all the way out to some
rural endpoint in your study, and you would look for gradients.
And that was a traditional way that we were investigating cities, because in essence we
were thinking of cities as the other.
So there was nature, and there was the city, as though they were somehow in different universes.
And we're going to talk about this in much more detail when we talk about urban ecology,
because urban ecology fuses what were two disparate communities of thought and bring
them together, that cities are as legitimate an ecosystem as any other place.
Whether at the top of a mountain or at the bottom of the ocean, cities are also ecosystems.
So building on this work, Kinzig specifically investigated perennial plant diversity in
parks, assuming that there would be a top-down effect because the planting decisions in parks
are made by municipalities, and they investigated four domains.
The second was perennial plant diversity in neighborhoods, assuming that individual neighbors
make decisions about their own yards.
So that's sort of a bottom-up control by individual homeowners.
They looked at bird diversity in parks.
Birds are very mobile, so they should be a little less sensitive to the wealth effects
of neighborhoods, and then bird diversity in neighborhoods which we expect would be
more sensitive to wealth.
So here's the hypothesis.
If the socioeconomic variable is powerful as an explanatory tool, it should be most
significant for neighborhood plant diversity, then neighborhood avian diversity, then park
avian diversity, and finally park plant diversity.
Well the findings were quite interesting.
When you look at the display of data, whether they're measuring neighborhood plants or neighborhood
birds or park plants or park birds, all of their findings showed a positive correlation
between the wealth of the neighborhood and the degree of biodiversity.
It was really quite a stunning outcome that suggests how important the socioeconomic variable
is in considering the impact on the physical system.
Now the exact mechanisms haven't been worked out.
Our wealthy neighborhoods, is there more discretionary funds available within families or political
pressure to spend more money in parks so that they're more biologically diverse?
Does it have to do with the rate of ownership and turnover?
If our renters more or less likely than homeowners to invest in gardens, I mean these kind of
things are all important questions.
And traditionally those kinds of questions have been the domain of sociology, and the
biodiversity has been the domain of the ecologists, and this new model, the ISSC model for thinking
about this integrated science for society and the environment.
It's bringing together these communities of thought, because ultimately if we're going
to make things more sustainable, we need to have these communities of scholars and participants
working together.
Because what we see now, the sort of mess that we have ourselves in, is that the current
development pattern of ex-urban sprawl is ecologically damaging.
The majority of the world's population now live in cities, two-thirds of the citizens
of the United States do so.
But the way in which our cities are growing, the way in which we're fragmenting the habitat,
and the way in which cities grow is incredibly destructive.
I mean just as an example, and we could choose from almost any major city in the United States,
but we're going to choose Los Angeles because it has long been the poster child for urban
sprawl.
In the period of time from 1970 to 1990, which was a boom time of growth in Los Angeles,
the population grew by almost 50 percent.
But the amount of land used grew by 300 percent, extraordinary, and this is happening across
the country, Chicago, New York, even these old legacy cities are growing in the same way.
So that's an example of how human land use can modify biodiversity.
Let's think, to get a better idea, let's sort of flip this over and say, what about human
behavior?
And we're actually going to take a non-urban model here for a moment.
As a comparison, think about how humans can alter populations in a top-down manner, in
this case, through hunting.
Now trophy hunting has altered the biotic structure of populations.
And Coltman and colleagues studied bighorn sheep on Ram Mountain in Alberta, in Canada.
And the population characteristics of males changed significantly over the course of only
30 years.
Let's take a look at some of these data.
What the scientists in this study did was to look over an extended period of time running
from about 1975 to the present time.
And they looked at the average weight and horn length in males in the population that
was in their study area.
And what they saw was a fairly extraordinary, continuous decline in the weight of the individuals,
which at the start of the study were somewhere in the vicinity of sort of 85 kilograms per
individual, and by the end of the study was down below 60 kilograms.
And they looked at horn length in this species and found that at the beginning of their study,
horn length was somewhere in the vicinity of 65 centimeters in length, and by the end
of the study, it was down in the 40 centimeter range.
I mean, this is a profound difference in the structure of the population.
And of course, genetically, what's happening here, remember, are conversation about biodiversity.
These animals that are being shot are being shot because they are trophy individuals.
They represent arguably the most important collection of genes in the population, and
they are being taken out of the population.
So not only did the impacts of hunting change the physical dynamics of the population, it's
altering the behavior as well.
See the males with the highest fitness capacity, i.e., the breeding value, those that were
the biggest and had the largest horns, rarely lived beyond three years of age.
This was an example of intensive directional selection for small horn size.
The big males with big horns were being shot early in their lives.
So this is a very, very significant change in the pressure that, in this case, human
induced selection is placing on the population.
And so over time, that population is likely, the hypothesis is, that this population will
likely become locally extirpated by this kind of activity.
Now as noted before, we talked about invasion by non-native species as another significant
threat to overall community structure.
Non-native species or exotic species that have become able to survive and reproduce
outside the habitats where they evolved or spread naturally.
That's our definition of an invasive species.
Now many times, non-native species are brought by human activity either intentionally or
unintentionally.
These invasive species are those introduced species that spread widely or quickly and
cause harm either to the environment or directly to human health with respect to the interactions
that humans and these animals have.
They have a direct impact to humans with respect to the biodiversity of the community
in which they live.
Now gathering these data are hard because we're talking about legacy data here.
We're talking about the impact of invasive species.
So for instance, the Asian reed that we talked about, Fragmites in the last lecture, that's
a pretty extraordinary example.
The invasive part of that species is only about the new haplotype that came in is about
a hundred years or so old, maybe a little older than that, and in that period of time
it has swept up and down the east coast of the United States.
And we actually can see measurable differences in the lifetimes of humans.
But often the impact of species take a longer period of time, and so it's harder for us
to gather those data because the concern about invasive species and biodiversity is relatively
new.
Remember, this is a young science.
And so the kinds of data we wish were collected a hundred years ago are being collected now
and it is our grandchildren that will be able to make the measures that we wish we could
do.
But there are certain instances when we have so-called legacy data that we can use.
And one of those studies was conducted, the data were collected, the study was conducted,
by Drayton and Primac at Boston University.
It was, they were investigating long-term changes in a plant community in the middle
sex fells, which is a thousand-acre tract of land in the Boston metropolitan area.
It is an area that has been forested for a long period of time, and it's near enough
to the city that it gets visited by lots of people.
It's an important recreational area.
It's an important location that people go to for the opportunity to get away from the
sort of noise and crowd of the city, but its forest products have also been used over
a period of time as well.
And because of its value as forest products, folks have actually been monitoring quite
closely the distribution of plants and trees in that area for some time.
And there actually exists a pretty good data set that goes back a hundred years.
And these are the data that I want to look at now.
I want you to join me in this.
If we take a look at the oldest complete set of samples we have from the middle sex fells,
they go back to 1894.
And in 1894, they measured a total of 422 plant, tree, and shrub species that were in
that system.
Of those, about 350 would be considered native species, and they're already exotic species
in the system.
By then, there were 72.
A hundred years later, in 1993, the total number of species in the system had dropped
to 331.
The native species were only 244, but the exotic species, despite overall species loss, the
exotic species, the recruitment of additional species had gone up to 87.
So this is a trend that we think is probably consistent with invasive species.
So the total number of invasive species actually went up in the middle sex fells, but that
caused the suppression of the overall biodiversity of the site.
The biodiversity of the site fell significantly.
And so additional data are being collected there, and so what we have now is really an
extraordinary opportunity to investigate an area long term.
And now the question is, for instance, can alternative management practices be implemented
in the middle sex fells that can bring back some of the initial genetic variation that's
now missing?
Remember we talked about a few lectures ago.
We talked about Tamarix, the salt cedar, which was originally introduced into the southeastern
United States as an ornamental shrub.
It was designed to help with soil erosion, and we compared that with the Australian rabbits
and talked about the challenges of introduction.
But I want to return to this.
In this case, we're talking about landscape impacts.
Remember Tamarix, and we use the genus here because there are like eight different species
of Tamarix that have been bred for ornamental use.
And so in order to include the whole group, we refer to them at the level of the genus.
Tamarix can spread rapidly, and it disrupts, and eradicates native plants.
It is a very, very deep taproot that can penetrate deep into the ground for water, which helps
it survive in dry climates, but is extremely disruptive.
This enables it to really suck up all the water.
Remember, it can use 200 gallons a day.
It sucks up all the water and desiccates the surrounding plants that have shallower root
systems.
So here's the taproot of the Tamarix, and then here's the root system, the other plant,
so the water gets taken away.
The Tamarix seeds have very high concentrations of salt, so when they fall, the surrounding
soil salinity concentration increases and makes it inhospitable for other plants.
This starves and dehydrates any plants that would try and compete.
Tamarix have large branches that create a large amount of shade in an area, and so native
plants are shaded out.
Now Tamarix are thriving and completely changing the ecosystems on the banks of the lower Colorado
river in the Grand Canyon.
This is one of our nation's treasures, and we're seeing the ecosystem modulated and really
degraded by the impact of these species.
And this is primarily due to dams and controlled water releases that Tamarix has been able
to thrive along these river banks.
If the waters were allowed to flood like they would normally do on a seasonal basis, then
Tamarix wouldn't be able to get a foothold.
Now another example of changes in biodiversity as a result of land use involves amphibians,
and we keep going back to amphibians throughout this course as a measure of biodiversity,
and you might be sitting there thinking, what's the big deal with amphibians?
Are they the only important species?
No, amphibians are important, but the reason that they're such useful tools to an ecologist
for understanding the impact of humans with respect to biodiversity and land use change
is that they are a particularly sensitive species.
Remember, amphibians are somewhere between fish and reptiles.
Fish have to essentially spend all of their lives in water, and reptiles for the most
part can spend all of their time outside of water.
There are reptiles that spend a lot of time in water, like alligators and crocodiles,
but they can spend their time out of water.
They lay an egg that doesn't have to be kept wet all the time, and fish are always in water.
Phibians are in between.
They spend part of their life as aquatic creatures, as eggs and tadpoles, and then typically spend
a portion of their lives as terrestrial creatures.
They do a significant amount of air exchange through their skin, and as such, they're very,
very sensitive indicators of pollution levels, and they're important indicators of habitat
change, because within a given system, amphibians use a huge variety of habitats in a single
year.
They'll be up in dry areas part of the year, wet areas part of the year, they'll be in
the temporary pools or vernal ponds that occur in the spring part of the year, and if any
one of those are missing, the cycle is broken and these animals can't complete their life
cycle.
So one of the studies that have been conducted, one of the many studies that have been conducted
on amphibians was done so by James Gibbs, and he was interested in looking at amphibians
in New England, specifically in Connecticut, and he was interested in trying to understand
more about the declines that are being recorded as a result of this habitat fragmentation
and changes in human use patterns.
He investigated the distribution of five species of native amphibians in southern Connecticut
along a 10 kilometer spatially contiguous gradient.
Again, this is one of those situations where we create a gradient, we have our, you know,
invisible tape measure, and he was going from an area that had relatively low forest cover
at the urban end, it was about 5% forest cover, and at the other end it was very rural and
had 95% forest cover, so what he had was a gradient, and he could then look at these
five different species and to see what kind of preference for intact habitat he was able
to discover.
And it turns out that at least three out of the five species, there was a significant
connection between the amount of forested habitat and the preference for these species.
Now the first two species, the redback salamander and spring peepers, it turns out that essentially
wherever he measured their presence, and if we start at .0, we're really starting at
the beginning, at the urban end of the transect, and we go out to 10, that's the 10th kilometer,
we're essentially measuring the most rural, the probability that the spring peepers and
redback salamanders would be located in any of those parts of the transect were essentially
the same.
But if you look at the data for wood frogs, spotted salamanders, and red newts, essentially
there's zero probability that you're going to encounter them in these broken up habitats.
The probability of encounter goes up and is only essentially at the normal levels when
you get in far enough away from these damaged habitats so that there's significant forest
cover still in place.
Now the dynamics between this are complicated because two of the species were able to withstand
this impact of urbanization, three of them weren't, so there's a lot more we need to
investigate with respect to the dynamics, but the emergent patterns are quite interesting.
Now the conservation of parks and habitat restoration has become a very important part
of public policy.
Parks and open space are proving to be vital to ecosystem stability and resiliency.
The national park system was created in 1916 by President Woodrow Wilson and it helped to
establish over 58 parks across the United States.
Overall the system protects about 84 million acres of land.
These parks are very incredibly in size from giant ones in Alaska that are nearly 4 million
acres in size to little ones in areas that were more intensely lived in by humans such
as Pennsylvania which are only about half an acre.
The national park system helps to connect people to other natural environments and many
of these park systems have trails and roads and they help keep humans in designated areas
providing them access and also protecting wildlife.
And this is an important practice of habitat restoration.
The idea is to keep human impact contained so that the rest of the park can remain in
a relatively pristine condition.
Now finally I'd like to talk about a real land management success story and that has
to do with amphibian tunnels across roads.
Now one of the most obvious features of urban ecosystems is the presence of roads and roads
vary from single lane alleys to mega highways with eight lanes or more and some roads even
have fences along the sides to separate the pedestrians from the cars.
And we may think of roads as pathways to and from the city however for many species of animals
roads are actually blockades that separate them from the other parts of their habitat
and this is especially true for amphibians that must access water bodies during their
reproductive season.
Now tunnels combined with fences to lead salamanders to the tunnels are helping to direct them
and other amphibians under and across the road safely.
The best designs emerged only with careful observation and data gathering and amphibians
especially the spotted salamanders navigate by the stars so they have to be able to see
the stars in order to orient as to where they are.
The earliest tunnels that people put in for salamanders were usually a concrete or metal
tube and were completely dark inside and very unpopular they were only partially effective
as the salamanders couldn't see the sky.
Now more recently salamander tunnels have a grating on the top that lets in the light
and so the migrating animals can actually see the stars.
Recently Harrah-Holtz and colleagues published detailed findings on design preferences of
what these tunnels how these tunnels would be used by various species they investigated
tunnel preferences for both reptiles and amphibians they looked at snapping and painted
turtles plus green and and leopard frogs and they found that tunnels have to be about a
half meter wide half meter in diameter with gravel and and sort of a moist lining to be
effective for frogs and turtles that they tested but they can be incredibly effective.
Now in the following lecture we're going to investigate how biodiversity within ecosystems
can help buffer the impact of human invasion and until then thank you.
