Hello and welcome back.
You know, human impacts of habitat fragmentation and land use have completely transformed the
landscape and reduced biodiversity of many animal and plant communities, leaving them
susceptible to local extinction.
In previous lectures, we've talked about how the reduction in genetic diversity can put
species at risk.
Well there have been unprecedented losses of species diversity, unforeseen since the
extinction of the dinosaurs nearly 70 million years ago.
Conservation biologists argue that we're in the sixth major extinction phenomena since
the history of life began on Earth.
Humans tend to carve up the landscape and reshape it with plants and animals that are
not native to the community in which they're currently living.
So we're going to consider the ecosystem services that are lost when biodiversity is suppressed
and also explore ways in which humans can coexist with healthy urban and changing ecosystems.
In addition, we're going to investigate the role that climate change is having on biodiversity
through a new field of study called phenology.
Now in my neighborhood, climate change as we've mentioned before has changed the arrival
dates of birds in our backyards.
Most notably things like robins and cardinals.
When I was growing up, cardinals weren't very common at all and robins were really only
a migratory species.
But in that 30 year period of time, we've gone from having a particular species that
was relatively rare to having the song of the cardinal being a normal part of my experience
in my neighborhood.
And in fact, both cardinals and robins have entire populations that no longer migrate
at all.
And they stay in the part of Massachusetts that I live in year round.
And the males stop singing and they are still doing that on a seasonal basis, but they stop
migrating altogether.
In response to changes in the ecosystem.
Now the human impacts of habitat fragmentation and land use have transformed and reduced
the genetic variability of organisms and that leaves them very susceptible to what we call
extirpation or local extinction.
As we investigated earlier, community biodiversity is measured either as species richness or
by a set of indices that are designed to measure the evenness within the community.
Now when I talk about this notion of evenness, I think a metaphor is helpful.
With my own students, I think about taking a comb and setting it with the teeth pointing
up and you lay a piece of paper on top of that.
And in a perfectly even comb, all of the teeth will just touch the underside of the paper.
And we can consider that each of the tines of the comb represent the number of individuals
of a given species or the proportion of that species representing the whole population.
In general, we have a model in ecology that suggests the more even the height of those
teeth are, the healthier the ecosystem is and the less likely any one of those teeth
will fall out and go extinct and more importantly impact the population, impact the community
in such a way that the community will begin to fall apart.
So this notion of evenness is a very critical piece of our understanding of biodiversity.
And I understand we've discussed that before, but I think it's helpful to return to that
concept because we'll be using it today.
Both species richness, then the count of the total number of different species of a given
taxonomic group that we find in a particular community and the proportional distribution,
the evenness of the distribution of those species.
So land use by human activities can alter surface processes, the biogeochemistry, the
hydrology and the biodiversity.
We know that fragmentation exposes forest edges to external influences and decreases
the core habitat area.
Remember our conversation about oven birds and cow birds, oven bird populations decreasing
because core areas are getting smaller, cow birds, which are nest parasites that nest
on edges, populations going up dramatically because of fragmentation.
Smaller habitat areas generally support fewer species.
And we have these examples from our understanding of island biogeography theory.
Smaller islands far the distance from the shore have smaller numbers and assemblages
of organisms.
We know that species diversity in any population is a combination of colonization, which adds
new species, and local extinction, which subtracts new species.
And these are dynamic processes.
And so at any moment in time, you have the number that have colonized minus the number
that have gone extinct and you have the existing distribution.
We know from island biogeography theory and from data that smaller islands have fewer
species.
Smaller islands are also more susceptible to local extinction.
And this is because smaller islands have fewer ecotypes, which are little variations
within the ecosystem.
They have lower encounter rates by potential colonizers.
Because they're smaller, they're harder to find.
And they have fewer embedded resources, meaning fewer or lower amounts of the kind of resources
that particular species will need.
So for species requiring undisturbed core habitat, fragmentation can cause local and
even general extinction.
So if we then take these ideas from, excuse me, if we take these ideas from island biogeography,
which was a sort of a theoretical model that emerged in the 1950s and 60s, we can actually
apply them to human dominated landscapes.
Because remember in this extended metaphor, we can think of the fragmented pieces of habitat
as essentially green islands within a sea of concrete or at least heavily modified landscapes.
So in a sense, the green spaces that exist in heavily agricultural or heavily urbanized
landscapes are like islands.
And so the same kind of processes are likely to be at work.
You know, a study conducted by Shui assessed the value of habitat resources for butterfly
species in Indiana.
You know, less than 20% of the land in Indiana is of natural cover and much of it has been
fragmented and degraded.
Indiana is filled with both cities and lots of agricultural use.
However, Indiana has one of the most extensive natural area reserves in the United States.
It includes over 200 sites.
And these reserve systems capture much of the imperiled butterfly fauna.
And 13 of the species at risk are currently known only in Indiana in populations existing
in the reserves.
They're endemic to those reserves.
The fragmentation of this habitat also puts them at risk of invasion by exotic species.
Now in a marine community, a study of an oyster bed biodiversity was conducted and looking
at their response to disturbance.
The study site was in Tomales Bay in California, and David Kimbrough and Edward Grohlschutz
from the University of California at Davis set up three different disturbance regimes
to investigate the nature of the impact of disturbance on these oysters.
They had a low disturbance regime where they didn't go in and remove any of the oysters
or other organisms from the beds.
And that resulted in about 65 to 100% cover of organisms on the marine intertidal floor.
And let me just remind you that we think about the marine environment, the surface environment.
It's intertidal.
There's waves.
There's action.
So the only animals that really survive are those that can anchor themselves to the floor,
to the substrate.
And so substrate space becomes the limiting factor.
And so you really can look at the density of species as a measure of disturbance by
looking at the percentage of cover.
So in their low disturbance areas, they had like between 65 and 100% maximum density of
organisms.
In the intermediate disturbance, they had about 50%.
They literally plucked out organisms until they got it down to the 50% level.
And in the high disturbance area, they removed all the sessile species, those that were attached
to the bottom, so it could start over.
And then they allowed this experiment to run.
And these disturbance models mimic natural events, such as waves and storms and rocks
turning over, et cetera.
It's a pretty high energy place for organisms to live.
So this kind of removal experiment really mimics natural events.
So what was revealed in the studies published in Ecology that overall species richness was
highest under the levels of lowest disturbance.
It turns out that in the disturbed areas, oysters grow rapidly and out-competed the other primary
sessile species and ended up decreasing the richness and evenness.
But they also found a very interesting set of results over time.
As disturbance increased, species richness went down, but the evenness increased.
And remember, these are two both important but often competing relationships.
So the research highlighted the real complexity of scales at which disturbance occurs.
And there's actually some support in this and other studies for something called the
Intermediate Disturbance Hypothesis, or IDH, which suggests that in natural ecosystems
there's a certain amount of disturbance that occurs, whether it's fire and forests or storms
along the intertidal zone that actually serve to shake up the ecosystem a little bit, redistribute
organisms, and it prevents any one particular species from becoming dominant, such as the
oyster in this kind of situation.
Now typically human disturbance suppresses biodiversity as it generally disrupts natural
ecosystem interactions that might otherwise enhance biodiversity.
Now this can be countered by the creation of protected wildlife areas, and that's one
response to declining biodiversity and climate change.
However, in developing nations, these protected areas, or PAs as they're found in the literature,
the implementation of these is often seen as controversial.
And many have argued that protected areas leverage an undue burden on the local indigenous
people and serve to exacerbate the disparity between the comparatively wealthy elites who
establish the PA and the locals who must live outside them.
And this concern is more acute when we consider that there has been a nearly 500% increase
in protected areas over the past three decades, most of this occurring in developing nations.
Well in response to this concern, a study has been conducted by George Wittemeyer and
a team of researchers from the University of California at Berkeley, and they found
that human population growth rates on the border of 306 protected areas nearly doubled
the average rural growth rate.
So within their study design, they looked at 306 PAs, and they found that the growth
rate actually exceeded the areas around these PAs, the growth rates were actually exceeded
then in the more rural areas.
This is due in large part to more economic prosperity and tourism attracted to these
areas.
The PAs help create jobs, roads, clinics, sanitation and schools.
There's an economic engine here for positive social change.
While the people in these areas derive benefits, there can also be negative impacts on the
biodiversity of the area and increased habitat isolation.
The rates of deforestation were highest around the PAs where human population growth was
the greatest.
So the PAs had a magnet effect of attracting people, but as you attracted people to the
areas around the preserve, the rate of deforestation just outside the preserve continued.
And what was discovered was that there was a fascinating and really precarious balance
for these PAs and a real management challenge.
So PAs act as attractants.
They can bring in foreign aid, bring in schools, clinics.
They enhance employment, market access for people living in the area and additional financial
security.
So that's sort of the human social ecology.
But they also act as deterrents because they often come with land use restrictions.
There's often accentuated conflicts with park staff, cultural degradation and cultural isolation.
And these problems can then feedback on each other and have real challenges with respect
to managing the needs of the non-human organisms that are inside the PA and the people who
are congregating around it because of the resources that they're trying to deal with.
So we also know that there has been, this fragmentation leads to extirpation or local
extinctions are significant and they're contrasted with global extinctions.
In 1980, Mount St. Helens erupted and it wiped out most of the plants growing by covering
them with more than a cubic mile of material.
I mean, it was really quite extraordinary.
It was devastating to the local economy.
But it was also an opportunity as ecologists for us to investigate how these ecosystems
were covered from these kinds of shocks.
And it helps us to make predictions about future kinds of events.
So the recolonization patterns exhibited on the island was particularly interested
in the lizards provide insight on ecological processes.
And we can take a look at some of those data.
Prior to the eruption of Mount St. Helens, there were approximately 15 or 16 different
species that were found of herpetifona that were found around the mountain.
And within about 10 years, the richness began to recover to about 6 to 7 species that continued
then to taper off, but then grow a little bit more by about 15 years.
And then as the wetland systems changed as a result of plant communities and soil changes
and stuff, the diversity began to drop off.
So some of the diversity was recovered, but inevitably, even after 20 years since the
eruption, the full biodiversity has not yet been recovered.
And so this is an ongoing study.
We'll be able to tell you more later.
But it's fascinating to be able to look at the way in which these systems recover.
Now in Boston, the eastern box turtle has been extirpated, however, they can be found
in other parts of the state and in the eastern United States.
And an effort is underway to try and reintroduce this species to urbanized areas because there's
some indication that they might actually do pretty well.
Now reduction in genetic diversity occurs when habitats are fragmented and the size
is decreased.
These richness is affected by the physical size of the community in which individuals
live.
Large areas have more micro-habitats, which leads to specialization and higher diversity.
Large areas have higher encounter probabilities.
Remember, thinking back to the island biogeography model, larger areas also have higher colonization
success probabilities.
One of the things we know about urbanization is that it freezes the process of ecological
succession.
We talked about this just a little bit more, but it's worth investing a bit more time.
Because as humans begin to dominate the landscape and put up permanent structures, those permanent
structures are essentially a measure of stability, so especially taking a coastal environment.
When we build our buildings and roads near coastal environments, coastal environments
tend to be very dynamic and constantly changing.
Well, in response to changes in coastal environments, we don't want to move the buildings.
Instead, we build seawalls and other impediments to the movement of coastal soils so that those
buildings aren't imperiled.
And in a sense that then freezes the geologic process.
Well, this also occurs in vegetated communities as well.
We plant a series of trees.
We maintain them a certain way.
And our parks have a certain collection of species, and we tend to decide on that diversity
and then freeze it when, in reality, over time in natural ecosystems, the distributions
of organisms and plants would normally be changing.
But the biggest threat to biodiversity is habitat destruction.
There's no question about that.
The second biggest threat is the impact of invasive species.
Now returning to our conversation about rainforest decline and palm oil production are examples
of direct habitat destruction.
Remember from the examples of the Living Planet Index, we show that looking from 1970
to 2005, we've seen a significant reduction in the overall index of survivability, if
you will, of tropical forests.
And much of that is due to the production of palm oil as it continues to claim forests
that were once diverse and are now, in essence, growing monocultures.
The palm oil production claims a large amount of land.
It's detrimental to the surrounding ecosystem because it's a monoculture and it's relatively
inhospitable to the native organisms that would be there.
Remember, fire is used to clear the land, and it creates air pollution and problem for
surrounding areas.
So when palm oil plantations are built, all other native plant species are excluded.
The ecosystems rapidly decline and the plantation must be expanded into new soils.
The cycle of destruction is thus continued.
Now human consumption of harvested fish species can alter an entire ecosystem.
Brad Taylor and his team out of the University of Wyoming and Cornell have been studying
migratory detritus eating fish that live in South America called procolotus marii, commonly
called flannelmouth by indigenous fishermen.
The species live in the Ornoco basin and are a critical component of the healthy functioning
ecosystem.
As freshwater predatory fish have suffered declines as a result of over-harvesting,
people have turned their fishing efforts toward the detritivores as a source of protein.
The impact of over-harvesting fish at that part of the food chain is really quite unknown
as they are situated in a novel part of the food web compared to those that are typically
harvested.
Over-fishing has decreased the average maximum body mass of the largest quarter sampled by
nearly 75% from 850 grams down to 200 grams and this level actually falls below the typical
breeding weight of females from healthy populations.
Not only does this spell trouble for the population, but it represents a diminished set of ecosystem
services usually provided by the species because remember, these fish naturally enhance the
transport of organic materials along the rivers in which they live by consuming and ingesting
large volumes of detritus.
It's what detritivores do.
In addition, their feeding habits scour the river bottoms, altering biofilm composition
and reducing the turbidity of the water.
These are likely really critical activities that these fish perform.
Now what they did was to do some artificial removal experiments and they revealed that
these services were not adequately performed by other fish in the ecosystem, indicating
that population decline in this species is likely to be a very serious blow to an ecosystem
already overburdened by habitat fragmentation and deforestation.
Now another topic I want to engage that is really helpful in understanding the impact
of both climate change and direct anthropogenic impact on ecosystems is that of phenology.
It's the timing of natural events such as the blooming of flowers and the emergence
of insects, the melting of river ice, coursing by frogs.
These are deeply interrelated biological events that have co-evolved over hundreds
of thousands or even millions of years.
And global climate change is altering these patterns by changing the thermal regime in
which these events take place.
Researchers from Boston University as well as Harvard have been investigating the biodiversity
changes in conquered Massachusetts.
These studies are evaluating species changes in their natural history patterns in the very
woodlots that Henry David Thoreau cataloged 150 years earlier.
As climate has changed in Boston, the hypothesis that the researchers were using predicted
that phenological events would also change and thus provide a robust record of changes
in natural history patterns as a function of global warming.
They discovered that many species of plants have begun to flower at least a week earlier
than in Thoreau's time.
This corresponds to a 2.4 centigrade increase in mean temperatures in the area over the
past century, a trend that is expected to climb anywhere from one to six degrees in
the next century.
The most sensitive varieties they found were the dogwoods, sunflowers and orchids.
Now plant species that respond to temperature changes may be better at maintaining important
periodic interactions with pollinators, better at avoiding negative interactions such as
predation, and a global approach to conservation priorities is necessary to minimize these
future species losses.
And think about this for just a moment.
So you have this shift that's happening in the flowering activities in the Concord Woods,
but and these plants and insects that are the insect service pollinators for the plants,
the plant service food sources for the insects, their life cycles are tightly intertwined.
As temperature changes, the signals associated with the beginning and the ending of the cycle
shift.
And so if the timing comes out of phase and the insects are at their peak activity and
expecting the plant pollination foods to be there and the plants aren't there or the plants
have already passed, you have a mismatch in the co-evolved relationship, which can mean
the extirpation of both species within that population.
A global meta-analysis of 143 species of 143 studies that investigated the life history
patterns ranging from mollusks to mammals and grasses to trees was a study that was
led by an interdisciplinary team led by Terry Root, who was leading an interdisciplinary
team.
He's from Stanford and he analyzed data from nearly 1500 species to find out their spring,
how their spring activities had changed over the past 30 years.
And climate change data tell us that we're warming rapidly and many anecdotal observations
have been made about the shifting of the timing of spring events.
And they had this very, very large data set.
And they looked at invertebrates and amphibians and birds.
They looked at non-tree plant species and tree species, and combined they found over
a five-day difference in the past 30 years with respect to changes in the timing of these
phenological events.
And some were even more so.
Birds were shifting almost a whole week on average of their activities.
Very spring events, overall it shifted about five days, but certain species, like the common
murk, had shifted 24 days in the onset of breeding.
And other trends are also quite striking.
Northern cardinals from other studies are initiating their territorial calls an average
of 22 days earlier.
Tree swallows are initiating their clutches nine days early in certain parts of the country.
Summer winters are shifting the maple syrup season earlier in the year.
And there is a fundamental imbalance that's looming as the two most fundamental triggers
of vernal activity are starting to get out of sync.
Right?
Global warming is shifting temperature regimes, but not shifting day length.
And species tend to use either one or the other.
So for species like the like the pied flycatcher that winters in North Africa and migrates
to Europe on day length cues, it's arriving on breeding grounds in Europe too late to
take advantage of the early insect bloom that was triggered by temperature.
And remember from other conversations migratory birds are depending on that food to be there
when they arrive because they've lost half their body weight in migration.
And as the systems become unlinked, the resiliency of the ecological community is weakened.
And we're just beginning to understand the importance of the phenological synchronization
in ecological communities.
You know, some of my work in graduate school, I had the great good fortune of working in
some of these large bird colonies on the East Coast.
And there'd be turns and plovers that would be nesting.
And it's fascinating to look at the distribution of how these colonies change over time because
certain colonies would become very, very dominant with one type of species, you know,
common turn colonies that might have three to 5,000 nesting pairs.
And you would see the evenness begin to drop as other species were either pushed out of
the colony or moved to new locations.
And you would see the ebb and flow over time.
In certain years, certain species would be more common than others.
But then you would see these profound human changes, like suddenly a section of beach
would be used for other purposes by humans and the whole colony would be gone.
Not just one species going up or down, but the whole colony shifted.
And so I had this chance to see the different scales.
Now in the next lecture, we are going to again be changing scales, something that we do quite
often in this course, shifting from communities back to populations again as we investigate
the population growth and regulation of communities.
