Hello, and welcome back.
You know, no aspect of ecology is more fundamental to resiliency than the way in which natural
populations grow.
Systems have the capacity to grow faster than they actually do.
Usually their growth is modulated by competition, disease, or some available resource that
becomes limiting.
In this lecture, we will investigate the logistic growth model and the demographic transitions
that accompany the carrying capacity for local ecosystems.
We will examine the relationship between population and growth and system sustainability.
One of the aspects of growth that we tend not to think about is the social dynamics
of animals, and we're actually going to include that in our conversation today.
And I was reminded of a study that my colleagues and I were involved with when we were in graduate
school, and we're studying social dynamics of crows, and the image that you see before
you is of a crow family that's from our study site.
And crows are fascinating in the sense that typically birds tend to breed as a mated male
and female raising offspring, what we call a monogamous pair.
But there have been a few species of birds, American crows included, that do what we call
cooperative breeding.
Now you still have one male and one female who are mothers and fathers of the offspring,
but there are additional adults that are tending the nest.
They're feeding the young, they're defending the nest against predators, and it's a fascinating
study.
And in the middle 1980s, it was a brand new topic, and a lot of us as researchers were
very excited about being involved with that aspect of the study.
But like any part of ecology, the ideas are exciting, being outside is exciting.
But you know, it's after watching a particular set of animals do something for a thousand
hours, and that's not metaphor, that's real.
It can become tedious, like any job, even a job that you love.
And so one of the groups of crows that we studied was actually adjacent to a little family-owned
donut shop called Sullivan's.
This was down on Cape Cod.
It's not open anymore.
Or I'd recommend you go there, because the crows loved it.
But anyway, we would be sitting there watching the crows, and crows do their most interesting
things very early in the morning.
So you had to be in place to watch these animals by like 3.30 or 4 in the morning, and they'd
watch maybe four or five hours and gather data.
So they'd come in, and the family that owned the donut shop would leave their dumpster open,
and in the morning they'd sort of throw out all the donuts that hadn't been sold the day
before.
And so here you are, the focus on the animals.
And they're in there, and you've got, you know, so they're baking the fresh donuts for
the day, so you've got the smell of the donuts wafting through the parking lot, and you're
sitting there trying to focus on the birds and gather your data, and they're leisurely
going into the dumpster and picking out a donut, and then the other goes in and gets
another donut, and I'm telling you, it's torture, because you're sort of salivating
because you can smell the donuts, and you're there looking through your binoculars, trying
to write everything down, or record into a microphone the data that you're seeing.
And there was this sort of, you would sort of get this sense that who's watching who,
you know, these are, here are these animals eating human food, and you're sitting in the
car, it was a very interesting phenomenon, and I was thinking about this because we're
going to talk about the kind of pressures and variables that animals do in environments
that are essentially saturated, and where we were studying these crows was essentially
an urban area, and their response to being in a highly urbanized area was to have larger
family groups, and so we're going to look at that phenomenon.
Now the state of the science and population biology, let's think about this, you know,
how do populations grow?
It tends to be pretty mathematical, but we're going to try and smooth out those bumps as
much as we can, and so we have to answer this question about what do we even mean when we
say a population?
What is a population?
Well natural selection limits the total numbers of individuals in any group, and so a population
involves the individuals who are exchanging genes.
We also use the term of a deem, which is where 95% of the gene flow occurs, it's an isolated
part of the population, but a population is the individuals with any given species who
are likely to be breeding with each other, and so if we take a human example, all of
the humans on the earth are all in the same genus and species, Homo sapiens, but despite
the fact that we've become a very mobile species, we are still more likely to pair bond and
have offspring with individuals who live in neighborhoods that we live in than somebody
who's on the opposite side of the world.
So when we think about a population of humans, it's all one mega-population, but the individuals
within local regional areas are more likely to exchange genes with each other, and so
that's essentially what we mean when we're talking about populations.
Now populations are limited by all kinds of things, how large can they grow, things like
competition and disease, and some of the contemporary ideas about population have gone way beyond
the initial contributions that Darwin made in thinking really only about competition.
There are other forces at work that include cooperations and mutualisms and things that
we have both talked about in the future and will continue in the conversation.
So populations are actually regulated in very, very complex ways.
And the other thing to remember is that populations are dynamic.
The number of individuals in a population at one time may not be the same number in
the future or as it was in the past.
As conditions change and as dynamics change, so can the population.
So one of the things that ecologists do is to consider the distributions of populations.
Distribution is the way in which they're organized and dispersion is the key to understanding
this process.
In other words, when adults give birth to young, what happens to those young?
Well, some of them don't survive and some of them do survive, but those that do survive,
what do they do?
Do they stay in the same area where the parents are?
Do they leave and go somewhere else?
Typically at least one gender has to disperse in order to avoid inbreeding.
So these patterns can take different forms.
They can be clumped or random or so-called regular.
So let's take a look at some of the dispersion patterns that can exist.
And the image that you see before you essentially looks at three different kinds of dispersal
patterns in nature.
You see a so-called regular pattern where individuals are distributed essentially equidistant
from each other and some species display that kind of distribution.
As far as we can tell on certain spatial scales, some species are essentially randomly distributed.
And then other species tend to be clumped and you find them in tight aggregations and
then there's a significant area where you don't find any of them.
So this notion of being regularly organized, randomly distributed or clumped ends up playing
into the role, if you will, of how big these populations can become.
Now we need to talk about how populations grow.
So we've talked about how they're distributed, let's talk about how they grow.
It turns out that populations grow what we call geometrically until they are ultimately
limited by some external force.
We call this growth pattern the so-called J-shaped curve, which we will look at in just
a moment.
Now the forces that allow the rate of growth are intrinsic to individual species.
So every species has what we call an intrinsic biological rate of growth, which is essentially
to say that under the best of circumstances, what is the maximum rate that this population
or individuals in this population can grow and reproduce.
So looking at humans, for instance, humans vary all the way from choosing not to have
any offspring any time in their life to beginning reproductive activity as early as 10 or 11
years old in unusual circumstances.
So this huge, and so if you have populations that are starting to reproduce very early,
you're going to end up with a different ultimate population than you will be if individuals
are delaying their reproductive activity.
And this was first investigated by a Belgian mathematician, Pierre Werhelst, who lived
from 1804 to 1849, and he was very, very interested in population growth, and especially thinking
about how fast populations are growing at any particular instant in time, what we call
the so-called instantaneous growth rate.
Because here's the take on point.
We're going to get a little bit mathematical here, but I think it's going to be okay.
When we're interested in populations, traditionally, we're interested in the dynamic aspect, right?
Because let's say if the population could hold 100 individuals and there are always
100 individuals, well, there's not really much to study there.
So when ecologists are interested in population, it's not the constant part we're interested
in.
It's what are the forces that lead to variability, and how much resiliency there is in the system,
in this case in population dynamics.
So we're interested in what we call the instantaneous growth rate, which is the absolute rate of
growth at any one moment in time.
And for that, ultimately, you need calculus, but we're going to do this conceptually.
So this notion of the growth rate is essentially the change in population over the change in
time, delta n over delta t, which is going to equal your birth rate minus your death
rate as a function of the population.
So remember, any population is a combination of all the individuals who are born minus
all the individuals who have died.
So if for a long period of time, a number of individuals born exceeds those who are dying,
in other words, b minus d is greater than zero, your population is growing.
If the birth rate minus the death rate equals zero, then your population is stable.
If the birth rate minus the death rate is less than zero, your population is declining.
Now another factor we need to include in this delta n over delta t equation is the fact
that there is a biotic component to this.
So delta n over delta t, actually this birth minus death rate can be represented as the
biotic potential, the intrinsic growth rate that we call little r.
And so the instantaneous growth rate at any one time is actually little r times n.
This is the basic biotic potential or intrinsic growth rate to the population.
And so what this does is help us to define the population growth in the so-called logistic
curve.
And so if I can direct your attention to a couple of different curves that I want to
show you.
First of all is the classic what we call geometric growth or J-shaped curve for populations.
And you can see that in this graph you have time on the x-axis and population on the vertical
axis.
And what you see over time is that the population is not growing in a linear fashion, but the
growth rate is actually accelerating through time.
And remember that's a factor associated with the way in which reproduction works.
Because of one individual in this case when we're looking at absolute growth rates we
tend to focus on female fecundity which is the measure of reproductive capacity.
So if you have a female that produces two offspring in that next generation those two
offspring are produced are producing their two offspring.
And so instead of going from one to two and then to three you're going from one to two
and two to four and four to eight and eight to 16 and 16 to 32 and 32 to 64 and so forth.
And so you're not growing in a linear fashion you're growing in a logistic fashion that's
a J-shaped curve.
And that's essentially what you see in the existing dots along the points in the graph.
But in reality growth tends to be geometric because most organisms don't just reproduce
once and die, they reproduce once, those offspring are growing up and in the meantime the adult
is still reproducing and at some time those offspring begin to reproduce, the initial
adult is still reproducing, those offspring have offspring and you may end up with the
great-grandmother, the grandmother, the daughter and the granddaughter all reproducing at the
same time and so you end up with an incredible potential capacity for growth.
And so what it appears over time almost that the population growth becomes extraordinarily
intense and rapid and that is absolutely the case until the population becomes limited.
Now in order for us to understand this little better you take a look at the right hand graph
and here we see over time still in the lower axis and the population size and the vertical
axis but notice what we've done here is that the vertical axis is logarithmic and instead
of each tick mark being equidistant apart each of the major tick marks on the graph
is actually a power of ten.
So you go from one to ten to one hundred to a thousand to ten thousand and the effect
of that is to smooth out the curve so you're actually seeing a straight line and so when
we tend to look at these kinds of growth dynamics it's not unusual for us to use logarithmic
representations because then because we're looking at a straight line we can then use
linear approaches to understanding the way that that line is tilted right we can look
at the characteristics which are actually representing realities embedded in the population
itself.
So we said that populations don't grow forever ultimately they will exceed the capacity of
the environment to support them we call that carrying capacity and so there's some density
dependent factor that's going to limit this growth and it may be competition it may be
resources so the density dependent factor is k minus n over k and that ratio represents
the fraction of the total carrying capacity that remains to be filled.
So if we go back to this instantaneous equation the sort of tool we want to be able to use
as a way to shed light on a given population the delta n over delta t model turns out
to be r times k minus n over k times n and as n approaches k the fraction gets smaller
and smaller and eventually reaches zero.
So therefore if r times k minus n over k times n equals r times zero times n then the outcome
is zero and the population is not growing and at that point we call that carrying capacity
which is represented as big k it's the number of individuals of a particular population
that the environment can support and the carrying capacity is a function of resources available
and consumed and it may also be a moving target.
Now as an ecologist it's nice to think about a system having a carrying capacity and it
makes sense right we can create a good definition around it's a number of individuals of a given
population that can exist within that particular geospatial area but you know what it's almost
impossible to measure and very few studies have really gotten close to that.
We can understand it as a conceptual framework almost in the same way that we use the trophic
diagrams we looked at a few lectures ago to help us conceive and put an idea on the table
so we can measure but the idea of carrying capacity is much much harder to measure than
it is to conceive.
So I want to take a look at some examples of density and resources and how that can impact
breeding biology and I'm going to begin by talking about the Sechelle's warblers.
This is an endangered songbird that lives on the islands off the coast of Africa and normally
the species breeds as monogamous pairs however when resource issues emerge and the environment
isn't providing enough food they will switch to cooperative breeding when the conditions
force them to typically through reduced territory quality.
And this was first discovered in the early 1970s because up until that point when researchers
were investigating the Sechelle's warblers they discovered that the number of birds breeding
birds and number of territories were lining up pretty appropriately.
But over time they saw that the number of territories beginning in the mid 1970s through
the rest of the duration of the study the number of territories remain saturated they
didn't increase but the number of breeding birds did.
Now the only way this can happen is if the birds are literally sharing the same nests
and what they discovered was that on territories of the lowest quality the birds were being
forced to share nests and it was an interesting system because there would still be one male
and female who are producing eggs and one male and one female mating producing eggs
but there were other adults that were tending the nest and from the standpoint of evolution
that's a little bit complicated why those individuals would give up their capacity to
reproduce and help somebody else.
We're going to answer that question in just a moment but I want to talk about yet another
example of reproductive strategy in densely packed landscapes that are used by birds and
that has to do with crows and with their closely related cousin scrub jays.
Now for scrub jays it's a little bit like the Cichelli's warbler story because the scrub
jays first of all they're distributed across the American south and southwest and again
they usually breed in monogamous pairs.
But in central Florida scrub land where trees are scarce and the population is saturated
they tend to breed in cooperative family groups.
So again here they are like the Cichelli's warblers and we haven't gotten to the crows
yet but it should be challenging your world view with respect to the way in which evolution
works.
Why should mature adults give up the opportunity to breed?
The big question here is are they actually being altruistic?
Altruistic as a set of behaviors that an organism would go through that are costly to it from
a fitness standpoint that are helpful to other individuals and that goes against everything
that we know about evolution from Darwin on down.
It turns out that no, they're not being altruistic.
They're actually making the best of a bad situation.
In most instances in which helping has been studied the helpers are actually closely related
to the breeding pair and they gain fitness indirectly through a process we call kin selection.
And let me take a moment and explain to you how that works because again this is connected
to this densely populated or resource depleted environment.
Let's say you're an adult crow, you've got or Cichelli's warbler or scrub Jay and we're
focusing on the scrub Jay's right now.
You're a scrub Jay, you don't have a nest, what are your choices?
You could sit on the sidelines but by staying and helping your parents raise additional offspring
that they wouldn't be able to raise without your help you're actually getting some of
your genes into the next generation because you are closely related to those offspring.
From the standpoint of genetics you're as closely related to your brothers and sisters
as you would be to your own children.
And so there is an inclusive component to this that makes sense for these birds under
these circumstances to help.
And the control for this of course is that you would expect if the resources were plentiful
they wouldn't do it and so in years in which the Cichelli's warblers have access to great
territories they don't cooperate.
And the same is true for scrub Jay's.
Now American crows are also interesting and it's part of a research project that our team
has worked on as have many other teams across the country.
They breed cooperatively under certain circumstances as well.
And here researchers in Washington State led by Marsiloff and his team and New York State
McGowan and in Massachusetts by our team led by Auger found larger breeding groups in smaller
territories in urbanized areas.
The mechanism of social size may be different than the resource driven forces for scrub Jay's
and Cichelli's warblers but what we're seeing is a modification related to a limiting resource.
Ultimately in any population the density is going to reach some kind of equilibrium when
birth rates equal death rates.
Death is sort of the ultimate negative feedback system in ecosystems.
So the factors that contribute to population arrange size and review, we've talked about
this a little bit before but we need this as part of the toolkit, you know is habitat
availability and stability, there are the historical factors, there's the dispersal
and evolutionary events, competition and finally predation.
So predators competition and disease are going to act as local limiters to populations.
Now since being introduced the European Red Fox Volpe's Volpe's has nearly eradicated
the burrowing betong from Australia which is sort of the native mammal that would have
that same niche.
The betong is of a native species, it currently occupies only a fraction of its territory
and survives only because of exclusion fencing that keeps the fox out.
So this competition from an invasive species completely squelched the population.
Now carrying capacity limits population and ultimately forces trade-offs.
Local organisms are rare but are often a response to environmental conditions.
So for instance the you social mound building insects like the termites, resources such
as a mound are very expensive to come by and too intricate to build alone and so it becomes
a very limiting resource to the population and their only way of doing that is to do
so in these incredibly complex societies.
Now other you social insects the social hymenoptera also have an extraordinary genetic structure
to them called haplodiploidae and the social hymenoptera include the bees and the ants
and the wasps and this extraordinary genetic system drives their social architecture because
in this situation it turns out that within these large social groups sisters are more
closely related to each other than they would be to their own offspring and as such this
inclusive fitness model drives their structure of their societies.
Now fence lizards provide an excellent example of another trade-off and the trade-off here
is in parental investment.
They are very common reptiles in urbanizing areas and fence lizards must balance between
egg number and egg size.
In order for them to reproduce the females have to lay eggs.
The bigger eggs have a higher probability of surviving but they can lay fewer of them.
They can lay lots of little eggs but the little eggs have a lower probability of survival.
So it turns out that there should be an evolutionary theory and ecological theory predict that in
any given population there should be a sweet spot where the balance between the size of
the egg laid and the number of eggs laid maximizes the reproductive success of individual females
and we find that to be true in certain in any population any ecological setting there
is an optimized amount and size of eggs that are being laid.
Another example would be colony nesting gulls in this case the lesser blackback gulls that
also have to apportion their egg number as it affects parental investment.
So baby chicks require a very large amount of food.
Now Najer and his colleagues performed removal and addition experiments in order to test
the investment that is taking place in these eggs.
So let's take a look at some of the data.
So in this particular data set we're measuring the percentage of eggs that survive to fledging.
That's not just how many eggs are laid or how many hatch it's how many actually survive
to fly away at the end of the season versus the number of eggs laid.
And what we see is an incredible relationship that emerges.
So the more eggs that are laid the much lower percentage of individuals survive.
And so gulls are locked into the same decision matrix as are the lizards because as they
lay more eggs which should at face value then suggest that more offspring could be produced.
Doesn't end up being the case because they have to invest so much in each of those eggs
once they hatch.
So as the number of eggs laid goes up the number that survives go down.
Another example of this kind of apportionment of reproductive effort is found in red deer.
Now red deer breed throughout Europe but the longest running study by a team led by Timothy
Cluttenbrock has studied the red deer as they go through their ecology on the island of
Rhum in Scotland.
And this is an island that's chosen because it's isolated and so the number of deer out
there can be controlled in essence because a deer have to either swim out there or be
transported out there.
And it's an extraordinary study.
They have actually each year they mark all the individuals so they know their individual
identities.
They have blood samples from all of them so they know who's related to who and who's
the mothers and who's the fathers.
And the ecological system is basically this.
The males establish territories and attract females.
And basically the males try and establish territories in the richest feeding grounds
where the females will spend their time eating.
And so only a few males end up holding territories so a few males become the sires of all the
offspring.
And so from the standpoint of evolution males were a real genetic long shot because only
a few males get to reproduce but really almost every daughter who's healthy will become impregnated
by those males.
So if you're a mother red deer the question is the cost and benefits of having sons and
daughters.
And females apportion their reproductive effort according to their status because sons are
very expensive to produce unless females produce a very large son it's unlikely that he will
be able to support or be able to support and maintain a territory.
And so what it turns out is that female red deer tend to produce sons only when they are
in their best physical health and when they are dominant within their social group which
allows them access to the highest quality grasses.
And they produce daughters early and late in their lives.
Complex social species especially for top order predators provide fascinating implications
for studying social dynamics.
Early social organisms have long lives and require extensive parental care.
They have reciprocal relationships which can take years to stabilize.
Let's quickly look at two examples, bottlenose dolphins and chimpanzees.
Both species invest highly in each offspring at the cost of producing many offspring.
In the next lecture we're going to see how humans respond to increased growth rates by
moving into cities.
Until then, thank you.
