Hello and welcome back. In our last lecture, we talked about the complexity of the ecology
of animal migrations. We talked about short-term, long-distance migrations. We talked about
cyclical migrations and dispersal. Well, in considering migration, we also, from the
standpoint of human impact, need to think about how it is that we as a species are impacting
and changing the way that species migrate. Organisms that do migrate long-distance are
particularly vulnerable to lapses in ecosystem stability. When animals are migrating, they
are at their weakest and most vulnerable. Many species of birds lose half their body
weight during migration. One of the highest incidences of mortality for animals in their
annual cycle occurred during the period of time that they are migrating. Human land
use practices have disrupted the migratory patterns of many migratory species, especially
in North America and Europe. Many of these migratory species are on the brink of extinction
as a result of a disruption of their migratory roots. In this lecture, we're going to investigate
the unique ecological requirements of migratory species, including navigation skills and endurance
and flexible reproductive schedules. We'll also investigate some of the management strategies
employed to facilitate animal movement across urbanized landscapes, including under-road
tunnels, sod bridges, and wildlife corridors, all of which are constructed to mitigate the
human imposition on the migratory pathways. Now, when we begin our conversation today,
we actually have a guest who's joining us at the table. This is an African spotted tortoise.
Its natural habitat would be in the African plains, West Africa, found typically in grasslands.
If you notice the spotted design that has imprinted here on the shell, this is actually
part of its ability to remain cryptic or hidden from other predators. These are incredible
tortoises. They live as long as 70 years. They have relatively small migratory patterns,
but they do move on an annual basis. As you notice, the shell is very much domed, although
turtles and tortoises are essentially the same thing. We tend to think of turtles as
having sleek, low shells because they swim and therefore have to have a fusiform shape
to move efficiently through aquatic environments. Tortises tend to be turtles we find on land,
and you see this domed shell, which allows them to store more water, have more biomass
inside. Also, if they get rolled over on their back, the high dome makes it a little easier
for them to flip themselves back over. If you also notice this desert tortoise, grassland
tortoise, you can see that the shell wraps around very, very tightly as a type of armor
in order to protect it. You can think of this as a Kevlar coating around this animal that
protects it from attacks from other predators, and just like the Kevlar armor that law enforcement
people wear, sometimes it has lots of extra coverings to make sure that there is extra
protection, but at the same time that also limits mobility. In aquatic turtles, we tend
to see the armor reduced so that they can swim more efficiently on terrestrial tortoises.
We tend to see more of this wraparound armor that helps to protect them against predators.
So if this animal is confronted with an animal that wants to eat it, it simply pulls into
its shell and waits it out. But I brought along this tortoise today because turtles
and tortoises are some of the most vulnerable species with respect to disrupted migration.
And across North America, there are lots of species of turtles whose ecology is endangered
because of their inability to complete their migratory patterns.
Now human land use practices have disrupted the migratory patterns of many migratory species.
One pattern of change is related to phenology, which we tackled a bit earlier, but we need
to review here because it's so critical with respect to our consideration of what it means
to migrate. You know, scientists at Boston University led by Richard Premack have been
studying the phenology of species in Boston for nearly 20 years. Remember the team analyzed
a 40-year study, a natural history study that was conducted by naturalists who lived on
a farm just outside of Boston. And over that 40-year period of time, they discovered that
the migratory arrival of wood ducks was occurring a month earlier at the end of the study than
at the beginning. Ruby-throated hummingbirds were arriving about 20 days earlier than at
the beginning of the study. Now another meta-analysis of nearly 1,500 studies by Terry Roode and
his colleagues revealed an average of a five-day shift for a very broad range of organisms,
from grasses and trees to amphibians and mammals. Now why do we bring up the phenology
part again? Well, because the timings of migrations, as we mentioned in our previous lecture, are
such that it maximizes the migrating organisms' access to either predator-free space for
them to reproduce, or maximum calories for their metabolic requirements. And as we shift
the timing of migrations, and remember the timing of animal movements tend to be associated
either with day length or with temperature. And as the climate warms, remember the temperature
cues are shifting in time and happening earlier, but the daylight cues are remaining the same,
so that animals and plants that are using different cues are getting out of sync with
each other. And so, although we don't think of it as a physical impediment, one of the
impediments to appropriate and successful migration of animals has to do with the timing
of when these events take place. And as climate shifts, these timings change, and the phenology
of the events, while the actual migration is not physically blocked, if the animals are
arriving too early or too late, their food reserves that they depend on are not there
when they get there. Now a good example of the geospatial challenges
of migration have to do with migratory waterfowl and the prairie potholes that they require
to complete their migratory path, and prairie pothole ecology can serve as an indicator
of the challenge. Now let's take a human diversion here, and just remind ourselves about the
importance of migration and how it can be disrupted. Imagine you're taking a relatively
long automobile trip, and you're going across an area that's not very well, or not very
heavily populated, and you know it's a 400-mile trip, something like that, and you know there's
a gas station about two-thirds of the way, and you're going to stop there, you know,
you might get something to eat. It's not a very fancy restaurant, but you get the fuel
you need for your car, there's resources you need when you get there, but if you get there
and that gas station's closed, you're not going to finish your trip, even though you
had all the resources you need when you left, and there's the resources that are waiting
when you get there, if that intermediate step doesn't happen, the whole system breaks down.
And this is the tremendous challenge, collectively, in thinking about managing long-distance migrations.
Think of the turns we talked about in the last lecture. They're going from one pole
to the next, so in managing their migratory needs, we're going across the entire globe,
across different governments, across different landforms, and any one of those areas that
fails to meet the needs of that species breaks the whole cycle. And that's why potholes are
such, I think, a useful jumping-off point for this conversation. So these potholes are
temporary small wetlands that dot the landscape along the major inland migratory route for
North America's waterfowl. They were carved by the glacial retreat, and the Great Plains
of North America contain millions of shallow, wetland depressions called potholes, other
parts of the country would call them vernal pools. So they're rich in plant and aquatic
life, and they're absolutely critical stopover and breeding sites for huge populations of
ducks and geese. Now, agricultural use of the plains have degraded 50 to 90 percent
of these historic wetland systems. So going back to our metaphor, an awful lot of the
gas stations along the way are now closed. So in the past 20 years alone has seen a further
loss of nearly 200,000 acres of breeding habitat. So when we think about crises of large green
spaces, we tend to think about the degradation and loss of rainforests. But here in our own
backyard, if you will, on our own continent, we're seeing a similar degradation and loss
of these prairie ecosystem stopover points. And as such, then water birds can serve as
bioindicators of changes in these systems and of the whole trophic dynamics of prairie
potholes. So one of the initiatives has been to restore this Great Plains Prairie Pothole
Region. It goes across a number of states, and it's a recognized ecological entity, almost
in the same way we think about watersheds as being recognizable entities. Remember we
said that a single watershed might be in a number of political municipalities, but it's
a single ecological system. And the Great Plains Prairie Pothole Region is a similar ecological
entity. And it's an important ecosystem for waterfowl due to the presence of these shallow,
prairie wetland resources. And the prairie pothole wetland area is total about five million
acres and about two and a half million basins. And this is monitored by the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service. And so they're keeping track of these, and they're the ones who provide
the quantitative information. Now, most of these basins, over two million of them, are
less than an acre in size. They're very, very small, and they comprise about 700,000 acres
of the resources. Now, even though they're small, and many are less than an acre in
size, they're incredibly valuable habitat because of the critical stopover points. Now,
agricultural practices in the Great Plains dried up many of these pothole oases, and
they had a dramatic effect on the organisms that depended on them. Now migratory waterfowl
depend on these wetlands at a minimum for feeding along their migration routes. So remember
these birds are losing weight as they're flying. They're arriving, expecting to be able to replenish
these lost resources. Now, a team of researchers led by a scientist by the name of Austin examined
duck populations as indicators of landscape condition. And they found that the most reliable
variables as indicators of waterfowl abundance was actually the presence of cropland in grassland.
More ducks were present when the cropland was low. What they found is that for a variety
of species, and they did this study over a two-year period of time, and they looked
at mallards and pentails and gadwalls, blue wingteals and shovelers, the classic waterfowl
that used these areas, and they found that there were significantly more birds both feeding
and breeding in areas where the percentage of cropland use was low in comparison to areas
where cropland use was high. And what that suggests is that the human use of cropland
is modifying the availability of these local temporary potholes or basins. And of course
that's the case. In most instances, as the land is transformed for agriculture, these
miniature pools, these little one-acre potholes are either drained or filled in, or because
of the removal of additional vegetation, they're not able to retain water as long and they lose
the ecological value to these migrating ducks.
Now other changes have been measured in other wetland systems. We're shifting away from
prairie potholes and we're actually looking at wetland systems in Spain, the menor lagoon,
where changes in the populations of great crested and black-nested grebes, which winter
in these lagoons, end up impacting the nitrogen flow within the lagoon. And in fact, the annual
tons of nitrogen were compared to the number of species present in these particular lagoon
systems. And although they were being recovered or being used by these birds, as the birds
arrived, the levels of nitrogen changed. The levels of nitrogen increased as the number
of waterfowl wintering at these sites decreased. And so the birds were clearly part of the
system and were necessary to maintain the system. And when they were absent, the fluctuations
changed pretty dramatically.
Now another impediment to appropriate migration besides sort of destruction of habitat necessary
along the way is the imposition of roads. And roads pretty dramatically affect adversely
the wildlife and their habitats. And roads do that directly by destroying or altering
the habitat. And the physical presence of the road itself induces additional wildlife
mortality and tends to deflect and change the ease in which animals move. And in fact,
this brings up an interesting point that we will talk about a couple of times within
this lecture series. When we think about ecological impacts, it's pretty easy to measure, for
instance, the number of animals that are hit by a car because you'll recover the carcass
or someone will report that it happened. What's harder to measure is what happens to the remaining
animals who are in that same social system that viewed that event taking place. How does
that individual who got run down impact the animals that are still surviving? We call
that the ecology of fear. We'll talk about that a little bit later, but it's not just
the animals that are hit by cars. It's not just that their genes are removed from the
population. It's how does it change the behavior pattern of the populations that remain?
And we judge this or we use a tool to analyze the impacts and we call road effect zones.
And the road effect probably impacts somewhere in the vicinity of 20% of the available habitat
in the United States. And so, as we said, these highways inflict high cost of wildlife
that go much beyond direct mortality. In a German study in 1987, Kuhn demonstrated
that on certain roads as many as 20 or 40 cars per hour was all that was necessary to
end up killing 50% of the migrating amphibians. Now, according to research done by Donaldson,
there are about 1.5 million traffic accidents each year in the United States that involve
deer that ends up in somewhere in the vicinity of over a billion dollars annually in automobile
damage. And this is caused by deer doing their short distance migration, but in having
to cross roads in order to move from one part of their forgery to another, they end up encountering
automobiles. And it's often a pretty difficult encounter. And not only is it tremendous cost
to the damage to the automobiles, often people are badly hurt in these kind of accidents
because cars, as you can imagine, are actually quite safe with airbags and seatbelts inside
impact beams, but they're designed to collide with each other, not collide with wildlife.
And typically, if you end up crashing into a deer or another large ungulate like a moose,
the energy of that animal is not actually absorbed by the car, it tends to come through the windshield.
Invasive species often follow the construction of roads as soil conditions are altered by
the construction process. So again, this notion that beyond the direct impact of animals being
hit, animals changing their behavior, now we have the additional piece that roads are
creating conduits for invasive species. So species that aren't even native to the system
are moving in because of the kind of ecological conditions that roads create. If you drive
along the sides, if you look carefully along the sides of roads and areas that have snow
and the communities are using salt to melt the ice on the roads, you get a very, very
different distribution of plants along the sides of the roads because they're the plants
that have actually adapted to live in salty environments. And you actually end up seeing
plants that you'd only see along saltwater beaches, well inland along the sides of roads
because the salt and the soil mimics the ecology of ocean environments. Now the roads create
fragmentations and that forces wild populations into habitats that are too small for them to
complete their life cycles. Mitigation strategies to deal with, to deal with this problem fall
under essentially two categories. One, we can modify the behavior of the motorist and so things
like brake for moose signs and along with adjusted speed limits and lights and signage
will help to modulate this kind of impact. You can also modify the behavior of the animals
who are crossing the roads and this involves habitat alterations or installations of wildlife
corridors along with exclusion fences and culverts to either go over or under systems.
Over and under passes are being constructed all across the world now to promote safe wildlife
crossings. These are structural passages that can go beneath the road or above the road.
Conservation biologists advocate for crossings and drift fences that will direct and facilitate
wildlife movement. Now this notion of a drift fence, let me talk about that for a minute,
because I think it's pretty intuitive to think okay if we create a natural bridge across a highway
I can understand how the animals will use it but no matter how big the bridge is it's a pretty
small percentage of the amount of habitat with related to where the road is. So not only do you
have to build a bridge but you actually have to create a conduit that will lead the animals to
the bridge and for small like amphibian tunnels and things like that we call them drift fences.
So as the animals go to cross the road they actually encounter a fence they'll move along
the fence until they find the tunnel or the bridge and then they go over. So you need both a
crossover conduit but you also need to persuade the animals to go to that. So in Europe this has
led to the implementing of small pipe culverts for amphibian tunnels. Also some of the first
tunnels in North America were tried here in Massachusetts in the Pioneer Valley and they
found them to be reasonably effective. One researcher Glista mentions that the use of
retaining well in a box culvert and pipe culvert system reduced wildlife road mortality by as
much as 90% in a state reserve in Florida. In Banff wildlife crossing is proven to be successful
at least in a limited range. 10 underpasses have been put up and received nearly 40,000 uses
by wildlife at 10 different underpass sites between 1996 and 2003. Now they're most
frequently used by elk but also coyotes and wolves and sheep will use the site as well.
And if we take a look at at some of the data in a two-year study actually it was both a multiple
studies actually went for about four years. You can see that as they were implemented the use by
both grizzly bears and black bears and wolves went up and continued to be relatively high use
profiles. Certain years would be would drop would see drops by certain animals and they may have
been hunted or removed from mortality purposes at least from the data set. But you can see that
there's at least some limited success and and as a behavioral ecologist I would assume that as
additional generations of grizzly and black bears and wolves and and cougars are born they will
become more familiar and more likely to use those overpasses. Along the TransCanada Highway 36
culverts were monitored in a total of 618 crossings were documented by at least nine different
species. You know underpasses along waterways are used by lots of mammals and 100% of them actually
in the sample that Glista was working with 100% were used by mammals and 75% of the amphibians
use them as well. In Florida bridges were constructed to help save the declining panther
population. You know 24 wildlife and 12 other bridges were modified and constructed within a
40 mile stretch of the highway known as I-75. Also used was a continuous barrier fencing
in other words this notion of a drift fence that we can move the animals along an area
so that they will actually use the resource. And panther numbers have increased in Florida
from a historical low estimate of about 20 due to hunting and trapping and poisoning and being
killed on the roads to about 100 today and in the protected areas no panthers have been killed
by vehicles. So that's that represents a pretty significant pretty significant success rate.
Now some panther mortality was found in areas that lack the drift fences so it's not just the
crossings that are necessary the drift fences are necessary to modify the behavior of the animal.
So up till this point we've talked about timing issues and we've talked about physical blocks
whether it's actually a road itself or whether it's the lack of resources position in the right
place that can limit migration. We need to think about another set of human behaviors that can
limit migration and one of which is light pollution. And light pollution along with habitat destruction
are probably the most important core forces that are reducing the ability to migrate appropriately
and disperse appropriately especially for nesting sea turtles. So remember upon hatching
these sea turtles which are very very vulnerable to predators they've evolved to orient towards the
brightest horizon and generally this results in a in the appropriate dash for the sea. So they come
out they it turns out that the turtles have an orientation system that we're only beginning to
understand but they have magnetic organic material in their skulls called magnetite. Now when you
watch a baby turtle come out there's a certain period of time where they will they will begin to
orient and you see them adjusting their head position and although the data are really hard to
sort of quantify you sort of have a sense that they're that they're sort of setting their clocks
and once they do that they orient in the direction they think they need to go and
off they go and it's a mad dash for the sea. But artificial lighting on beaches and roadways and
dwellings have altered the sensory environment in which these hatchlings find themselves.
And it turns out that that often the brightest spot is not towards the ocean it's actually back
inland. Now these animals have a backup system and most most migrating animals have at least
two systems in which they can figure out where they are. So hatchlings move towards light but
they also move towards lower elevations or the lowest illuminated horizon. So under perfect
conditions they go down and towards light and that takes them to the ocean. If there's light
behind them and they go down to the ocean they're conflicting signals. And researchers are finding
that beachside resorts that get very close to the high tide line can severely disorient
hatchling turtles because they often emerge at the top of the beach with the ocean down one side
and pools of water and bright hotel lights down the other. And they have limited energy
and and stored in their egg sac and when they surface the longer time they spend disoriented
wandering the greater their chance of mortality from predation or from running out of energy.
And according to previous studies by Lauren and Salmon the longer the disorientation on land the
more difficulty they have finding the sea. Now a study conducted by Bourgeois in 2008 found that
leatherback hatchling orientation was deviated towards the direction of artificial light but it
was partly ameliorated by the debris on the beach that could dissuade some of the hatchlings from
traveling the wrong way. They actually had two different study sites and they found that on one
site you know the stuff at the top of the beach sort of got them to turn around and go the other
way and another beach it wasn't quite so helpful. Now turtles are not the only species that are
impacted by light pollution it's devastating to birds to insects to bats it disrupts their
orientation when using especially for birds it disrupts their orientation when using stellar
migration cues it causes them to crash into buildings and lighted towers it causes them to
get trapped in what we call light cones where these very very bright flood lights will bring
birds in and you'll see them circling and circling and circling until they run out of energy they're
overstimulated by the bright light that that they're encountering and this is difficult to quantify
but there are some very striking examples that we have from from history that tell us that this
is a problem for instance going all the way back to 1954 there were 50,000 migratory songbirds killed
when they get caught they got caught in a single beam of light from an aircraft tower in Georgia
at Robin's Air Force Base rather extraordinary and it was was well documented. In 1981 10,000 birds
struck a lighted smokestack in a hydroelectric facility in Ontario
and in 1998 as many as 10,000 individuals of a single species the Lapland long spurs collided
during their migratory track with a radio tower in Kansas. Now in response to this many managers
are actually keeping track of these data for colleges so we can begin to assess these kind of
impacts and and over 15 year period of time at the McCormick place in Chicago
over 1,500 bird carcasses have been collected and so the birds fly into the tower and they strike
and the birds land on the ground and they can be assessed. So as habitats become more fragmented
and stop over locations more patchy birds will face increased threats from light pollution
as they pass through cities on their migratory routes. Now as we said birds are not the only
species that are impacted by this and one of the things I would suggest if you want to see the
impact of lights the next time you're out at night especially on a relatively warm night
especially if there's some humidity and you're you may find that either the street lights will
be bright enough or if there's a sports field nearby go and take a look you're quite likely to see
large congregations of bats that are attracted into the lights now ostensibly they're there
because the insects are there but the lights can be so bright that the bats themselves can get
trapped in that system even though they're actually located they're they're figuring out their world
by echolocation they're not using direct visual cues they're using acoustic cues but the light can
become overwhelming to them so it's it's a very interesting story in our next conversation we're
going to confront one of the great questions in ecology why do so many organisms have males and
females and what are the implications for gender in managing declining habitats and until then thank
you very much
