Hello, and welcome back. In this lecture, we're going to tackle one of the more complicated
questions in ecological systems and our understanding of animal behavior is why are there two different
sexes? You know, we begin with the observation that most higher organisms reproduce sexually.
However, from the Darwinian perspective of fitness, sex actually makes no sense at first
blush. In addition, the investment in sperm and eggs is wildly unequal. The ecology of
male and female organisms is quite different as a result of this different reproductive
investment. And we're going to tackle these questions of the evolution of sex and the
variation in investment between males and females. In some species, males and females
are so different they appear to be completely separate species and live the majority of
their lives with no contact with the opposite sex, except during times when they need to
mate. We will investigate the strategies that each gender uses to manipulate the investment
of the other. And these adaptations will be compared to those few species that have dispensed
with sex altogether and the ecology that drives this process. You know, when I was
growing up and getting very interested in animal behavior, one of my heroes was Jane
Goodall and her incredible story of the long term studies that she was doing with chimpanzees
at Gombe. And her study has gone on now almost 40 years and stands the testament to the both
incredible commitment of science that she's made, but also by extension the commitment
of how her knowledge of how the ecology of these animals unfolds, what are the conservation
implications and moral implications of both living with and studying a species so close
to ourselves. But you read her accounts and one of the most disturbing things that she
discovered in her in her long term studies was the infanticide that would occasionally
take place in these social systems. Infanticide, as you probably know, is adults doing mortal
violence onto young individuals within the population. And when she first saw this happening,
she assumed it was just a maladaptive behavior or something related to density or some of
the ways that we ascribe other violence among organisms. But as she studied the system more
and as chimps have been studied in other areas, we understand that one of the drivers of infanticide
is this differential investment in offspring between males and females that has its deep
roots in the way in which organisms reproduce. And we're going to investigate some of that
more. So this big driving question, why should organisms reproduce sexually? Because it seems
to be such a biological paradox. And from a biological perspective, it seems to be such
a waste of an effective phenotype. And let me give you a description. So you look at
any adult organism and adult organisms, by definition, they've made it to adulthood,
they're successful. Their phenotype, in other words, the combination of genes and the environment
have created individuals able to get through their days successfully. Now, we all know
that from an ecological, from a biological perspective and also an ecological perspective,
we are bags of genes and those genes need to get to the next generation. So why would
you want to take that bag of genes and change it at all? You want to sort of hand it off
to the next generation unchanged because it appears to be fit. But in sexual reproduction,
the first thing adult organisms do is cut their genetic material in half. To produce
viable sperm or eggs, you have to go through meiosis, which cuts the genetic dose in half
and the proper amount of genes are reunited at the time of fertilization. But when that
happens, both parents have lost half of their genetic investment. And so at first blush,
this seems to be a paradox. On one hand, most higher organisms use sex as a strategy to
get their genes into the next generation, but at the same time, they're reducing the
efficiency with which they transfer genes. In a Darwinian fitness model, the winner is
the winner gets the most genes into the next generation. So why is it that the dominant
system of reproduction requires first we cut our genomes in half? Well, these two apparently
disparate worldviews can be brought together with an understanding of the way in which
sex actually works. Now, higher organisms often reproduce sexually, but what about
the systems where there's no gender? Let's take a look at those first. And that would
include this great group of strategies that we call asexual reproduction. And these are
the production of individuals whose genes, the alleles we talked about in previous lectures,
all come from one parent. There is no sperm or egg and no fertilization or fusion. With
sexual reproduction, offspring are formed by the fusion of haploid gametes. Remember,
we have an ovum, the female gamete. It's large. It tends to be not very mobile. We have the
spermatizoon, the male gamete, which is usually small and highly mobile. And in fact, as we
begin to talk about the differences between males and females, it derives from the asymmetry
of these gametes. Eggs are selected or have evolved to be essentially much, much larger,
million times larger than sperm. They're a storage organ. They're the container in which
individuals develop. And sperm, which are produced in very high numbers by individuals
are very small. And the only thing a sperm really contributes to the egg is the genetic
information. So you have this huge differential, but not all animals do it this way. Sexual
reproduction we know generates additional variation among offspring beyond which happens
through mutation, but it also has the effect of scrambling successful genomes. So sex as
a reproductive strategy, alternatives to the standard model might shed some light on the
complications that we've discussed. Now sexual reproduction is particularly difficult in
organisms like parasites or organisms who are sessile, meaning they're bound to the
ground. Remember our conversation about marine organisms that tend to be anchored to the
ground. It's hard for them to get out much. Burrowing animals or other parasites that
are either stuck to their host or find it difficult to move from place to place. Now
in response to that, some organisms actually alternate between a sexual and an asexual
phase. One example is Daphnia, the so-called water flea. And during stable times, females
simply reproduce asexually, creating clonal copies of themselves. It has the advantage
of being able to reproduce very quickly, produce large numbers, and as long as the
environment is stable, it makes sense in an evolutionary sense to just make carbon copies
of yourself. Now when the environment becomes unstable or highly stressful, they switch
to sexual reproduction as their mode. And in this case, the males are haploid and the
adult females are diploid. And so during the sexual phase, the females will go through
meiosis, male sperm will fertilize the eggs, and they will produce offspring that are different
from the mother. And that has the way of generating variation. And as these variations disperse
into the environment, you end up with the hope that at least some of the individuals are
well adapted to this new changing environment and can create a foundation for an expanding
population. Another strategy is something called hermaphroditism, where an individual
can function both as a male and as a female. One strategy is actually to self-fertilize,
where your sperm fertilize your own eggs, and you end up producing essentially clones
of yourself. But the largest percentage of hermaphrodites actually combine gametes with
another member of the same species. An example is the common earthworm, Isenia fatida. It's
a simultaneous hermaphrodite, meaning it produces viable sperm and eggs at the same time, but
it avoids inbreeding. Because each individual donates sperm to the other, and in return
receives a genetic dose from that other individual. Now it's an amazingly cool strategy, right?
Because it doubles the number of offspring that occur in comparison to a system if only
one female was present. So think about this for a minute. In typical sexually reproducing
systems, you have one male and one female. The limiting step in population expansion
is the number of eggs that the female can produce, because the eggs are larger and
more expensive, and in organisms that have internal fertilization, the eggs develop inside,
and mammals of course, there's internal gestation and then lactation. So the number of individual
in the population is ultimately limited by the number of females. In the model of hermaphrodism
we just discussed, if every individual is both a male and a female, you double the number
of young organisms produced because you don't have a class of individuals who are exclusively
male. Males can't produce any eggs. Now another model is sequential hermaphroditism, and here
sex is changed in an individual during its lifetime, and there are two strategies. One
is to be protagynous, where you are female first and then you become male, and the other
is to be protandrous, where you are male first and then females. We tend to see this most
often in marine organisms, and as an example, the Caribbean blue-headed races are protagynous,
in other words, they're female, and only the largest individuals in the population become
males. They live in herms with a single breeding male, and if he dies or leaves, the highest
ranking female, the alpha female, becomes the breeding male, and she can switch from
being a fully functioning female, egg-laying female, to a fully functioning sperm-producing
male in about one week. And for fish that works, because if you remember your anatomy
of a fish, all of their reproductive organs are internal. They don't have an external
organ system, like mammals and some other organisms do, so they have to tune the gametes
they produce, but they don't actually have to change their physical anatomy. Now, there
are both costs and benefits in an evolutionary sense with respect to sex as a reproductive
strategy. Now, not to give away the punchline at the end, but we make the assumption as
ecologists that because sex is the dominant reproductive strategy, and we know that primitive
organisms have various stages of sexual reproduction, that the assumption we make is that sex evolved,
it has generally been very successful, and has become the dominant reproductive strategy.
So on total analysis and fitness analysis, we assume that sex must be beneficial. But
first let's look at some of the known costs of using sex as a reproductive strategy. And
the costs of sex are not trivial, they're expensive. First of all, recombination scrambles
successful genomes. So we said before that you have individuals who've reached adulthood,
they obviously have some level of fitness because they've reached adulthood, and now
in order to reproduce, they have to find another individual of the opposite sex, cut their
own genetic material in half, and recombine it with someone else's. So you have successfully
taken a bag of genes, opened it up, poured half out, gotten someone else to pour half
out of theirs, and now you're going to pour them into a new bag, zip it up, and hope that
this new organism has the right combination of variables within its genetic dose, within
its genome, to be a successful individual. And as you can imagine, many of these experiments
fail, and mortality can be relatively high. Another cost is that this whole process of
meiosis, the cutting down in half of the genetic dose in sperm and egg, and the process of
syngamy, which is this collective idea of bringing the two individuals together and
getting eggs and sperm to unite and fertilize and begin the development of offspring, takes
a lot more time than simply reproducing via mitosis. And so there's a lot more time involved.
In addition, courtship and mating are incredibly costly and risky. So organisms take chances
during the process of courtship and mating that put them at relatively high risk to
other predators. It is metabolically costly. The conflicts associated with sexual access
and organisms is incredibly costly and risky. So all of this is added to the equation. And
for organisms that are reproducing asexually, they're not investing this energy or taking
that risk. They're simply making more offspring. Now, particularly coherent into the conversation
for the notion of ecosystems in decline is that at low population densities, sex may
actually be impossible. Let me give you an example. We've talked about humpback whales
earlier in our conversation about the geospatial differences between where they do most of
their feeding in the cold arctic waters and where they do their reproduction in the warmer
waters to the south. And we also said the males and females don't leave at the same
time. Males leave earlier because they don't need quite as much energy. They don't have
offspring that are gestating inside them. So they leave earlier, they go to these warm
mating grounds and calving grounds and they send long distance acoustic signals back to
the females that can, under appropriate conditions, can travel hundreds or even thousands of miles.
And many of you have probably heard the extraordinarily complex and beautiful songs of humpback whales.
However, the ocean is a big place. And even in a healthy population, there aren't that
many whales. And it's complicated for them to find each other. It's made even more so
under current conditions where at any moment in the Atlantic, we literally have thousands
of ships that are moving back and forth that have noisy, diesel and electric motors that
are generating noise in the ocean. And as such, the mating calls of these whales are
not traveling as far. And as a result, females are having difficulty finding males. So here
you have healthy males, healthy females, and find each other. And so at these lower population
densities, sex can become impossible. Now, we've had, we've talked about turtles before
and I just, before we move on, I want to mention one of the strategies that animals have to
counter this population density issue. Female sea turtles, for instance, it's a big ocean
and it's pretty hard to find males. When they do find males and they do mate, unlike in
most animals where sperm stay viable in the reproductive tract of females for only a few
hours or days, some species of female sea turtles can store sperm for up to 10 years.
So a single mating will produce eggs for an entire decade. So those are sort of an insight
into some of the costs, but clearly they're benefits. And the benefits of sex must outweigh
the cost for most species. Now, we do know that one of the biggest challenges of storing
the genetic material that we have as DNA is it's a lot of it. And one of the things that
has to happen is it has to constantly be repaired because of mutagens that we encounter in the
environment. And so one of the things that happens during meiosis is just before the
first division when the DNA has been replicated now instead of being diploid for a short time,
we actually have four copies of every one of your genes, there's DNA repair at the tetrad
level, that collection of four chromosomes we call a tetrad. So DNA actually has an extra
step of repair that takes place during meiosis and that's actually considered to be an advantage.
It improves the fidelity of the information that's transferred from generation to generation.
There are additional theoretical models that help us to understand the advantage of sex
as well. One is something called Mueller's Ratchet, which says that the sexual reproduction
that occurs on a generation to generational basis allows deleterious alleles to be selected
out of the population quickly. Now, remember from other conversations that because we are
diploid and often a particular phenotype that we express is the result of having only one
of the two copies of genes being dominant and we carry a recessive allele, that recessive
allele is essentially silent in our genomes. And if we only reproduce by cloning, that
gene could really stay with us for very, very long periods of time. Because we mix the genes
every generation, occasionally there'll be instances in which the two recessive alleles
show up together and if there's low fitness with those alleles, that individual will be
selected out of the population. And so this idea of Mueller's Ratchet says, oh, we can
actually select individuals out of the population. Another hypothesis is the so-called Tangled
Bank. And this was actually a favorite of Charles Darwin's and this is actually his
metaphor, the notion that the spatial distribution of ecosystems is very heterogeneous and that
by producing individual offspring with variation, that they can move into these different environments
and have a higher probability of success. And so by generating differences in your offspring,
you compensate for the spatial variation. More recently, a team of researchers led by
William Hamilton and Marlena Zook investigated a theory they call the Red Queen Effect. And
if you remember the Red Queen from the story of Alice through the Looking Glass, remember
the Red Queen instructed Alice that you have to run faster and faster just to stay in the
same place. And this is the essence of the understanding of how sex works from the perspective
of Hamilton and Zook. They suggest that it's not necessarily spatial heterogeneity that's
the key variable for sexually reproducing organisms. Instead, it's the biological heterogeneity
that's created by scrambling our genes every generation. And the most important aspect
of that is it keeps the host ahead of their parasites. So Hamilton's hypothesis plays out
in an analysis of similarities between genes in lab mice and rats. It's a very interesting
data that we're collected. So the hypothesis or the theory revolves around the idea that
we're in an arms race with the parasites that are trying to attack us. And the defense we
have against parasites is our immune system. And our immune system relies on our ability
to create continued variation to create a defense against attacking pathogens. Well, the pathogens,
their fitness is connected to their ability to attack us. And so in an evolutionary sense,
they're trying to pick the locks of our immune system and the immune system keeps changing
its lock. So the advantage of sex is it gives us new locks every generation. So in order
to investigate this, they looked at variation among the proteins produced in the genes of
the MHC locus, the major histocompatibility locus, which is the sort of central part of
our immune system that generates variation. And then they also measured the variation
in genes and proteins for other traits other than the MHC. And what they found was that
the immune system between mice and rats, and the reason they chose mice and rats is because
they have a common ancestor going back in time. And so when the mouse lineage and the
rat lineage split, now they're on separate evolutionary trajectories and we can measure
the amount of variation that's generated in the amount of time that they've been on these
separate evolutionary trajectories. So what they found was that the variation in the genes
of the immune system were much higher than the variation in the genes and subsequently
the proteins that were generated from other loci or other genes in these two different
species. So the immune system showed a much greater allospecific, meaning specific to
that species, divergence than the genes from other locations or other loci, leading to
some critical support for the red queen hypothesis. Now a species with internal fertilization
usually produces fewer zygotes, but invests more in parental care than species with external
fertilization. And if you've got to carry the eggs inside, you're going to produce a
fewer number of them, but you are going to invest more. And a lot of insects are external
fertilizers, but some internal fertilizing insects like the giant water bug in the genus
Bellostoma produce relatively few offspring, and the offspring are actually tended by the
male. Now male parental care is unusual, except in species where survival of offspring depends
on both parents, such as birds. We're actually beginning to get to the core of some of the
conflict between males and females. Now external fertilizers such as amphibians generally produce
large numbers of offspring, but invest very little in parental care. So this really becomes
an entry point now for us to think about some of the differences between male and female
strategies. And this has been sort of enveloped in an idea called sexual conflict theory.
And it has two core ideas. The first is that the conflict exists between the sexes essentially
over mating decisions. And second, the variation in ecological condition drives the evolution
of adaptive mating strategies and results in all the observed diversity that we see
in organisms. And let's take, for example, water striders in the genus Jaris. They're
commonly found on the surface of the ponds. They're the ones that you see walking across
the pond. Much of their observed behavior is actually a playing out of the inherent conflict
between males and females. Now in this species, like in turtles, females store sperm and thus
they need to mate only a few times during the summer. But it's in the male's best interest
to solicit multiple matings with the female, and they want to displace the rival sperm
by soliciting these frequent matings. Now the matings are costly to the females and
so they vigorously resist these advances. Now these water striders have evolved, have
co-evolved strategies to maximize their mating success and they want different things. So
the males want to mate more and the females want to mate less. The males antennae of special
clasping hooks that facilitate grasping onto and holding the female during their mating
encounters. And this mating is very costly to the female. When they're mating it's reducing
their foraging efficiency. She can't eat efficiently when you have a male riding on your back. And
she's at higher risk of predation during copulation and she spends a lot of energy struggling
to dislodge him. And therefore there are these interactions between them. And so what we
see in this particular species in the water striders is actually an arms race going on.
Males keep developing systems that improve their capacity to mate and the females are
in essence developing systems to sort of reject the male. Now traditionally reproductive control
is exerted primarily by females because they have the limiting resource which are eggs.
And males compete with each other for the rare resource which are females. Now reproductive
decisions that are controlled primarily by the female include the investment in the egg.
How much and what and how much to place in each egg. So for instance female side blotch
lizards must decide how many eggs to lay and of what size. See their total investment is
limited. Now females also decide what mate to what mate are they going to mate with.
What is their choice. What male will you accept sperm from. An interesting example here plays
out for female red wing blackbirds. Now they can make a choice of mating monogamously or
polygenously and they make that choice on a territory dependent decision tree. Because
traditionally they can be the only female of a male who has a relatively poor territory
or they can be the second or third wife if you will of a male who is in a wealthy territory
and they will make their choices based upon the food in those territories. Females also
have a decision with respect to fertilization of eggs. Which sperm to use. And here we talk
about this issue of sperm competition. Sperm competition benefits females. Some females
act actually actively engage in this choice by mating with as many males as possible.
Now blackleg kitty wakes actually expel sperm from males that they copulated with that was
too far away from their laying dates because the sperm is no longer as viable. And they
will seek additional matings and additional competition closer to their ovulation date.
They can also decide how much to invest in offspring. Which embryos to maintain. Which
offspring to give care to and how much. An example are Osprey. And Osprey the female
will decide how much she is going to invest in each of her offspring. In good years both
offspring will survive. In bad years only the largest and most aggressive will. Now
male traits can actually influence the reproductive decisions that females do. So they can make
decisions about how much in the way of resource to transfer to females. And that will influence
the investment in the eggs or acceptance of the male as a mating partner. Male common
turns for instance bring fish as a courtship gift to potential female mates. And she's
judging her mating decisions based upon his ability to provide fish. Which is not so critical
to her but very critical to her young when they need to be fed. A labyrinth courtship
is another resource that males have. It influences the acceptance of the male as a mating partner
or the use of the male sperm. And here are the example of bower birds who build these
ground nests filled with colorful objects. Males can solicit frequent copulations with
the same female. This influences the female to use his sperm to fertilize her eggs increasing
the benefits he gains by caring for the resulting offspring. An example are tree swallows where
the males solicit these frequent copulations with the female just prior to egg laying as
a paternity assurance. And females gain as well by having higher levels of sperm competition.
Now males can actually use a strategy called force copulation and overcome female preferences.
An example in the insect domain are bed bugs. In the genus Symex they have a system of literally
of traumatic insemination where males bypass the reproductive tract of the female all together
and insert the sperm directly into her abdominal cavity. In fact the reproductive tract in
this species is used only for birthing of eggs. And that's a very extreme example of
sexual conflict. Another choice or strategy for males is infanticide and that influences
which offspring the female will care for and this we see this in African lions. When males
take over a pride often they will kill the cubs that are there because they're not their
offspring there are no genes in those bags. And by dispensing with those cubs the females
come back into estrus and the reproductive cycle can continue. Now some species dispense
with sex all together some higher species. One example is the desert grassland whiptail
lizard. It's an all female species. Eggs undergo a chromosome doubling after meiosis
and develop without fertilization at all. But it's interesting here because ovulation
requires courtship rituals that are similar to closely related sexual species. And the
sexual behavior in these whiptail lizards is correlated with their ovulatory cycle and
is mediated by circulating sex hormones. So during ovulation estrogen is surging and
individuals behave as females. Upon ovulation progesterone surges and the individuals behave
as males. And so male courtship is necessary to induce ovulation in the females. So they
form female-female pair bonds that are out of sync with each other and they flip back
and forth between playing the male and female role. Now our understanding of the ecology
of sex is just beginning to mature but there are significant implications for conservation
and climate change are profound. Many species have real trouble finding each other. We've
talked about humpback whales. We've talked about sea turtles. These isolated populations
lack genetic diversity such as elephant seals and cheetahs. Also topics that we've investigated.
Now courtship systems can be disrupted by things like urban noise and fragmented habitats.
Pollution is reducing male fertility. We know that to be true in amphibians and in humans.
Now I know I opened this conversation by talking about sort of a disturbing part of the research
that Jane Goodall found in her work with chimpanzees. But I will add you know I generally
think that you know I'm hopeful about the ecology of systems. And one of the fascinating
things that we've seen in the expanded study of chimp behavior has been with a separate
species of chimp called the bonobo which are found in relatively small populations compared
to the chimps that you're used to seeing or used to reading about. And it turns out
that bonobo systems are quite fascinating. Their bonobos actually use sexual behavior
as a peacemaking tool and they use it throughout their social group. Very interesting and the
sexual behavior actually has a strong social function in many ways similar to the way that
the behavior plays out in humans. Now in our next lecture we're going to see how human
demography has adapted to our newly emerging urban lifestyles. So until then thank you
very much.
