Hello and welcome back.
You know, one of the most remarkable adaptive capacities of the human species is to radically
change reproductive patterns in a relatively short time.
You know, not many species are able to do that, but humans have displayed shifting demographic
patterns towards industrialization and urbanization.
They've dramatically changed the size of the nuclear family all over the world.
Domestic birth rates have actually fallen below the replacement rate, and some populations
are actually only maintained through foreign immigration.
In this lecture, we're going to explore the ecological forces that select for large and
small families among the human species, and what it suggests for our own future sustainability.
You know, when we think about this notion of falling birth rates and how that's going
to impact prosperity, it seems as though it's a bit of a paradox, because we would suspect
that as populations decrease, then maybe we're not going to have the same kind of labor capacity
or other aspects of natural capacity that we'll talk about in more detail later to maintain
economic prosperity.
But it turns out that there's an interesting paradoxical relationship between family size
and prosperity, especially in the post-industrial environment we find ourselves now.
So we have these shifting demographic patterns towards industrialization and urbanization,
and they have dramatically reduced the size of nuclear families.
And this is fundamentally a result of change in human birth rates.
Lower birth rates are a transition that reflects rising economic stability and greater access
to education, especially for women.
Although some researchers are finding lower birth rates actually reflect some of the tougher
situations that exist in high-density human environments like cities.
Now this transition is not a reduction in reproductive effort, rather it's a change
in the investment per child.
And let me take a moment and expand on that.
And we have made these kind of connections with other populations of non-human animals.
Essentially, organisms have a fixed amount of energy that they can invest in reproduction.
And the question is, do you invest a lot in a small number of offspring, or do you invest
a little bit in a lot of offspring?
Ultimately, the theoretical model suggests that the total investment is the same.
We're talking about the apportionment of investment.
Now according to a special session of the United Nations that was brought together in
2007 to consider this whole notion of growth rates and changes in demographics, Asia and
Latin America have actually shifted pretty quickly from high to low birth rates.
Overall, the world population growth, however, remains at about 1.2% per year.
And we're going to look at how that mechanic actually unfolds.
About 200,000 additional people are added to the planet each day.
And so the UN estimates that somewhere between 7.3 and 10.7 billion people will be on the
planet by 2050.
Now these UN estimates forecast that two-thirds of the world's population will be living in
cities by the time we reach that number.
That means that somewhere in the vicinity of five to five and a half billion people are
going to be living in cities.
So let's take a look at how these data play out, because it's pretty interesting to think
about these trends.
So we're saying that there's essentially a reduction in population, and you can see
some of the data here.
But even though growth rates are slowing, because there are plenty of young reproductive
women already born on the planet, we're seeing that there is still a considerable amount
of additional population added each year.
So if we take a look at these data on sort of semi-decadal intervals, you'll see that
we're still adding 70 to 80 million people each year of reproductive age, despite the
fact that the average number of offspring per reproductive woman in her lifetime is
dropping.
Now Ruth Mace, whose work we've investigated before, has studied this phenomenon worldwide,
and she reports in the journal Science that the trends towards smaller families is worldwide,
and it reflects the relative costs of producing children that can effectively compete when
they become adults.
And she argues that the trends towards smaller families actually have very, very deep historical
roots all the way back to Europe.
And we go back to examples like the German farmers, who because of their systems of inheritance
practiced smaller family size in order to protect the value of that inheritance, because
it was cut up among the surviving sons.
African herders, who are breeding livestock whose growth themselves are slow, and wealth
within herding communities is really measured as the number of cattle that you have.
If your cattle essentially breed and grow slowly, your population, your family population
size, can't exceed the capacity of the cattle that you have.
So within African herding traditions, there are patterns of reduced fertility so that
you don't outgrow the ability of your cattle to provide necessary resources.
And these strategies vary.
It can be delayed marriage, it can be abstinence, a variety of social mechanisms can enforce
this idea of slower production of children in the family.
The industrialization of the West enhanced the pace of urbanization.
In Britain, for instance, the dramatic reduction in family size between the two most recent
centuries is pretty extraordinary.
It was very common, in fact, the most common commitment to reproduction in the late 19th
century was somewhere between six to eight children families.
And now, by the time we got into the 20th century, the family size of less than four
children became the most common demographic trend in England.
And these trend lines, which began in Europe with the Industrial Revolution, moved to America
and Asia, and now moving into the African continent as well.
Now this negative correlation between wealth and reproduction, as Ruth Mace found, seems
to be a bit of a paradox.
But let's take a look at some of the data.
So if we look at data of women for childbearing age, we look at worldwide populations of women
of childbearing age.
You can see that between 1950, up forecasted, up into the 2050, we're seeing an increase
from about 600 million up to about 2 billion additional women added to the population.
But that's happening despite the fact that fertility rates are actually dropping.
So the transition is affecting individual families, but because of the number of young
women growing into childbearing age, even though individually they're contributing
less children to the population, there are more breeding females, and so therefore the
overall population increases.
And so when population biologists think about this kind of challenge, and we talk about
the mechanics or the math of population biology and other lectures, there's this fundamental
inertia that happens in population growth that takes a while to overcome.
Now Robert Trivers, the evolutionary biologist that has contributed so much to our understanding
of parental investment, argues that the total investment must be distributed in the most
efficient manner.
And so as we think about the challenge of human populations and apply some traditional ecological
tools to them, it becomes not so much of a paradox.
So for instance, if times are harsh and conditions are poor, many offspring may be the only possible
strategy as the survivorship of any one child is locked in as particularly low.
This is called R selection from the steepest part of the growth curve in a population,
which we covered in an earlier lecture.
Remember R is actually the biotic potential of the species.
So under these circumstances, a parent seeking to maximize their genetic fitness should invest
only a small portion of that meager wealth in each child.
Now if conditions stabilize, then more investment per child as survivorship is rising makes
sense because competition among children from different families is becoming more fierce.
And this would be true in animal populations as well.
This is considered K selection, referring to the K in the equation of the carrying capacity
of an ecosystem.
And we see this pattern in many non-human species.
So stable environments or environments that are rich in resources actually select for
an increased parental investment in each offspring.
And an example would be dolphins, where there's a many year natal dependency by the offspring
on the parent.
And in comparison, an animal, a terrestrial animal, the ways about the same amount, white-tailed
deer, they tend to live in very patchy and unpredictable environments that also tend
to be resource poor.
So they have a relatively short parental investment per fawn, and a female deer might have as
many as three fawns in a single year, in which she invests relatively little.
Again, because the probability of survivorship of any one individual is relatively low.
So you're better off dramatically diversifying, if you will, your parental portfolio.
And in comparison, as things become stable and resources are better, then you can, with
some high probability, invest in a fewer number of offspring, invest in their competitiveness.
And they will have provide for you higher fitness than the alternative strategy.
And all of this is linked to the, in human systems, to the emergence of lower mortality
rates associated with urbanization.
So because there are lower mortality rates, parents live longer, and they actually have
more time to invest as parents.
And in fact, they may be investing as parents and grandparents, and in many cases now, great-grandparents.
There's a reasonable likelihood that a given child will survive.
And so that escalates the stakes for each child, because there's more investment in
that child.
It's a positive feedback system.
So Ruth Mace sees very similar urban patterns that link competition and these high-value
investments that are specially made in developed nations.
Education is a modern urban arena for competition.
And in the context of the ecology of cities, educated offspring are incredibly important.
But education is expensive, and it's technologically intensive.
So parents must invest heavily for students' future.
And that's especially true in developing nations where there's not the kind of government
support for education that there are in developed nations.
Theoretically in developed nations, there's a shared tax burden that provides at least
a basic education for every young person.
And therefore, the total investment for the parents can be relatively low, of course until
it's time for college, but some parents will invest more in private schools and so forth.
But in many developing nations, the cost of education is actually entirely leveraged
onto the parents.
And so you see these tremendous sacrifices of parents made so that their children can
get the school uniforms and things necessary to go to both these urban or rural schools
and developing nations.
So what happens is you see both in wealthy environments and those shifting in their demography
is in a sense a runaway directional selection for smaller families and pampered children.
So this demographic transition we're talking about actually passes through some predictable
stages.
And the time lags in these stages will vary according to the social ecology of the region.
Let's take a look at this demographic transition model.
It breaks down into essentially four stages and stage one has relatively high birth rates
and high death rates.
Remember, that's what leads to, it's the high death rates that lead to continued high
reproductive output.
Now in the first transition from stage one to stage two, what happens is that the death
rate begins to fall.
People live longer, children live longer, childhood mortality begins to be reduced.
And so for a period of time as the death rate falls, the population actually grows pretty
fast because you have falling death rates and you still have relatively high levels
of reproductive activity.
That's the sort of dangerous bubble within a population where with additional education
and the availability of high quality medical care, all of a sudden lots and lots of babies
are surviving, but moms are still having lots of kids.
And so the sort of model is the population then moves to the second transition, so-called
stage three.
And stage three is where the death rate continues to stay low, but now the families are adopting
smaller numbers of children as a strategy.
Death rates are falling, and now we begin to see the rate of growth decline.
And with those two essentially converged, we enter through the third transition into
stage four, which are relatively stable populations that are having small families and have essentially
relatively stable population levels.
However, the lag between the start and completion of the transition is very complex and has
a relatively high cost of the system.
As I said, the longer that lag is between stage three, stage two and stage three, the
more complicated it is for the population.
And let's take a look at some age distribution data, theoretical age distribution data from
developed and less developed countries, and you can begin to see the challenge that we're
talking about.
As we take a look at the data set on the left, we see what appears to be a pyramid, and what
that is is the age distribution in five-year intervals of the distribution of the population.
Now if you have a very wide base at the bottom of your population, all those individuals are
eventually going to reach the age of reproduction.
And as they reach the age of reproduction, suddenly you see this tremendous burst of
population.
In this country, it happened after the end of the Second World War, where the development
of modern drugs and immediate increased wealth after the end of the Second World War.
And lower death rates, we saw this baby boom.
And following the baby boom, we saw the final stage of transition to much smaller families.
But there was that bulge of young people growing up and then reaching retirement age that actually
exceed in some instances the young people who are actually of younger age who are working.
So when you have these wide bases, you end up having essentially the recipe for very,
very intense population growth.
Compare that, for instance, to the structure that you see on the right-hand side, which
is less like a pyramid and it's more even.
And what that's showing actually is a relatively narrow base at the end.
Population is either stable or constricting as a result of reduced family size.
And that population is a little bit more stable and likely to not grow as fast.
Now family size and public health are also linked.
In general, public health is higher in communities with smaller families.
Now urban neighborhoods have shown trends of improved public health.
Family sizes have dropped as humans move from rural agricultural areas.
The connections between smaller family size, increased educational opportunities and better
public health outcomes are robust actually across cultures and nations.
Now according to research done by Christopher Dye of the World Health Organization, this
drop in fertility is interlinked with improved sanitation and overall health prospects and
is robust across all geospatial scales.
We have data here from his recent paper in Science and you can see that as we look at
fertility rates and we look at the distribution of fertility rates from a wide variety of
areas ranging from sub-Saharan Africa to Asia to the Arab states, Latin America, Central
and Eastern Europe and Central Asia, you can see that the fertility rates remain much higher
in rural areas than they do in urban areas.
And if we take a look at the childhood mortality rates, infant mortality rates, those are infants
dying in the first year of life, you also see that the infant mortality rates are much
higher in rural areas than they are in urban areas.
And again, this is across the world, not just in developed nations and not just in developing
nations.
These are robust cosmopolitan trends.
Now the U.S. fertility rates have dropped precipitously over the past five decades.
According to the Centers for Disease Control, there have been some slight increases in the
past few years, but they are still small by comparison to previous decades.
And it's interesting, one of the sources of the small amount of increase is the rather
surprising trend in the United States that's followed us through the transition to the
21st century of the number of mothers who are having babies out of wedlock or as single
mothers.
And it's hard to separate those two demographically, but somewhere in the vicinity of 40 percent
of the children born in the United States are currently born to unwed mothers.
And we have some very interesting data from the Centers for Disease Control that are looking
at this relationship and the last data that we have, they lag a little bit behind the
actual publishing of the reports.
But what you see is that from the 1940s to the 1950s, there was a pretty significant
increase in the rate of live births and fertility in the United States.
And remember, that makes sense.
What we're seeing is a response to the end of the Second World War, this change in demographics.
It was a real renaissance and emergence of the middle class.
And in fact, this reliance on the sort of economic engine of the middle class is what
has given rise to the great distribution of suburbs that emerged after the Second World
War, which are actually a celebration of the emergence, the birth of this middle class
of citizens in the United States with relatively high levels of education.
We're going to talk a little bit about some of the ecological burdens that that has leveraged
onto ecosystems as a result of the development of suburbs.
But we see this in the population demographics because we're seeing this burst of population,
both in the number of offspring being born and the particular birth rates.
We then see that somewhere in the vicinity of the late 1960s and 70s, we see a pretty
significant decrease in the birth rates.
And that has both cultural drivers and ecological drivers.
And it's sort of interesting to think about this from an ecological standpoint.
One of the contributors to the reduction in birth rate has to do with the rate at which
women are entering the workforce and entering the workforce as highly educated individuals.
And so by entering the workforce, it delays the onset of birth of the first child, typically.
And what we do know as a general trend across the world is that starting later generally
results in fewer children.
There's also a very strong link between education and family planning.
And so as more and more women enter the workforce, they're tending to do so both in the United
States and internationally with more education.
And as education levels rise, women are take a more active role in the decision making
about family size.
And remember, this goes back to the ecology of R versus K selection.
One of the things that surprised folks when this trend was taking place in the 1970s,
because in fact when I was in graduate school and this trend was just beginning to emerge,
there was a sense among those of us who worked as ecologists who felt we had a strong social
mission to sort of improve the nature of humanity, a number of my colleagues would
be working in the Peace Corps, working in developing nations.
And we had this sort of uneasy sense that in some ways was reinforced by some of our
older professors who had sort of a Malthusian view of the world that by going into these
impoverished communities and providing additional resources and reducing poverty and hunger,
what we were actually doing despite our best intentions was causing an artificial increase
in population that would ultimately lead to a reduction in ecological viability because
that population would now grow faster and in a generation we'd have even more hungry
children to try and feed.
And so there's a sort of nagging anxiety around this.
But what was extraordinary is I was lucky enough to be in graduate school at the time
in which this transition, these demographic transitions were first being realized.
And the work of Robert Trivers and others were emerging with respect to parental investment
and it all started to fall in place, it was really exciting.
Of course, families with higher education and higher wealth have higher social stability
and this increased social stability meant that you didn't have to invest in so many
children.
The children that you had were likely to survive, they were likely to get the appropriate care
that they needed so that the wave of childhood diseases that took so many children in impoverished
communities weren't there anymore.
And so these educated families were transitioning themselves into smaller families because of
the change in the investment structure.
And so as we began to learn these patterns and began to see these when ecological historians
then went back to look at other populations, it was, of course, this happened in Europe,
this was happening in the United States and these are models that as other nations develop,
they will go through these transitions as well.
And sure enough, it's happened in India, it's happened in China, absolute rates of population
growth per individual or reproductive rates per individual are falling, of course the
world is still continuing to grow because of this, there's this lag time of the extensive
base in these demographic structures of the populations.
So two parent families with higher income generally have fewer children and invest more
per child.
It brings full circle, this paradoxical question that we started out with today.
You know, the World Bank estimates that increasing the age of marriage around the world would
have the greatest impact towards reaching replacement level fertility, which means the
population, the population level would remain essentially the same.
Now one of the great challenges that we still face with respect to creating these high density
places for people to live where transitions have taken place is the challenge of creating
spaces where the resources in these communities are equally distributed.
We are still challenged by urban disadvantages, cities are inherently unequal.
Now resources within urban areas tend to be distributed unequally, amenities such as parks
and open spaces, playgrounds, municipal swimming pools are typically cited in more affluent
sections of the city.
However, this distribution is viewed by many as unfair and represents one of the many urban
environmental injustices.
And this situation is exacerbated when you add the distribution of dis amenities in the
city such as trash, transfer stations, parking lots and municipal repair facilities, all
of which drive down property values.
Some cities zone these under the category called noxious use because it's clearly understood
that this reduces the value of the community.
Now many urban researchers have considered the historical legacies of these dis amenities
and many theories have emerged with respect to their origins.
One obvious variable is race, that these unequal distributions were driven by racial considerations
at the time of their implementation.
Now some studies support these analyses.
James Lester led a team that investigated this phenomenon across three different geographic
scales.
Published in his book Environmental Injustice in the United States, Myths and Realities,
the data showed that environmental injustices are present in about 50% of the Hispanic population
analysis between 30 and 50% of the white population in analysis, but nearly 90% of the African-American
populations that were analyzed.
These data sets and others like it are really quite compelling, but the critics cite flaws
in the methodology and challenge the linking of these distributions to the temporal histories.
In other words, there's a lag between what we're measuring now and when things happened
and is it really a robust relationship?
Now recent research by a colleague of mine, Charlie Lord at Boston College, suggests that
these relationships between race and dis amenities have deep roots in the history of cities and
a clear intentionality that municipal zoning decisions were made with, that race was a
key component of that.
In research conducted in Baltimore, he found a legacy of redlining dating back to the onset
of formal zoning laws that themselves date back to the formation of a zoning commission
in 1921 and then the emergence of these first zoning laws in 1925.
Now remember, redlining is the practice by banks and lending agencies of targeting neighborhoods
and literally drawing a circle around them as a no-lend zone, high risk, no-lend.
This is a crippling effect on economic growth in that area inside the redline.
And historically in Baltimore, those red lines were drawn around neighborhoods of color and
they were able to gather the data and the comments of the people who were the written
comments in letter form, the people who were drawing those lines, making those direct
statements.
Now Charlie Lord along with a team of statisticians and GIS experts tracked the decisions made
by the zoning board from 1930 through 2000, nearly 10,000 records of which the decisions
on noxious uses were ultimately analyzed.
They took a subset of that that were focused on the uses they were interested in and the
data were striking.
In each decade analyzed, there was a positive correlation between race and distance to the
noxious use.
In other words, the higher the proportion of black residents, the closer the neighborhood
was to the dish amenity.
Now as we move through the period of racial tension and awakening and the civil rights
movement and finally the integration neighborhoods, those correlations weaken as the data get
closer to the present, suggesting that the trend is subsiding as neighborhoods become
more racially mixed and these practices are daylighted.
Now understanding these data are a critical step in understanding the social ecology of
urban areas and real insight into the ecological forces that racial bias plays in the assembly
of city structures over time is really important because remember it's both social and biophysical
drivers that make the ecology of urban areas and in fact any human dominated landscape.
In order for cities or any neighborhood to be sustainable, they must also be equitable.
Public resources are the equivalent of ecological nutrients and they can permit human populations
and therefore intrinsic social ecology either to flourish or to wither.
For instance, we have considered park design for instance and habitat structure in other
lectures.
We see how physical change can alter the characteristics of animal neighborhoods just in the case of
central Florida driving out native scrub jays with invasions of blue jays.
In the case of these two species of corvids, we do not ascribe a moral decision about
the outcome.
Instead, this is Darwinian competition among species for genetic survival.
But we do consider a moral imperative to protect rare habitats for endangered species as their
presence is critical such as the habitat loss in Florida related to the jays, it's anthropogenic.
However, in city systems, the communities in ecological competition over resources are
all one species, human beings.
Our moral and ethical compass generally points towards an equity of opportunity that should
extend to the ecological characteristics of all of the city's neighborhoods.
Now in our next lecture, we're going to investigate the ecology of migration.
Why and how species move from one ecosystem to the next.
So until then, thank you.
