Music
Hello and welcome back.
You know, as part of this course series, we've been looking at ecology at a number of different scales.
And sometimes we've been flipping back between population, scale ecology, and then working at the level of communities.
And in this particular lecture, we're back at the level of communities.
We're very interested here in the way in which species are interacting with each other.
You know, many species live in such close proximity to each other that they actually impact each other's evolutionary trajectory.
We call this process co-evolution.
There are many forms of co-evolution, including mutualism, predator-prey interactions, arms races, mimicry, camouflage, and deception.
And we'll analyze the nature of competition and cooperation among these co-evolved species,
and we'll consider the ecological dynamics of such relationships.
You know, the rapid decline of world ecosystems places these extraordinary relationships in real peril.
Now, when we think about the kinds of systems that we're investigating,
we're really talking about communication systems with organisms.
And sometimes this information actually is deceptive.
And I want to begin with a story about the nature of deception,
because we tend to think of the fidelity of information as it transfers among organisms
within a population or across species boundaries as essentially being true signals.
But sometimes animals actually want to send deceptive signals,
because it helps to compensate for some kind of limitation in their system.
And of course we tend to see that in human systems as well.
You know, we want to be perceived as wealthier or younger or have more capacity than we actually do,
because inherently we're in a competitive environment.
And the signals that we send are critically important.
And in fact, many of the signals that we send around arenas of conflict are designed actually to prevent the conflict altogether.
So for instance, if a signal can be sent by a human or any other animal,
that a conflict with me would certainly result in you're losing that conflict,
then the organisms are actually much less likely to enter into conflict at any state.
And so the signals we send are important in that they achieve their outcome,
but sometimes they're deceptive.
And so keep that in mind as we think about this whole process of co-evolution.
Now in stable ecosystems, different species can profoundly impact each other's evolution.
You know, generally we think that only natural selection and genetic drift
can alter the genetic structure of populations.
And we've investigated that in this series, but I think about Hardy-Weinberg dynamics
and how directional and other types of selection can change those frequencies.
However, some species are so intimately interconnected that they change the gene frequencies in each other's population.
And we call this phenomenon co-evolution.
And it's such an important piece that really to understand the changes in the ecology of a planet like ours under stress,
we really need to understand how these co-evolutionary relationships work
because they're pretty high risk in unstable ecosystems.
So in a co-evolve relationship, each party exerts selective pressures on the other,
thereby affecting each other's fitness and by extension their evolution.
Now, a very early and profound example of co-evolution is found in all eukaryotic organisms.
Mitochondria, the organelles within our cells that are responsible for our ability to use oxygen,
improves very large amounts of ATP, actually at one time in the deep history of life's past,
they were free-living prokaryotic cells.
And Mitochondria essentially moved into other cells and that co-evolve relationship
allowed for the evolution of eukaryotic cells.
But because of that, Mitochondria actually have their own DNA sequences
that are separate from the DNA that we carry in the nucleus of ourselves.
The first eukaryotic cells appeared about 1.6 to 2 billion years ago,
and that represents this incredible co-evolved relationship,
which is still evolving between the DNA of the mitochondria and the DNA in the nucleus
because they're separate, but they're clearly affecting each other's evolutionary trajectory.
Now, a more spatially apparent relationship on the scale that we tend to view the world
would be a co-evolve relationship between birds, such as hummingbirds, and the flowers that they feed on.
They have co-evolved based on color and flower shape and bill or tongue length in the birds themselves.
So the flowers and the birds have co-evolved to maximize the efficiency of the relationship.
So hummingbird flowers have nectar chemistry that accelerates the efficiency of the bird's diet.
Their color and morphology also coincide with the bird's vision and bill morphology.
And in fact, the blooming times of the flowers have been found to coincide with the hummingbird's breeding season.
And remember, we've talked about this issue of phenology before,
and as we think about ecosystems being changed by things like climate change,
if this relationship between the timing of the bird's arrival and the availability of flower nectar is not tightly linked,
then the birds don't survive and the plants don't get their pollination needs met.
Now another way to think about co-evolution is that it is an evolutionary arms race
because some co-evolve relationships are between predators and prey.
And the whole idea of deception helps many organisms survive.
But the adaptive value of the phenotype that the organism is providing is entirely conditional on both players.
And that's what makes co-evolution so interesting.
Additionally, we think that fitness is the relationship between a population's DNA
and all the forces that are aligned against it or in competition with it.
But in a co-evolve relationship, the value or contingency of the phenotype is very tightly linked to what the other organism does.
And let's take into example the deceptive activity of camouflage.
So camouflage minimizes the difference between you and your surroundings and it enables you to avoid predation.
So this is an arms race.
So the crypsis that's being involved, the phenotype of camouflage, has to work for the predator sensory system.
So for example, if your prey species is a bird and birds are visual species,
then your cryptic adaptations are likely to be visual.
It's a visual indicator that the organism is trying to provide as a phenotype.
So crypsis or this method of avoiding being detected by prey
is a function of the predator's ability to detect its prey and the prey's ability to diffuse or to not send that signal.
An example, a classic example, would be willow ptarmigan,
which use crypsis as an anti-predator strategy against birds of prey that are trying to find it.
The ptarmigan, which lives in subarctic and arctic regions, has two very distinctive feather molds
or feather displays that it molds from one to the other during different seasons.
So in the winter, it has white plumage, which helps it blend in with the snow.
And then in the summer, it has a mottled brown plumage for the breeding season.
You can see the two different feather morphs of this particular bird.
And during the breeding season, it's nesting on the ground because in the areas that it lives in,
these willow thickets and marshes in the arctic valleys and subarctic valleys, there are no trees.
It's above treeline.
And so all the birds there are nesting on the ground.
They're at high risk from predators and they're at high risk for visual predators such as other birds of prey.
And so their strategy for survival is to remain incredibly hidden within the willows
and that involves the color of their feathers and also it involves behavior.
And one of the interesting things about willow ptarmigan is that as you approach them,
they stay incredibly still up until the very last moment and then they'll fly up.
But in that flying up, it reveals where their nest is.
Their behavior is to stay as still as possible when potential predators are around.
Now, another example of a cryptic strategy are inchworms in the genus Necrophora.
They resemble twigs on which they live.
From a behavioral perspective, remember, caterpillars are which are the first half of life of a butterfly.
They're essentially eating machines and they're gaining weight rapidly and growing through a series of successive instars,
which are the way in which insects grow.
Remember, they have ectoskeletons, they don't have internal bones,
so they essentially create these hard external packages that they live in
and they have to break and build new packages a number of times in their development.
We call that an instar.
But in order to survive, they have to avoid being eaten.
And so many of the species of caterpillars are cryptic.
Now, some are poisonous and we'll talk about that later.
Now, after pupation, they emerge as adult butterflies and moths.
And then the focus of their behavior is actually not eating at all.
It's behavior and reproduction.
And the image you can see of the inchworm is that it looks almost like a tree branch.
And again, once it senses that it is being detected,
if there's any movement or sound that it hears, it will freeze
and its best defense is to not move and to look as much like a branch as possible.
Now, an alternative to hiding is another set of signals,
and that's alarm and warning coloration.
And here, the organism is actually trying to maximize the difference
between its body and the background.
And this aposomatic or body not like the background coloring wards off predators
because it sends a signal that I'm poisonous.
And a classic example are monarch butterflies.
Now, as a caterpillar, the monarch butterfly feeds on milkweeds,
which actually are plants that produce poisons that make them pretty much safe
from almost all insects except a very few number that include monarch caterpillars.
And so the caterpillar feeds on the milkweeds
and it sequesters the poisons from the milkweeds in its wings and its body surfaces.
And that makes the insect toxic to most animals that would eat it.
It causes an emetic response.
It causes them to essentially puke up the body of the butterfly.
So in response to already being poisonous,
it has evolved an orange and black coloring that warns predators of its toxicity.
And these bright colors, as you can see in the image,
are very effective signals that, in fact, have been copied by other species.
There has been a convergence on this coloration of bright orange and black or yellow and black.
And so, in fact, you see this in a number of noxious or toxic or stinging insects.
You see this in bees and wasps.
You see this alternating yellow and black color in certain kinds of poisonous snakes
and poisonous frogs.
And they're a signal.
They're a signal to potential predators that if you eat me,
I'm going to make you very, very sick.
And in fact, over a long enough period of time,
these signals actually become built in to the sensory systems of potential predator species.
And they either avoid them from birth or they learn very quickly and are reinforced
that this is a signal that says, don't eat me.
Now, here's where the deception piece comes in.
And this is why I think co-evolution is so really incredibly interesting.
It turns out, a while back, about 150 years ago or so,
a British naturalist by the name of Henry Bates began to investigate the system of shared colored signals.
And in fact, we named a form of co-evolution called Batesian mimicry after him.
And this is a situation where the signal is actually deceptive
and the mimic is exploiting a model whose signal is actually honest.
So the mimic can talk the talk but can't walk the walk.
And we're going to talk about a couple of examples in just a moment.
About the same time, another naturalist by the name of Fritz Muller,
who was a German biologist, was also investigating this process
and found that a number of organisms had actually converged on this signal
and their signals actually were honest.
And the fact that there were multiple species using the same signal,
they were converging on a single phenotype.
And so the fact that more than one species was using that signal actually strengthened it.
And we're going to talk about this relationship in just a moment.
And let's start by coming back to an example that we just mentioned, and that's honeybees.
Now, honeybees have evolved this aposomatic coloring as an anti-predator defense.
And you can see by the image, if you look at a honeybee, you see this alternating yellow and black stripes.
What that says is that if you attack me, I'm going to sting you.
And that ends up being enough of a warning for most organisms to stay clear of bees.
But this long relationship between the model, in this case the honeybee,
has created an opportunity for mimics to evolve these color systems
without necessarily having to also involve the noxious or poisonous or stinging capacity.
And one classic example are surfid flies, the so-called hover flies that we have in most ecosystems.
And hover flies have these alternating black and yellow stripes.
And it gives them essentially a free pass as they move through ecosystems.
Birds won't eat them, but they lack stingers, and they're not even closely related to bees.
But instead, they've evolved this signal, and this signal essentially protects them
because they are interpreted as bees.
That's an example of a Batesian mimic to the honeybee.
Now, there are other species of bees and wasps that live together.
One example would be the sand wasp, and there's an image here on the screen that you can see.
And the sand wasp is a malaria mimic of the honeybee because the sand wasp can sting
and is therefore sending an honest message.
Now, malaria mimics reinforce each other's signals and contribute positively to their fitness.
And here we can see the three examples of a honeybee, a surfid fly, and a sand wasp.
And I have the images together because, first of all, it gives you the metaphor
that these organisms are living in shared ecosystem space,
but it helps us to understand how the fitness is modified by the presence of these different species.
So think about this for just a moment.
Honeybees are sending the signal.
The availability of sand wasps, which are also sending an honest signal,
improves both the fitness of the honeybee and the potential fitness of the sand wasp.
And that's why it's called honeybee because, let's say, we have a young naive bluejay
who's just left the nest and may have to learn about this coloration,
sees these big juicy insects, they're yellow and black, eats one, gets stung.
Not going to forget that experience.
Remember, getting stung by a bee or wasp is pretty unpleasant when you weigh 150 pounds.
Imagine how unpleasant it is when that same amount of poison is interjected into an organism
so that's in aversive response that that bluejay will never, and bluejays live 20 years,
they'll never eat another yellow and black insect again.
So in the malaria system, a young bluejay that eats a wasp for the first time,
it's not even going to have to try a honeybee because it's learned that yellow and black doesn't work.
But think about instead the bluejay that might have for the first time eaten a surfeit fly.
Wait a minute, the yellow and black, easy to find.
Surfeit fly doesn't sting me.
This actually worked pretty well.
Lots of protein and fat in an insect, pretty good meal.
So now this has gotten a mixed signal because maybe the next time the bluejay will eat
or attempt to eat one of the honest signaling insects and get stung,
now you've got mixed messages going on and it may actually take a fair number of wasps and bees dying
before the signal is actually embedded in the bird well enough to say,
oh, it's not worth the risk to try these yellow and black insects.
And so surfeit flies to some degree, and the degree is dependent upon
what proportion they make up of the overall ecological population,
they actually reduce the fitness and in some ways are parasitic onto the signals
of the honest messengers.
And this is a classic challenge in ecosystems.
Deceptive signalers bring down the fitness of honest signalers
and the systems are only stable when they're relatively low numbers.
Now monarch butterflies are also a model for another species of butterfly.
Remember their warning coloration against predation, they taste horrible.
One of their mimics is a viceroy.
And there's wonderful controversy around the nature of this mimicry.
Originally the viceroy was considered a palatable food source
and then it actually abates in mimic because it didn't appear to produce any poison.
But recent data indicate that the viceroy is actually unpalatable to some species of birds,
which would make it a malaria mimic.
And here we have an image of both a monarch and a viceroy butterfly
and if you're good in working in the field, you can tell them apart.
But a casual observation and one that a predator would make,
it's very hard to tell them apart.
Now another way to think about co-evolution is to think about symbiotic relationships.
And these are long-term interactions among organisms that can shape an ecosystem.
Predator-prey relationships are also in a sense long-term,
but the relationship between a predator and its prey, it either gets eaten or it doesn't.
In these other kinds of relationships we're engaging in now,
we're really talking about different species that are going to spend
significant portions of their lives in close intimate contact with each other.
And we really consider three kinds of interactions.
The first is a commensalism.
And here is where one species benefits from the relationship
and the other is not significantly harmed,
but nor does it gain a benefit.
And the example that I'm using today is that of a clownfish
and sea anemones we consider them to be commensal symbionts.
Now many species of clownfish, including the one that's image here, amphopryon,
spends a significant portion of its life feeding amongst the sea anemones.
Now sea anemones have stingers and most fish that would enter there
would be stung by entering this community,
but they gain protection and food from their association with the anemones.
However, the fish don't appear to provide any fitness advantage to the anemones,
but they don't appear to impose a cost.
So they're neutral to one species, helpful to another.
We call that a commensal relationship.
However, some researchers suggest that clownfish may actually drive away
some predatory fish so that that relationship hasn't worked out,
but it hasn't been completely worked out,
but you can see the theoretical structure behind it.
Now when most people think of long-term covalval relationships,
they think of the second example we're talking about here, which is a mutualism.
And this is where each individual derives a benefit from the other.
And one classic example of the relationship between some species of ants
and some species of aphids, they are mutualistic symbiotes.
So the ants and aphids are in a mutualism that benefits both species.
Now in these relationships, ants tend the aphids and protect them from predators.
And in exchange, they get a share of the nectar that is harvested by the aphids.
Now I know that some of you have gardens and just mentioning the word aphid
sends you into a kind of a spire of anxiety.
And I understand because aphids can wreck a garden so quickly.
By the way, one of the reasons that aphids are so dangerous
is they reproduce asexually when conditions are good.
So you go and look in your garden one day and you see a few aphids.
You come back a few days later and the plants are crawling with aphids
because they can reproduce so quickly.
And as you know, aphids drive their stylus into the flow of the plant
and take the food right out of the plant.
But because of the positive pressure of the fluid,
it literally blows right through and out the back end of the aphid.
And there's essentially undigested nectar that's available,
sugar water that's available.
And the ants can make a living off of that.
But at the same time, it's a bit of a protection racket
because they want to protect their aphids.
So we have this mutual relationship.
The ants will protect the aphids, the aphids are providing food.
And in fact, when the plants' wound response plugs up the available liquid,
the ants will actually help unplug the aphid and move it to another location.
Absolutely extraordinary.
Another relationship in these long-term interactions
is something we call consumer-victim relationships.
And that includes the whole collection of things like predation
and pathogens and parasitism.
Parasitism is when one organism gains a benefit,
while the other, the host, is harmed.
And there are things like gut-bacterian ticks and things like that
that are sort of traditional parasites.
But I thought I would talk about something I think is very interesting,
which is actually a behavioral parasite.
And here the example is a species of bird called the cuckoo,
which exploits the parental behavior of aloe-specific birds
in order to raise their young.
We've talked about brown-headed cowbirds in North America, cuckoos in Europe,
or do the same thing.
They lay their eggs in other birds' nests, and those birds raise their young.
So the female cuckoos lay eggs in other nests of other such songbirds,
common species that they parasitize or pipits,
and those are some of the images that you see.
And upon hatching, baby cuckoos instinctively remove the eggs of their host parents.
And that increases the amount of food and attention that they receive,
which improves their fitness.
But at the same time, the pipits aren't raising their own offspring.
Their own bags of genetic material have been tossed aside,
and they're now raising somebody else's bag of genetic material.
So it's a tremendous fitness advantage to the cuckoos,
because they can invest all their time in laying eggs in other nests,
but it's a tremendous cost to the parasitized nest.
Now, the really interesting biological piece here that's fascinating to me as a behavioral ecologist
is how do baby cuckoos know that they're cuckoos
if they're mostly raised by other species?
Because when they become adults,
they have to find members of their own species with which to breed.
So it's really quite amazing.
Even though a cuckoo is raised in a pipit's nest,
it will grow up to be attracted to cuckoos and sing a cuckoo song.
Really quite extraordinary.
If we had more time to talk about that,
we could certainly fill time discussing this,
but we're talking about these co-evolve relationships right now.
But it's really quite interesting.
We've talked before about the whole notion of malaria,
and it's a co-evolve relationship between humans and the plasmodium that causes the disease.
The plasmodium is a parasite.
We've also talked, member, that balanced polymorphism
maintains heterozygote advantage of humans in the malaria system.
And remember, heterozygosity at a particular locus
may provide greater survivorship and reproductive success
than for homozygous individuals.
And in this case, the heterozygous example involves the protein hemoglobin.
And there is a recessive allele that causes sicklecell anemia
among people who have two copies of that disease.
Now, the homozygous allele for hemoglobin is dominant,
and most individuals are homozygous dominant,
but homozygous dominant individuals which have normal hemoglobin
are also highly vulnerable to malaria.
So, heterozygous individuals which are malaria resistant
have an advantage in areas of high malarial risk.
And so, not surprisingly, sicklecell anemia
and the sicklecell allele frequency
is highest where the malarial parasite is common.
It's the cost borne by the heterozygote advantage
because in some places, a sicklecell allele may reach 20% or more
in areas with high prevalence of the malarial parasite.
Now, the more complex the co-evolve relationship,
the more disruptive to the system any kind of anthropogenic change can be,
and it's one of the reasons we've decided to sort of consider co-evolution
in the context of challenges to the Earth's ecosystem.
You know, this is hard to measure,
but it's probably a contributing factor to the current rates of extinction,
particularly so in tropical areas
because it's tropical areas that have the highest levels of co-evolution.
And the reason that happens, or at least the reason we think that it happens,
is that in temperate areas, remember, it gets cold part of the year,
energy is locked up, water is locked up in ice,
energy gets essentially put underground by plants as plants drop their leaves,
and so all the animals have to adjust to this force that happens at the end of the summer,
which is winter.
But remember, in the tropics, there is no winter.
It's always warm, it's always moist.
And so you have the ability in these incredibly stable environments
for very, very complex interrelationships to evolve.
But those very interrelationships and interrequirements, if you will,
make the human disturbance factor that much more of an impact.
Now, I just want to finish with a story around mimicry
that happens actually in my own backyard,
and I'm sure some of you have encountered this as well.
Going back to our conversation about blue jays, blue jays, long life species,
very, very smart members of the crow family, they can live 20 years or more in nature.
And we have bird feeders that are set up around our house,
and we have a particular blue jay, and they're not actually marked,
so I can't be sure it's always the same blue jay,
but birds that are at feeders are very, very worried about the presence of predatory birds like hawks.
And when hawks give their territorial signals, like they're returning to the nest,
usually the songbirds will, at least for a moment, just scatter away from the feeders.
We have a blue jay that lands near the feeder and mimics the hawk call.
And in mimicking that hawk call, literally acoustic mimicry,
it causes the songbirds to scatter and the jay can come into the feeder unmolested.
It's really extraordinary, and the birds essentially fall for it each time.
It's a small cost for them to leave.
It's a big advantage for the blue jay to get away with it,
and so you see this cycle repeating over and over.
Now, one of the most extraordinary aspects of co-evolution
is the way in which disease-causing organisms exploit their host.
And we're going to investigate West Nile virus and Lyme disease,
as well as other diseases of this sort in the next lecture.
So until then, thank you very much.
