Hello and welcome back. You know, in our last lecture, we were engaging ecology at the community level, and we're talking about this incredible process of co-evolution.
And we looked at various kinds of relationships and mimicry and deceptive signaling.
But here we're going to actually investigate the nature of disease and those diseases that require co-evolved relationships between hosts and vectors and agents.
We're going to talk about the whole biology of zoonotic disease because they are also diseases that are modified or enhanced by climate change.
You know, many human diseases such as Lyme disease or West Nile virus are the result of these so-called co-evolved relationships.
They involve many species, and many ecological factors play into the risk profile that these diseases present.
Now climate change and the breaking up of habitat is actually increasing the instances and spread of zoonotic and infectious disease.
Now the biology of zoonotic disease is really fascinating from a biological standpoint, and it involves the interplay of these various co-evolved species.
And there are very close connections between the lives of the animals involved and their human hosts.
And these are more complicated than the two species co-evolution that we saw earlier in the previous lecture.
So we're actually going to increase the level of complexity of this conversation.
Now many of you probably encounter ticks and other ectoparasites on your dogs, and when they come in you have to take them off and you sort of worry about the disease risk that's associated with that.
And that's actually an interesting factor because as our population has become more suburban and urbanized, the role that our dogs as pets play in our lives has actually changed quite a bit.
When we think about the history of the way that humans interacted with dogs in agrarian systems, it wasn't unusual for dogs to sleep outside or sleep in the barn.
And as we became more suburban, dogs moved into the house.
And as we have actually downsized our family and made pets more of a central part of our family, dogs are actually coming in very close contact with us.
And I have to claim being guilty of that we have golden retrievers and they sleep in bed with us.
But of course that relationship is bringing the potential microbes that the dogs are carrying closer to us.
Now in most instances they're not compatible, but in some instances they are in the ticks that are on your dogs and there can be two or three different species, some of which carry diseases that are potentially risky for humans and some don't.
But that relationship, that changing relationship with animals around us is actually one of the factors that's related to the risk of zoonotic disease.
Now despite what you might have read about killer microbes and infections, most microbes are actually quite benign and microorganisms actually provide critical ecosystem services to humans.
For example, think of the gut bacteria that we have. Without them, we couldn't digest our food.
In fact, the bacteria on our skin actually combat the growth of fungi and other microorganisms that are actually more damaging.
And this has some pretty serious implications when you talk later on about such things as antibacterial soaps and products that we tend to use thinking we're doing the right thing,
but they actually tend to disrupt the natural ecology that's taking place either in our bodies or on our skin.
But we'll get to that later. We're really focusing on disease in this particular lecture.
Now many human diseases such as Lyme arthritis and West Nile fever are the result of very complex co-evolve relationships.
Global warming, which is causing an increase in the number of floods and droughts, is actually facilitating epidemics in novel areas where they weren't seen before.
Now, research by Robin Weiss from the University College London and Anthony McMichael from the Australian National University have found really significant shifts in the nature of the diseases that plague humans
as our ecology has changed from rural to urban and agrarian to postmodern.
Remember, think of the metaphor of the dog in the barn and now the dog in the bed.
Reporting in Nature Medicine, their findings suggest that infectious disease, which with the help of new classes of antibiotics, which was on the wane 50 years ago, many of the old and some new diseases have resurfaced.
And it's actually marking the beginning of a whole new phase, what they call a fourth phase, of human micro-relationships that really began with the advent of agriculture some 10,000 years ago.
Remember, we talked about agriculture and its impact in a different lecture.
You know, agriculture means people stopped moving.
They become focused in a particular area because you're planting seeds and you need to wait for them to grow.
As you move to a focused area, the density of humans goes up.
And so beginning 10,000 years ago is a pretty significant change in the way that humans live their lives.
And the researchers call that phase one.
It's the emergence of what they call crowd infections, such as measles, which probably evolved from viruses that actually live in cattle and cause a disease in them called rindapest.
Now phase two began in what we would call classical antiquity, when the Eurasian populations clashed in war and occasionally traded commerce, and they actually exchanged what we call pools of infection.
So for instance, in 430 BCE, Athens received typhus as a zoonotic disease carried there by rats.
Now phase three was ushered in by this first great wave of worldwide exploration in the 16th century.
The availability of the technology to bring ships that would go around the world brought populations of people that had never been together.
And so diseases like smallpox and measles were brought to the New World by Cortez.
But nothing in return, there are actually no diseases that were brought back to the Old World.
And the history of colonization is clearly interlinked with that of disease.
In fact, many of the conquering armies from the Old World that came to the New World probably would have not defeated the populations that were indigenous, were it not for the sort of secret weapon they brought, sometimes unknowingly, sometimes knowingly, which were these infectious diseases.
Now phase four is where we are now, and this is caused by the urban populations which create hyper-density of humans, coupled with worldwide travel and international exchange, and you link that now to climate change and widespread ecosystem degradation.
And we have things like the Nipah virus and SARS are examples of outbreaks that only became global because of our postmodern world.
Not that the diseases weren't there, but their global distribution is a function of this postmodern movement and travel.
Now, with the change in climate, mosquitoes and ticks and mice survive these warmer winters and are expanding their range, and the health threats of these infectious disease follow this expansion.
Now, Harvard Center for Public Health reported that insects are exquisitely sensitive to temperature change, and we know this to be true.
Their poichelothermic and their point is that this sensitivity to temperature change is a key factor in their analysis of the expansion of disease.
In the past 30 years, the World Health Organization has identified 30 new and resurgent diseases that are linked both to this phase four reality of the way in which humans live and the change in climate.
And not since the Industrial Revolution has this kind of upturn in disease been witnessed.
So remember in the pre-modern city, the challenge was it was fouled by sewage.
And we talk about this in other lectures about how the cities modernize and have dealt with their sewage problems.
Modern ecosystems, we can think of are being fouled by warming climate.
Now, another World Health Organization report found that climate change has caused malaria to spread from historically isolated areas in Kenya,
only about three districts to now more than a dozen as a result of these ecological changes.
This has led to epidemics of the disease in Rwanda and Tanzania.
So this mobility is a function of both ecological and climate change.
Now cholera, which is a waterborne disease that was mostly considered wiped out in human ecosystems has reemerged.
In 1991, there was an outbreak in South America, which was the first time in the 20th century.
As you probably know, cholera is an infectious gastroenteritis.
The agent is a very toxic bacteria of Vibrio cholerae.
It's gram-negative bacteria.
It eats away at the mucosal lining of the small intestine.
It causes what we call exhausting diarrhea.
It's rapidly fatal.
It's one of the deadliest diseases known.
And people often die within about three hours of the onset of the most severe symptoms.
It's transmitted to people through contaminated food.
Now worldwide, there have been seven major pandemics of cholera.
There was an outbreak in North America just after the Civil War that killed 50,000 Americans.
And in Holland during that same period of time, nearly 20,000 people died in that outbreak.
About five years earlier, the third cholera pandemic, which affected mostly Russian citizens, killed over a million people.
And cholera is a very, very serious disease that's related to the ecology of human interaction.
And just the right abiotic conditions must exist for the cholera bacteria to thrive and survive.
And if those conditions are met, this kind of explosive epidemic can happen.
And so although they're relatively rare, the ability to understand the ecology of these diseases is really critical.
And we have to have really increased scrutiny and monitoring of ecosystems to make sure that if these outbreaks happen, we can suppress them quickly.
Let's take a look at a zoonotic disease such as Lyme disease and also West Nile virus.
Now Lyme disease is an example of a zoonotic disease.
And zoonotic disease vary from traditional infectious disease because they have a complex interactive ecology that often involves a number of different species.
Now according to the World Health Organization, a little over 60% of the 1,400 species of infectious organisms, i.e. the pathogens that actually cause disease in humans, are actually transmitted to us by animals.
Now the interesting thing biologically is we are actually dead-end hosts for the organisms that bring the disease.
Typically the pathogen that makes us sick and the organism that brings it to us gets no benefit actually from attacking us because we're not part of their natural life cycle system.
And that's actually signified by the fact that we get so sick from them.
Traditionally the organisms that have co-evolved aren't made as sick by the pathogen because if they didn't survive the pathogen wouldn't survive.
Now these zoonotic diseases are best understood by characterizing the disease involved in the system.
And so just like a play we have particular players on this ecological stage and by creating that kind of metaphor I think it's easier to understand how it works.
So first of all is the agent. The agent is actually the thing that makes you sick and the Lyme disease system it's a bacterium called Borrelia burgdorferi.
Then there's the vector and the vector is what brings the agent to you and in the case of the Lyme disease system it's the deer tick, exodescapularis.
Now within this system in order to maintain the agent there have to be a series of hosts.
The hosts are where the agent spends most of its life.
And in the case of the Lyme disease system the hosts are white-footed mice, paramyscus lecopas, and white-tailed deer, otochorlius virginianus.
Now what's interesting I think biologically here are the incidental hosts.
And the incidental hosts are really when the ticks make a mistake and they can be birds and voles and red foxes, coyotes and unfortunately for us humans.
And incidental hosts are those organisms that the tick mistakenly bites and passes on the bacterium.
Now the challenge here is that as incidental hosts we're not actually competent to support the disease or to support the pathogen or the agent.
But incidental hosts can actually play a pretty important role in spreading the disease to other locations especially organisms like birds that can fly and are migratory and maybe dropping ticks off along the way.
So these hosts will transport the agent, the bacteria, from hosts back to incidental hosts and so forth.
Now to understand how this relationship between agent and host works we need to understand the life cycle of the tick.
Because the life cycle of the deer tick is the key part of how the bacterium gets to humans.
And it's a two year life cycle and it begins in the spring when the eggs hatch out and you can follow along here on the diagram that I think will be helpful.
The ticks hatch out in the early spring and the summer when these larval ticks will then take their first blood meal and typically the larval ticks are going to feed on small mammals.
And they will go through the rest of the summer and through the winter and the tick then emerges in a different instar of the second year.
It's now a nymphal tick and the nymphal tick is sort of an adolescent or teenager tick.
It needs another blood meal and now the blood meal may include humans but the primary hosts are larger mammals.
And the nymph goes through the spring and summer and then in the fall it needs another blood meal as it morphs into an adult.
And that's where mating takes place, eggs are laid, the adults die and the cycle starts again.
So the deer ticks hatch in the spring, the larval tick will take its first blood meal.
Through the fall and winter the larva mature into nymphs during the following spring when the ticks are most active and hosts and incidental hosts are actually pretty high risk of being bitten.
Now Eastern New England has the highest density of disease cases and it's related to deer overabundance and that has impacted the spread of Lyme disease.
As the deer population increases the number of ticks increase.
Thus the number of reported cases of Lyme disease has increased and nationally somewhere around 15,000 cases a year but many of them go undiagnosed.
Now research that has been done in the coastal New England areas have recognized that urbanization has fragmented the habitat.
And one such study in New York has investigated this relationship between habitat fragmentation and risk of Lyme disease.
And what they found is that as the habitat becomes more fragmented and patch sizes become smaller you have elevated populations of whitefooted mice.
And the whitefooted mice remember are very important hosts to the deer ticks.
And Brian Allen and his team publishing in conservation biology have looked very closely at this relationship between fragmentation and Lyme disease risk.
And it's a bit counterintuitive so sort of hang with me here because all along I've been telling you throughout this course that as habitat becomes fragmented biodiversity goes down.
But remember one of the things we said that under certain types of fragmentation evenness begins to fall apart as a measure of biodiversity.
But some species can actually become dominant and that's the case in these fragmented coastal habitats.
What happens is that whitefooted mice whose populations would normally be controlled top down from predators.
The habitats get so small the predators disappear but the mice are still there.
Now let's contrast this with another risk in North America and that's West Nile fever.
Now here the relationship is not quite as complex as to the number of hosts but it's very complex as to the number of vectors.
West Nile virus is a very serious illness.
It's a seasonal epidemic in North America tends to begin in the summer and continues into the fall.
And some of the symptoms are pretty severe.
High fever, headache, neck stiffness, disorientation, coma, convulsions and tremors, muscle weakness, vision loss, paralysis, numbness.
Up to 20% of the people who become infected with West Nile virus have very very serious symptoms and some people will actually die.
Now the agent in this case is not a bacterium. The agent is a virus and it's a flavivirus.
But the vector here is not one species of tick.
The vector here is a guild of mosquitoes.
Generally in the genus Culex but there have been at least 40 species that are competent vectors for this particular agent.
Now the hosts tend to be wild birds and ducks.
Wild birds are probably critical in maintaining the life cycle of the virus.
The incidental hosts include mammals, bats, horses, frogs and humans.
And we can see the relationship here.
Again this sort of stage play of agent and vector and hosts.
So mammals and bats and frogs and probably horses, although they play a role as incidental hosts are probably very important in transporting the virus from community to community.
Now early on one of the species we actually studied quite intensively in our lab are American crows.
And early on in the West Nile virus scenario as it was unfolding in New England was tremendous concern about the role that crows would play because there were lots of dead crows found in neighborhoods.
Well it turns out that crows are hypersensitive to West Nile virus.
Not only they're not competent hosts they can't support the virus at all and when they get infected they die almost immediately.
And it has decimated populations of crows across some areas of North America as a result.
So this West Nile virus is amplified during the periods in which adult mosquito blood feeding takes place and there's continuous transmission between vectors and their bird reservoir hosts.
And the infected mosquitoes carry the virus particles in their salivary glands and the birds are infected during blood meal feedings by these viruses, I mean by the mosquitoes.
And so West Nile virus now has been detected in dead birds of at least 300 species and particularly crows and jays infected with the West Nile virus as I said become ill pretty quickly.
However most infected birds do survive.
The Centers for Disease Control report that about 3,700 human cases of West Nile virus have been diagnosed so far, 39 states reporting 214 deaths.
During 2002 evidence of infection in humans, mosquitoes and birds plus horses were observed in 45 states and in the District of Columbia.
You can see the distribution of the West Nile virus is pretty extraordinary.
Now I want to return to a conversation that we had about malaria and the sickle cell gene.
We've talked about it a couple of times now but here I think we really bring it to a full understanding when we think about the zoonotic relationship.
You know this malaria protozoa has been responsible for massive numbers of casualties and have numerous effect on the afflicted groups.
It's one of the most serious diseases that we have.
It's a vector born disease.
It's caused by protozoan parasites.
It's transmitted by the bite of infected mosquitoes.
So mosquitoes are the vector, the agent is the plasmodium.
It's a protozoan.
There are four different species in the genus plasmodium that are responsible for different types of malaria.
The falsiperum and vivax are the two most common.
And the vector here is the anopheles mosquito.
But there are at least 430 species of anopheles that will carry.
There are 430 species of anopheles mosquito and at least 50 of them can carry malaria.
Humans and mosquitoes are the hosts.
In this case humans are the critical hosts.
And in the human body the parasites multiply in the liver and then infect red blood cells.
Now 40% of the world's population, mostly those living unfortunately in the world's poorest countries are at very high risk of malaria.
Every year more than 500 million people become severely ill with malaria.
And malaria causes on an annual basis somewhere between 700,000 and 2 million deaths annually.
Very, very serious problem.
So how do we place the ecology of diseases into context?
You know we just had a pretty frightening conversation here and you might be tempted to shut your windows and bring back arguments for DDT.
But we really need to put risk into context.
Now the demography of disease has changed over time.
Develop nations have a very different distribution of disease risk than those are developing.
So across the world in developing nations infectious disease rates are falling,
with the exception of certain diseases like AIDS and malaria and a few others.
But they have actually been replaced by lifestyle diseases that come with increasing wealth.
And we have some data from Weiss that we can investigate.
I mean it's interesting he did an analysis of diseases in a country like Chile,
which has gone through a demographic transition from a rural to an urbanizing and modern nation over the past 75 years.
And it's fascinating if you go back to the turn of the last century,
the total infectious disease death in those communities was somewhere in the order of about 46% of the mortality components associated with those demographics.
The total cancer and cardiovascular disease rates however were only about 15%.
If we look at Chile now, the total infectious disease portion of the mortality is down to about 20%,
but the cancer and cardiovascular deaths are now up over 50%.
So we're seeing that the risk of disease is changing as the demographics change
and the way in which we live changes.
This is part of the conversation about urbanization that we've had throughout this lecture series.
Now in a previous lecture we talked about the positive roles that predators play in ecosystems
and what strategies might be employed to manage them in urbanized ecosystems.
Now this idea takes on new significance when we consider it in the context of zoonotic disease.
So most strategies for urban wildlife revolve around coexistence whenever possible,
as removal is often difficult and can be counterproductive.
Removing territorial mammals such as coyotes actually promotes the immigration of additional males searching for habitat.
So in general strategies are that wildlife should really only be removed from urban areas
only after dangers established and other control mechanisms have failed.
Because wildlife and urbanizing areas still provide ecosystem services.
Remember predators provide top-down control on populations of animals like feral cats and mice and rats
and reducing that mesopredator load on an urbanized ecosystem can help recover lost populations of ground nesting birds,
which in turn feed on insects.
And reducing insect populations can have a beneficial effect for human public health
and by reducing the populations of insects that cause zoonotic disease.
So one of the things I'd like to just finish our conversation today is to return to this whole idea of lifestyle diseases.
And it's interesting because the infectious disease risks that we have are ecologically driven
and in some respects we're not empowered to do much about them as individuals.
But as populations have become more wealthy and educated and also sedentary,
we now are replacing the sort of overall risk of zoonotic infectious disease with those lifestyle diseases
that are becoming of epidemic proportion like obesity, cardiovascular disease, diabetes and so forth.
And those are diseases we can do something about in our individual decision making,
which I think is very hopeful because it empowers us as individuals to have more control over the quality of our lives.
Now in our next session we're going to investigate the challenge of healthy natural ecosystems in the changing dynamics of urbanization.
So until then, farewell.
