Hello, and welcome back to the course.
In our last conversation, we talked about the co-evolved disease systems that we collectively
call zoonotic disease.
Let me be a little bit frightening, and we talked about the relationship between the
spread of these diseases and the reduction in ecological integrity of a system that's
a result of either habitat fragmentation, changes in use, or climate change.
And so it leaves us in this sort of beguiling position of what are we going to do.
And so today, we're beginning to really engage this conversation about reconciling the damages
that we've done and thinking about renewal of these ecosystems.
And it's driven by these new fields of conservation biology and restoration ecology that seek
to reverse the trend of ecosystem decline.
By focusing on the nature of the anthropogenic or human-caused impact and novel ways to mitigate
the negative aspects of human presence, that's the idea.
The emerging fields seek to rebuild damaged ecosystems in an effort to maintain world biodiversity.
We'll examine some of the work of these scientists and engage the debate about the efficacy and
the ethics of intervention.
We'll review some of the successes and failures of such programs and offer insight into the
ecology of the species involved.
This new field provides a testing ground for the ideas of human and wildlife coexistence.
Now, when I was thinking about the graduate career that I would embark on, I knew I was
going to get my PhD in biology.
The idea of conservation biology was relatively new.
And I was working with a species of endangered shorebirds called the piping plover.
But in fact, when I began the study, they weren't endangered.
And I was actually interested in the species because of the communication systems that
they do.
As some of you may know, the piping plover belongs to a group of birds that collectively
use a broken wing or injury feigning display to try and lead people away from the nest.
Kill-deer birds are very common plovers at nests throughout North America, and you may
be familiar with them.
So I started to do my work with this species because I was interested in this display system
and how human use of landscape would impact that.
And about three years into my study, the bird became endangered and my work shifted towards
conservation biology.
And I was really fortunate at that time to be a young graduate student in the sciences
and get to see how theory moves to practice and how critical that process can be.
Conservation biology is the study of how best to sustain natural ecosystems and to preserve
the population of declining species.
Now in 1988, Myers created a strategy for research and studied plants in the tropics
and identified these 10 tropical rainforest hotspots that contain 13% of all the plant
diversity in just 0.2% of the land.
Now hotspots consist mainly of heavily exploited and highly fragmented ecosystems that have
significant reductions in their extent.
Wilderness areas are largely still intact, more than 75% of the original vegetation remains
and they have relatively low population densities.
So there is an interest in targeting those areas that have the highest risk.
And biological hotspots or biodiversity hotspots are one of those areas that will target.
And we're going to talk about some of that strategy in just a moment.
But in general, these successful projects about reconstruction of ecosystems involve
science, policy, economics, and most importantly, local support and stewardship.
Now the whole sort of push towards conservation biology got its start in the 1950s with a
development of a science called island biogeography.
And there were scientists under these auspices that were attempting really to fundamentally
understand the distribution of species.
The pioneers in this field were E. O. Wilson and Robert MacArthur, who in 1967 published
some incredibly important work and really gave birth to this idea of island biogeography.
They investigated the pattern and the distribution of species using islands as natural experiments.
We've talked about this a little bit more and we've talked about this in other parts
of this course where we've said that if we're interested in terrestrial organism distribution,
how perfect a situation it is to use islands as a model.
Because of course, the terrestrial organisms can't live on the ocean that separates the
islands and naturally occurring islands come in different sizes, in different distributions
from the mainland.
And in fact, much of our understanding of reserve design or how we're building parks
comes from this understanding of the spatial relationships of these islands.
So MacArthur and Wilson discovered that the degree of isolation and the size of the island
has an enormous impact on its biodiversity.
Their theory includes that there is this continual turnover of species due to extinction and colonization.
And this balance is achieved by the arrival of new species and the reduction in species
caused by extinction.
And so there's this constant process going on.
Some species are going extinct, or locally extinct, extirpation, and other species arriving.
And at any one moment, you're sampling instantaneously the distribution of species.
So considering this as a dynamic process, and this was one of the great contributions
of island biogeography, is that we were recognizing that it was not a stoic, unchanging system.
But instead, what we're seeing is that the system is constantly in flux, and a measurement
now is really part of a legacy of things that have happened in the past and will happen
in the future.
Remember, that's at the heart of ecology.
The heart of ecology is this idea that we are part of a natural history narrative whose
events in the past have helped to direct the events that are occurring now that will
in turn be part of the narrative of the future.
So specifically, with respect to island size, larger islands have larger average population
sizes and larger colonization rates.
Isolation is an important factor.
Isolated islands have lower colonization and lower numbers of species.
Closer to the mainland will likely have higher colonization rates.
This theory is important to conservation because many hotspots or protected areas, as mentioned
in earlier lectures, are actually surrounded by humans and trapped inside their reserves.
Connectivity among fragments and creation of corridors will help to increase recolonization
and the maintenance of healthy populations.
One of the problems, however, is that local extinctions in hotspots are common because
the hotspots, remember, partly that way because of human impact, are isolated.
And the drop-off of species, which is sort of normal, is not being balanced by the arrival
of new species because of the isolation.
And that forces us then to do a sort of triage.
In other words, to figure out what species are worth saving.
This is at the core of the controversy, at least at one level with respect to conservation
biology.
Now, arguably, the biggest challenge in this field is determining the best use of limited
resources.
Think back to our water conversation, right?
It's sort of switching from the idea of how much water do we need to how much water do
we have and how best to use it.
Conservation biology recognizes the limited nature of resources, time, and the ability
of humans to invest.
And so we need to say, given those variables, what is the best outcome of use of resources
for this particular area?
And so to achieve this appropriate balance, which is never perfect, it's partly an art
form, conservation biologists have borrowed the ideas of emergency medicine to decide
plans of action, which we call triage.
So some species are going to go extinct no matter what you do.
And that's the sad part.
Once we sort of decide that, you have to say, we really can't invest much in those species.
Maybe we can maintain some in zoos.
Maybe they'll be isolated populations.
Maybe we can create a gene bank so that genetic information isn't lost.
Now, some species, although the numbers might be lower, will survive without intervention.
And in the component of triage, those don't need immediate attention.
But you want to focus on those species that will survive only with immediate intervention.
It's that third group that is the critical focus for conservation biology.
Now, in the United States, examples of high-profile interventions include the gray wolves, bald
eagles, and piping plovers.
Now with bald eagles, they were at historically and alarmingly low numbers not that long ago,
little as 50 years ago.
And they've had an amazing comeback, likely as a result of their resiliency.
At one point, there were only about 400 nesting pairs of bald eagles left in North America,
and actually very few of them in the United States.
This was the result of biological magnification of persistent chemicals in the population
like DDT.
There was extensive poaching and habitat loss, which combined to decimate the population.
I like to think that early, that bald eagles were actually early adopters of the Endangered
Species Act, which came about in 1973.
That and the Clean Water and Clean Air Act helped to create pollution-free water in the
habitats in which eagles lived.
The protection of these habitats provided for the baseline needs for healthy eagle populations.
Some national wildlife refuges were actually established with eagles in mind.
And the population recovery has actually been so profound that the bald eagle status was
upgraded from Endangered to Threatened.
And now population estimates for eagles are somewhere in the vicinity of 6,000 breeding
pairs.
So it's been a pretty extraordinary recovery.
And I've had the great pleasure of working with some of the scientists in Massachusetts
at the Quabban Reservoir, where they had eagle hack boxes, where they would bring the eagles
down from, or bring eggs down from Canada, and they would hand rear these birds and then
release them into areas and hope that they would stay as adults in extraordinary commitment
that these scientists did to try and reintroduce this at one time common species back into our
ecosystems.
Now, one of the most important ecotypes or biomes that we have on Earth are wetlands.
And unfortunately, humans once reviled and drained them and filled them, and it turns
out that they're ecological gold mines.
But the problem is we have done such intentional and continued damage to wetlands.
In fact, in my home city of Boston, historically 95% of the salt marsh that was there at the
time that the first colonial settlers were moving into Boston has been filled.
And sort of surprisingly, the largest fills occurred recently to build Logan Airport.
So we actually knew the damage that was being caused at the time that the airport expansion
took place, but economic momentum and incentives outweighed at the time our understanding of
the ecological cost.
So these triage errors can be significant if we're not careful.
So we know that there is tremendous ecological value and ecosystem services that wetlands
provide.
There's improved water quality through their filtering capacity, and wetlands worldwide
serve as important carbon sinks.
In other words, they can sequester carbon.
And global peatlands, which are a particular type of wetland system, store somewhere in
the vicinity of 500 gigatons of carbon, most of which would be circulating as greenhouse
gases if they weren't sequestered.
Wetlands have incredible capacity for flood control and stabilization of coastal margins.
And in fact, so much of the damage that's caused by storms nowadays in North America
have to do with the fact that we have destroyed the wetland buffer systems.
If I can take just a moment and return to Hurricane Katrina, which really helped profoundly
change the way that humans think about risk in living in coastal areas, it was a tragedy
what happened in that city, a social and physical tragedy.
But when we think of the narrative, and again the ecology of New Orleans, the narrative
that spelled the disaster of Katrina was not the arrival of the storm, but it was the destruction
of the wetlands and barrier beach systems that would naturally have served as a protection
for the population that lived there.
We talk about this in my class, I tell my students, it's the equivalent of getting a
new minivan and taking out the airbags and pulling out the seat belts and taking out
the side impact beams, all safety buffering systems built into the van, putting your family
in it, having them get into a sort of a predictable accident that happens and being surprised
at how badly they were hurt.
Well, all of the natural buffering and protection capacity of that vehicle was stripped away.
And so the disaster was simply waiting to happen.
And this is very true of our wetland systems.
Because wetlands produce critical human services, including food like rice and cranberries and
blueberries and timber and shrimp.
And the value of the biodiversity value of marshes and the role that they can play increases
as they grow in physical scale.
And research by Keddie and their group discovered that the largest wetland systems, which now
cover over a million square miles, the largest wetland systems have the highest number of
species.
This comes from our understanding of island biogeography, but now we're beginning to
apply this to fragmented habitats.
When you think about this whole issue of fragmentation, the larger the wetland system, the more biodiverse
it becomes.
And as I said, some of these largest wetland systems worldwide cover over a million square
miles, and some of the biggest include the West Siberian lowlands over 1.06 million square
miles.
Think of these ones, the Amazon River Basin, 670,000 square miles, the Hudson Bay Lowlands,
140,000 square miles, the Congo River Basin, over 70,000 square miles, the Mackenzie River
Basin, 65,000 square miles.
And there is tremendous sort of biological leverage on these wetlands.
A disproportionate amount of the world's biodiversity is dependent upon healthy wetlands.
Some 1,800 species of birds are critically dependent upon wetlands.
Birds like wading birds, ducks, and kingfishers, they can't live anywhere else.
They're absolutely dependent.
Over 100 species of the world's mammals absolutely require wetlands, hippos and otters, beavers,
muskrats, and many, many more mammals utilize wetlands for resources and refuge and for
part of their life cycle.
For example, the Okavango Delta in Africa is home to some 120 species of mammals.
Even fish, which we think of open water creatures, are heavily dependent on wetland systems.
Even saltwater species that use wetland systems for breeding and foraging.
In fact, the Amazon River Basin supports nearly 2,000 species of fish.
Many of them are endemic to the basin.
Now let's return to this notion of biodiversity hotspots, because this is where the triage
suggests the triage model from emergency medicine suggests that we should be investing our time.
Now one of the most daunting challenges in conservation biology is that most of the
ecosystems that are the most necessary to protect are in the world's poorest nations.
These are areas of very high biodiversity, that's what we call them hotspots, and they
were most of the important conservation projects are either taking place or need to take place.
The biodiversity of these selected areas are absolutely staggering.
These hotspots hold somewhere in the vicinity of 125,000 of the world's endemic plants,
which means they're only found in a narrow location, which is nearly 50% of the entire
count.
And if we take a look in more detail, it becomes even more compelling a story with respect
to the protection of wetland systems.
So if we look in the tropical Andes, which are some of the rarest and most isolated wetland
systems, some 20,000 endemic plants are found.
The Mediterranean Basin, which is one of the cradles of biodiversity somewhere in the vicinity
of 12,000 to 13,000 endemic plants, Madagascar and the Indian Ocean Islands, somewhere in
the vicinity of 9,700 species of endemic plants, the Caribbean Islands have 7,000 species
of endemic plants.
So these areas are critically, critically important.
And the restoration and protection projects that are taking place in poor nations are
particularly complicated because they often lack a sustainable infrastructure.
Count nations must often participate in the conservation efforts.
Now there are a number of lessons from nature that we need to take into account when we
think about how we're going to respond to these biodiversity hotspots or to conservation
biology challenges in general.
And some of this comes from, I think there's some great lessons to be taken from our study
of marine fisheries in both their collapse and resiliency.
This is one of the examples we keep coming back to throughout this course because I think
marine systems are so instructive.
Now as we've discussed before, fisheries ecology has been a source of direction for
understanding the impact on human ecosystems, partly because we do stuff to ocean ecosystems
we would never do in terrestrial systems.
I mean just stop and think about this for a moment.
When we fish with these big net systems, we essentially are taking chains and cables
and just dragging them along the ocean floor sweeping up everything that is along that
area.
I mean it's just amazing, it's equivalent of a terrestrial environment of taking sort
of a net a mile long, a mile around and just closing it and catching everything that's
there.
And at the same time sort of knocking down the trees and bushes and everything along
the way.
Never harvest like that on terrestrial environments, it would be so visually disfiguring that everyone
would be able to figure out something bad was going on.
And in addition, when it comes to ocean food, we eat very differently than we do in terrestrial
environments.
In terrestrial environments, the animals we capture or grow to eat are essentially in
the middle of the food chain, they're grass eaters.
We cattle, we eat pigs and we eat chickens and things like that.
But in the ocean, we tend to actually most heavily rely on the top order predators, which
are the rarest in the ecosystem.
It's equivalent of us in a terrestrial environment of deciding we're only going to eat coyotes,
grizzly bears and lions.
We don't eat that way in terrestrial environments.
So because of the sort of skewed way in which we harvest resources from the marine environment,
they're very, very instructive for us in investigating their recovery.
So in the previous lecture, we've investigated the collapse of the Cape cod fishing industry
and in the long history of cod fishing there off the George's Bank.
But today we're going to look at some recent work by Stephen Palumbi, leading a team from
Stanford University, Oregon State and the University of Washington that have discovered
that the resiliency of fishing grounds to recover from human overfishing is in many ways contingent
upon their health preceding the human invasion.
The recovery, resistance and reversibility are key features of an ecosystem's overall
resilience.
For one thing, the temporal scale is a critical feature of the analysis.
We have to sample the ecosystem for a long enough period of time so that it can actually
reveal the patterns that are taking place.
And one part of the study is really interesting.
They looked at the relationship between anchovy and sardine landings from some of the most
important fisheries and they found that these landings can vary on an annual basis by millions
of metric tons.
And when the sardines are up, the anchovies are down and vice versa.
Now these fish are big players in the marine industries of Chile and Japan and Peru.
But as they analyze longer time scales, it was revealed that these cycles are actually
driven by natural climate variation.
And so unlike what was happening off of the coast of Cape cod where the collapse was absolutely
and unambiguously related to overfishing, in these analyses of the anchovy and sardine
harvests, they needed to factor in the natural fluctuations and resiliency that were part
of that system.
And although humans are adding to the challenge, part of the natural fluctuations and the way
that those ecosystems are structured has to do with the fact that the anchovies and
sardines are actually going to co-vary on their own.
Now in addition, their analyses of fisheries recovery suggested that those ecosystems with
high initial biodiversity were better able to withstand the impacts of overfishing.
And these data help provide a more hopeful model of ecosystem recovery, at least in complex
marine ecosystems.
So what they discovered was that as you look at the original conditions of these systems
as a function of species richness, remember in biodiversity we could measure evenness
or richness or combinations of both, they looked at species richness and they found
that the systems that were most rich to begin with had the most ability to withstand collapse
because of human fishing.
And on the flip side of that, those that were most diverse prior to the collapse were most
likely to recover quickly when fishing limitations and other kinds of interventions were utilized.
Now we said at the very beginning of this conversation that successful conservation interventions
involve both good science, sound policy, economic incentives, and most critically buy-in from
the local stakeholders.
And one of the challenges that we face, remember in our initial conversation, was that so many
of these biological hotspots are in developing nations who have incomplete infrastructures,
typically enormous debt, and frankly worrying about wildlife health is very much secondary
to worrying about their own human survival, even though in the long term healthy ecosystems
help to support human population survival.
But in the short term, politicians and people living in ecologically depopperate communities
are literally trying to figure out how to get to the next month.
And so one of the more successful programs that takes into account this kind of challenge
has been the development of what we call debt for nature swaps, and the World Wildlife Fund
is one of the organizations that has taken a leadership role in this activity.
Debt for nature swaps work by partially retiring the debt of poor nations in return for their
commitment to ecosystem preservation.
So it works like this, a non-government organization, a so-called NGO, in this case the World Wildlife
Fund, purchases debt titles from commercial banks on the secondary market, and the NGO
transfers the debt title to the debtor country, and in exchange the country agrees to either
enact certain environmental policies, or more likely to endow a government bond in the name
of the conservation organization.
So the aim is funding conservation programs.
So you have rich debtor nations who hold debt for relatively poor communities or poor nations.
The likelihood of that debt getting repaid is pretty unlikely, so or at least in full.
So you have a third party step in like the World Wildlife Fund.
They look at these wealthier nations and say, look, you're unlikely to recover more than
pennies on the dollar.
So what if we agree now to literally retire that debt for pennies on the dollar, like
retire the whole debt for 10 percent, and in return we'll enforce the payment of that
debt by the debtor nation to itself in its own currency and be used for ecosystem enhancement.
And here's what's in it for the wealthy nations.
Remember, intact ecosystems provide all kinds of services, but you know what?
The carbon we produce in our industrial centers in the United States as greenhouse gas are
as equally likely to be consumed by carbon sequestering plants around the world where
that carbon goes.
So it benefits us to have healthy rainforests in tropical areas because in a sense those
trees are retiring our carbon debt.
And so by helping these developing nations maintain healthy ecosystems, we in turn have
retired an economic debt for the cashing in, if you will, and paying off of our own ecological
debt and burden that we've leveraged on the global ecosystem because of our use of combustion
technologies.
World Wildlife Fund has been a pioneer in this concept for debt for nature swap.
In beginning in the 1980s, they helped to design and establish the Asian Conservation
Company in the Philippines, which was the first of such corporations to manage this.
Now we started off with a conversation here about moving from theory to practice.
And I talked about in my own professional development this idea that theory and practice
should be linked.
And I think it's one of the most exciting aspects of how ecology moves into the daily
lives of individual people.
And as the students I work with now and young people growing up, I say, look, we have this
incredible body of theory.
And now it's time for this next generation to say, this theory can be put into the practice
of doing human good.
I think it's one of the most hopeful aspects of what ecology can do in service to humanity.
Remember, it's OK to ask an ecologist what's in it for me when that ecologist is telling
you about the way in which systems work.
In our next lecture, we're going to focus on park design as a way to enhance ecological
restoration and continue the healing process of our overburdened ecosystems.
So until then, farewell.
