Hi, and welcome back.
You know, we're getting close to the end of our conversations together, and I'm very
excited about the way that we're taking this information and trying to think about positive
change and recovery and resilience, and in the last lecture, you know, we talked about
the notion of hotspots and triage and conservation science.
And now what I want to do is sort of turn the coin over a little and begin to think
about what it means for human hotspots, which of course mean urban areas.
You know, as human populations grow and evolve, we need to make conscious positive transformations
in the way people live.
Our survival depends on making the correct transformations and cities are the fastest
growing human habitat on the planet.
Now, urban ecosystems are an opportunity to create sustainable communities.
High density human living has the possibility of both one reducing our impact on the earth's
resources and increasing the quality of life for humans around the world.
In this lecture, we're going to explore the new field of urban ecology as it seeks to
understand and improve the ecology of cities around the world.
Now, when we consider this whole notion of urban ecology, it's sort of a, it's a funny
contradiction in terms because we don't think of putting the words urban and ecology together,
sort of like jumbo shrimp.
It first passed, doesn't seem to work.
But in my own journey as a scientist, in fact, when I was in graduate school, if you were
in an urban university and you were doing ecological studies, that meant that you had
to begin those studies with a plane ride because your research was ultimately going
to take place in a non-urbanized area and in what we consider to be pristine ecology.
Now, we've learned an awful lot about ecology from that perspective.
But with most of the world's population living in cities and cities being one of our largest
challenges with respect to biosphere management, we need more ecologists in cities.
Now urban ecosystems are an unprecedented opportunity to ease the burdens of an overcrowded
planet by creating sustainable human communities.
Urban ecosystems can exploit the high density of humans to reduce the need of automobile
transport.
Now urban ecosystems can be both productive and sustainable.
Cities may even, under circumstances, become carbon neutral in the future.
What incredible vision that is.
And urban areas that have high social capital also have very high levels of satisfaction
for the people who live there and relatively low crime rates.
One of the interesting capacities here that we need to think about is how important urban
rivers are as a key aspect of sustainable ecosystems.
One of the great urbanists of the 20th century, Jane Jacobs, as early as 1960 was trying to
get us to think about cities as once again being the jewels of human culture and they
can be embedded in an equally valuable ecosystem.
But it's taken us about 40 years to catch up with her vision.
Now I want to return to a series of images that we have looked at in different ways throughout
the course because we need to orient our thinking.
And I bring you to the graphic of the notion of thinking about drivers and processes that
can be measured.
Now some of this work is really historical.
Some of it comes out of Nancy Grimm's work in their study of urban ecosystems in Phoenix.
But when we take a look at the historic relationship of ecosystems, we have as ecologists traditionally
measured things that we call biogeophysical drivers.
Tansley would have recognized this, Odom would have recognized this.
These are things like the flow of energy, the cycling of matter, community composition,
and from that emerge patterns and processes that we can actually measure.
We can measure primary productivity, the amount of energy that's flowing.
We can measure population dynamics.
We can measure organic material.
We can measure nutrients.
We can measure how the system is disturbed.
And so we understand that these biogeophysical drivers are going to affect the ecosystem
and we can measure that impact by measuring those particular patterns.
Now if we change the idea of general ecosystem to city, now we are really challenged to manage
an additional set of drivers, this time socioeconomic drivers.
And the socioeconomic drivers include the flow of information, the cultural values and
perceptions, and the institutions and organizations that make up the city.
And here we're measuring things like human demography, economic systems, power hierarchies,
land use and management, and what about the designed environment.
So thinking of urban ecologists is that these drivers are equally important to the ecology
of urban landscapes as are the classic biogeophysical drivers.
And the researchers who are toiling in these long term studies in cities like Phoenix and
Baltimore and to a lesser extent a variety of other cities like Boston and Los Angeles
and New York and Philadelphia and Pittsburgh and New Haven, we're all trying to answer the
same questions.
What is the milieu of socioeconomic and biogeophysical drivers that give rise to the city and how
might we make sense of the data to create the same kind of patterns that help us to
understand the activities in a place like Yellowstone Park.
So one important aspect of thinking about urban ecology is that of public health.
Now for the past hundred years, public health in the world's cities have steadily improved.
People living in cities now have longer lifespans, lower infant mortality, and higher standards
of living do their rural counterparts, and it has not always been that way, but it is
now.
However, people living in cities may have relatively high risk from air and water pollution.
One of the things that we are trying to do in thinking about cities in new ways and thinking
about the way in which they can help to absorb the growing world's population.
And by the way, as we sit here and think about world's population at over six billion, the
six billion sort of all have a place to live, although that's a bit of an overstatement,
especially when we think about developing nations.
But the prediction is that when the next hundred years, we may reach as many as nine or ten
billion people.
And so where are they going to live?
And one can really consider that as a challenge of reversing existing trends of suburbanization.
Now a colleague of mine, Rutherford Platt, who is now an emeritus professor at the University
of Massachusetts, presented some findings at a very early urban ecology conference in
Boston that I was attending.
He's a relatively new faculty member, and I was absolutely fascinated by the data that
he presented.
It was one of those transitional moments you remember in your own career development about,
wow, I'm now thinking about the world differently than I was a short time ago, and you feel
so blessed to say, wow, I'm really glad I have the job I do, and I get to be around these
really smart people because they're helping me learn new things.
So what he did was measure some changes over a 20-year period of growth in the United States,
and these were data he gathered from all kinds of census information.
And what he found is that these municipal areas were using land at a rate that exceeded
the growth of their population.
So for example, in a legacy city like Chicago that's been around a long time, in a 20-year
period of time, it was from the 70s until the 1990s, the population grew by about 4%,
but the land use grew by nearly 50%.
Now in Los Angeles, which we consider a poster child for sprawl, the population was booming
in Los Angeles in that amount of time, the population grew by close to 50%, but the land
use went up by 300%.
Now even in Seattle, which was a city that finally said they had enough, and we're going
to put our arms around this problem of suburban sprawl and do something about it, in that
same period of time their population grew by about 40%, and the amount of land use grew
by about 90%.
Now it's clear that these growth rates are unsustainable and they place a considerable
ecological burden on the lands that were being converted.
One of the great challenges associated with suburban growth is that it leverages additional
use of individually driven automobiles, which increases our use of petroleum and the amount
of impervious surface roads that have to be built.
We know that there are all kinds of lifestyle diseases that actually emerge because we spend
so much time traveling in automobiles and so forth, and so we sort of have this suburban
lifestyle that is emerging in wealthy nations that are unsustainable for a whole variety
of reasons.
And again, I don't present these data to suggest that we suddenly have to take apart
our suburbs.
The issue is not the suburbs that exist now because they're fulfilling a function.
The question is how do we infill the space?
Do we continue to grow in these uncontrolled fragmented suburbs, or do we think about different
models and density for living?
What provides the highest levels of satisfaction for humans?
What makes humans love where they live, which is the measure and essence of high social
capital, and how do we use the resources that the earth has for us in ways that will be
sustainable for generations to come?
Now one of the helpful things that has been done very recently by the teams of researchers
that are working in these cities has really been to dispel much of what we think about
the ecology of urban environments and the steward picket from the Cary Institute of
Ecosystem Studies, who is the principal investigator of a long-term research project funded by
the National Science Foundation, is leading a huge team of people that is investigating
the city of Baltimore, and this team includes dozens of scientists and educators and graduate
students and technicians and university collaborators and public groups and the National Science
Foundation and the U.S. Forest Service.
It's an extraordinary collaborative co-venture, and what they're trying to do is to crack
the code of how the ecology of cities operate, how do these systems assemble?
As I said, a similar study is underway in Phoenix and on a smaller scale across the
country in a variety of cities, including some of those in Canada and including cities
in Europe and Asia.
So recently the Baltimore group published a paper in the journal Bioscience that sought
to sort of retune the general perception of how cities function as ecosystems, and they
called them the collection, they looked at a dozen, and we'll only talk about a few,
a dozen urban myths that really need to be dispelled when we're going to move forward
collectively in understanding ecology.
First of all, they found that attitudes and perceptions about the environment do not follow
strict class, income, and ethnicity boundaries.
And I draw your attention to a figure from the paper, and the different colors represent
different responses to a question about air quality.
And one might historically think that our ideas about environment and environmental quality,
we often refer to conservation and environmental thinking as a full stomach issue.
In other words, the folks who really worry about ecological decline and conservation
issues are only those that are wealthy and have solved every other problem in their life.
When you ask those kind of questions in the city, you get a real education, and you find
out that concern about the environment, concern about the core issues of sustainability are
shared across socioeconomic boundaries.
They are not the domain of the privileged.
The second myth that tends to continue around cities is that it's only people of color suffer
from environmental inequity.
It turns out that while certain racial groups can suffer more significantly from the idea
of dis amenities in certain areas or noxious uses within cities, it turns out that the
distribution of inequity goes across racial boundaries.
And this is an important thing to consider, because we can't just think about the city
as being, OK, this particular neighborhood is not a good place to live, but all the problems
are solved somewhere else.
That isn't the case.
There are dis amenities and significant challenges across various boundaries.
Another myth is that urban ecosystems are not very diverse, and in fact, there is significant
diversity, both plant and animal diversity within urban ecosystems.
And the figure that I direct your attention to now are bird sample plots that were taken
throughout the city that looked at the distribution of three of the most common species of invasive
or invasive species of birds and cities, which end up doing pretty well ecologically in cities.
They're well adapted to cities, things like rock doves and house pigeons.
And you can see by the different sizes that the distribution of these species in relationship
to each other was not uniform.
And in fact, that there were areas of very high diversity within these communities.
So diversity can actually be relatively high.
Another interesting side study that was done by a team led by Bonnier at all and appearing
in behavioral ecology was that they were studying white-crowned sparrows in urban areas, and
they actually found an interesting side piece here.
They actually found that male birds, these male white-crowned sparrows, actually had
higher testosterone levels in urban areas than in non-urban areas.
And there's some interesting theoretical models developing around this, but it may be related
to the density and the amount of stress that they're under with respect to competition
with each other.
But fascinating and suggesting this is a very interesting biology that's going on here.
Another myth that Pickett and his team investigated was that it turns out that water pollution
from nitrates is actually higher in the suburbs than in urban areas.
And if you take a look at the figure provided from their study, you can see that the very
highest nitrogen levels come from agricultural lands, followed by suburban lands, and then
the nitrogen release from urban areas falls below that.
Now, the most healthiest and least releases of nitrate pollutants come from healthy forests,
as you might expect, and that histogram barely comes up above zero.
But if you were to ask the general person, well, where do you think the most pollution
comes from?
They're going to say cities.
And it turns out that that may be a myth.
Another very interesting factor is the idea that not all urban soils are actually disturbed.
We tend to think of urban soils as all being turned over by development and construction
and a whole variety of things, and it turns out that's not the case.
There are areas in which the legacy soils in communities are still in place.
Another interesting finding they had was that social change can actually mask the historic
ecological conditions that shape the vegetation.
What this means is that there's a different temporal pace to how vegetation changes versus
how social distributions of people within neighborhoods change.
Remember, people can get up and leave and move, and as conditions change, as an economics
fluctuate within an urban area, people will move to different neighborhoods.
But the trees and the natural communities that are in place are stuck there.
The trees aren't going to move.
And so we have to be careful when we are making assessments around biodiversity and ecosystem
structure and relating those to humans that are there that the human movement is on a
different time scale than are these other components of the ecosystem.
Another interesting finding is that in urban areas, lawns have social and biogeophysical
benefits.
In suburban areas, we tend to point our finger at lawns and say, ah, lawns are no good because
of all the fertilization and all of the irrigation that's required, but in urban areas, because
lawns tend to be smaller, they actually can play a very, very important social function,
but they also play important biogeophysical functions with respect to climate modulation
and humidity modulation and even some of the sequestering activities that green space does
with respect to air pollution.
Another important piece is that limiting ecosystem nutrients can actually be retained
by urban ecosystems.
So that urban ecosystems aren't just environments in which stuff flows out of, but in fact urban
ecosystems have ecological function and can actually sequester nutrients that they need
in order to continue their normal functions, much the way that all other biomes do.
Now urban green space, when we think about what really defines the ecological characteristics
of cities, we need to think about green space because it's the most important biological
contribution to urban ecosystems that's going to shape both the biogeophysical function
and also the socioeconomic functions of a community.
Now green spaces are proven to be very valuable to those communities and the people who live
near them.
Green space provides a place to recreate and retreat.
Research by Francis Quo and Bill Sullivan, who work out of a laboratory at the University
of Illinois, found some very, very interesting results from studies that they've conducted
in Chicago.
They found that the appropriate distribution of green space can actually help lower levels
of fear within the community.
It can promote a reduction in violence and aggressive behavior.
They found in areas where healthy parks are, there were fewer reported crimes in areas
that were near green space.
And by the way, this cuts across economic conditions in neighborhoods.
This is not simply a measure of wealthier poor neighborhoods.
And it's very interesting, access to natural parks actually helped promote more self-discipline
in girls defined as age at first pregnancy and staying in school and things like that.
They found out that for children that could have access to parks, ADHD symptoms were reduced.
And this is a fascinating biological piece because we're seeing this sort of upsurge
in these kind of developmental irregularities in our young people.
And urban ecologists are suggesting along with data from psychologists and from physicians
that one of the problems that we have with young people is that they don't get outside
into green space.
They stay fixed in front of a cathode ray tube that's either a television or a computer
and they're actually isolated from the very things that can transform our perception of
ourselves and our relationships to others.
Remember some of the data that we talked about with respect to healing times in hospitals
and green space.
So green space is promote better neighborhood relations in a sense of community.
Green space improves the ecosystem functions of cities.
Temperatures are modulated near green space and the air qualities improve.
Now plant metabolism can clean the air.
It provides a source of oxygen which can help to offset smog.
Green spaces are natural habitats for animals.
And we know that thriving wildlife communities have arisen, not without some challenges.
Every top order predators will move into green spaces where the public perception is that
there's no space for them.
It wasn't that long ago that coyotes entered Central Park and caused quite a ruckus within
the community.
Now historically there have been green movements in cities and probably our most important historical
advocate for green cities was Frederick Law Olmsted and he's an historic and well remembered
designer of green spaces throughout some of North America's most important cities.
He's probably best remembered for his work in Central Park which was completed in 1873.
Olmsted had something called the Greens Ward Plan and this was a vision that helped to
transform the development that ultimately became Central Park.
The idea was, and this was the sort of egalitarian piece, it was a common green space.
It was going to be accessible to all citizens.
And we have Central Park with a little over 840 acres and it has some open fields and
it has woods and hills, paths for humans, bikers and horses, a nationally recognized
zoo.
A similar but geospatially different distribution occurred in Boston where Olmsted and planners
developed what they call the Emerald Necklace which is an 1100 acre chain of parks that
are linked by some waterways in Boston and Brookline and Massachusetts.
So it's not centralized in the way that the planet emerged on the island of Manhattan
but instead it's a chain.
There's nearly a dozen contiguous parks.
Now they're very irregularly shaped because they're shaped according to the land and they're
very, very functional ecosystems for birds and other wildlife.
Now one of the ways of creating green space is to actually take it from its terrestrial
location and put it up on the roof and the emergence of green roofs are a sustainable
practice that benefits urban spaces from a variety of perspectives.
Green roof technologies provide the owners of buildings with a pretty high return on
their investment and their opportunities for significant social and environmental benefits
when green roofs are installed.
First of all they reduce storm runoff which then reduces the combined sewer overflow problems
that happen during storms.
They reduce some of the need to mitigate pollution potential.
They're sequestering carbon.
They're helping to clean the air.
They're modulating the surrounding environmental conditions.
In the winter they tend to insulate the building and keep it warmer.
In the summer they aid to cooling properties because of evapotranspiration.
They reduce noise and air pollution significantly and of course they're aesthetically very pleasing.
People want to be in these rooftop gardens.
What this does is really it's encapsulated in a theory that we call smart growth and
smart growth theory is really a combination of urban planning and transportation that
seeks to concentrate growth in the center of a city to avoid urban sprawl.
Now smart growth has 10 essentially major principles that are designed to promote and
sustain cities through what we call sustainable practice and let's think about some of the
key aspects here.
First of all any city that's going to be successful needs to create housing opportunities and
choices across a spectrum.
It's clearly not going to work nor is it part of the American ethos to say here's the kind
of house everybody needs to live in and let's move into that.
So key to smart growth is variation in choices.
Also key to smart growth is the fact that quality housing has to be provided for peoples
of all levels of income.
Also key to this is that neighborhood should be walkable.
You shouldn't always have to rely on either public transportation or your own transportation
to get from different points.
It should be both the natural elements of the ecosystem and the activities that are
related to your work and play and worship should at least some of them be walkable.
And so these communities become desirable because the distance between the things people want
to do is reduced.
Another central tenet to smart growth is that the stakeholders, the local neighborhood
residents have to be encouraged to fully participate in the community process.
Because it's the community's own sense of how and where it wants to go is the sort of
key driver.
Remember the idea is to create communities that people want to live in and in order to
do that you have to listen to the people who live there.
It's the core idea behind environmental justice.
So the notion of justice and smart actually go together here.
Now communities must have a strong sense of place.
And it's sort of interesting when you travel into the suburbs and you see recreations of
certain kind of houses like townhouses or Cape Cod cottages or things like this.
And they're totally out of context.
They're built that way because people think, oh that makes me feel like the environment
that I really would prefer to be living in.
And so you see these townhouse models out in the middle of fields and of course they
could be spread out.
And so this sense of place is so critically important to humans and smart growth encourages
that this sense of place be celebrated and actually amplified.
And that means that development and construction need to respond to the specific needs of the
community.
And when you're developing these systems all possible decisions aren't in real space.
We can't make all decisions.
We have to make choices.
And so decisions need to be predictable and fair when it comes to development.
Too often development decisions appear to be made in smoke filled rooms and we have
this whole issue of dis amenities and noxious use which we've talked about before and other
people are controlling the decisions of what's happening in communities, things like redlining
and that type of thing.
That seeks to corrode the sort of collective trust that builds in neighborhoods.
Now no system of smart growth is going to work unless it's embraced by the private sector.
And so they have to be at the table at the same time.
In addition, smart growth involves the embracing of the idea of mixed land use practices.
We can't afford anymore to always separate where we work, from where we live, from where
we do our shopping and all these things that are disjunct.
We can begin to interdigitate those activities as they were in medieval cities, especially
now that we're living in a postmodern environment where most of the work we do is not great
and grimy and pollution filled.
We can actually have homes and work relatively near each other without having the sort of
noxious outfall that would happen from traditional factories.
We need to preserve open space and critical environmental areas.
This open space model is so critical to creating cities where people want to live.
So focusing on this issue of quality of life, new growth should go into existing communities.
Instead of constantly spreading out into areas that haven't been used, we need to reinvigorate
areas that we've decided no longer meet our needs.
And we also have to have multiple choices for transportation because different people
have different needs for transportation at different times.
And there's a fallacy that one size will fit all.
Now a key element of smart growth is more choices.
And those choices include transportation, housing, shopping and communities.
We've talked about this before, but it's critical to remember that we need lots of choices.
We need to strengthen existing communities through redevelopment.
Redevelopment is a way in which the existing community gains in the economic wealth.
And another important place to conserve open space is along that urban fringe.
And that's traditionally been areas where suburbanization has taken place.
Compact design of buildings is also a key ethos.
We can have very high quality of life in smaller dwellings.
And in addition, we need less consumptive development by reusing materials and using
techniques that are sort of more aligned with sustainability.
Now making cities sustainable and healthy is one very big step towards a hopeful future
for our planet.
In the last lecture, I hope that we will bring together this challenge of investigating the
maintenance and restoration of healthy ecosystems.
So until then, thank you.
