Lecture 3 Why is Myth
Hello and welcome back to lecture 3.
In our previous lecture, we began our examination of some of the most important theories about
myth by looking at what I call Watt theories of myth.
In this lecture, we're going to move on to the why theories of myth and look at the psychological
theories of Freud and Jung, the structuralist approaches of Prop, Levystrose, and Burkart.
We'll also discuss the work of the very popular theorist Joseph Campbell.
This century has seen the development of crucially important, extremely influential, and very
complex theories about myth, which fall under the category that I've called why theories.
Again, obviously all I can do is scratch the barest surface of these theories, but we will
begin with the psychological theories of Freud and Jung and then move on to structuralist
theories.
One thing that these why theories have in common is that they assume myth reflects the
same underlying human realities in all cultures and that myth therefore is somehow cross-cultural
or trans-cultural rather than being specific to the individual culture in which it develops.
So let's begin with Sigmund Freud.
Among his other contributions to modern thought, Freud proposed that myth reflects psychological
forces present in the individual and through the individual, of course, present in society.
Clearly, his most important contribution to the study of myth was his interpretation of
Sophocles' treatment of Oedipus the King to develop his own Freud's own theory of the
Oedipus complex.
Freud developed the Oedipus complex as a theory after he asked himself why it was that Sophocles'
tragedy about Oedipus the King was still so compelling, so electrifying to modern audiences.
Freud disagreed with the interpretation given by most critics of his time, which was that
it was the interaction of fate and free will in that drama that made it so compelling.
The fact that Oedipus by trying to avoid his fate through the use of his free will drives
himself ever more inexorably into his fate.
Freud said that can't explain its popularity because there are other dramas written about
the interaction of fate and free will that are not so compelling that do not retain their
popularity centuries after they were written or even decades after they were written.
Therefore he thought the appeal of the story of Oedipus must lie not in the fate-free will
issue but in something specific to that narrative in the details of that story rather than in
its wider issues.
And of course the details of the Oedipus story are that Oedipus is a man who killed his father
and married his mother.
Freud saw this as reflecting the repressed desires of all male children to do away with
their fathers and have access to their mothers.
According to Freud not just the Oedipus myth but myths in general are in effect the collective
dreams of the human race.
By that he meant that he thought myths utilize the same kind of imagery, condensation and
displacement that we find in our own individual dreams.
And he thought that the imagery of myth was similar to the imagery of dreams and of course
in both cases Freud thought that this imagery was primarily sexual in nature.
Oedipus is a story about at least in part about a sexual relationship but Freud saw
sexual imagery in other myths as well.
The second great psychological theorist of this century to grapple with myth was of course
Carl Jung.
Jung saw myths as reflections of the collective unconscious.
In particular Jung thought that myth draws on archetypes which are contained in the
collective unconscious.
By archetypes he meant more or less recurrent images that exist cross-culturally and throughout
time.
Images such as the image of the wise old man, the earth mother, the maiden, that sort of
thing.
Jung thought that myth utilizes these images, these archetypes and that we find myth compelling
because we too partake of the archetypes as we partake of the collective unconscious.
Because myth according to Jung reflected the archetypes of the collective unconscious
he thought that myths were crucially important both for the individual and for society.
He probably accorded more importance to myth than Freud did.
Now the psychological approach is only one universalist or to use my terminology why
approach to myth.
The other main school of thought that's developed around myth in this century is what's called
structuralism.
Structuralism is very difficult to define briefly and simply.
The best definition I found is given by the scholar Walter Burkert who says that structuralism
is a system of definable relations between the parts or elements of a whole which admit
predictable transformations.
The predictable transformations part of that definition is what's crucially important in
it that according to structuralism the component elements, the system of definable relations
between the parts or elements of a whole will interact with one another in predictable ways
whether the whole that we're talking about is society in general, language, myth or some
other systems.
Structuralism says that its parts interact with one another in a predictable manner.
There are two primary varieties of structuralist theory that I want to look at here.
The first is often called the formalist school.
Some people separate it from structuralism entirely and call it formalism instead.
It was developed by a Russian folklorist named Vladimir Prop who analyzed traditional
tales based on their surface elements, based on the actual narrative elements that appear
in these traditional tales.
Looking at Russian folktale, Prop found one basic pattern of tale which could be called
the quest pattern which he further analyzed into 31 separate elements or as he called
them 31 separate functions.
Now an important thing to understand about Prop's kind of analysis, about formalist analysis
is he was not saying that every single tale would have all 31 of these functions.
One story might have functions 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 9, 13, 15 so forth.
Another story might have functions 1, 2, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 15, 17 and so forth.
When you study the entire body of traditional tales, you find the same functions and this
is crucial.
They appear in the same order.
Thus, it is the sequence of functions which creates or defines the tale for a formalist
analysis, not the characters who happen to appear in the tale.
The characters are not the tales defining characteristic to make a bad pun that I didn't
realize I was about to make.
Let me give an example to try to clarify this.
We could say that a tale in a formalist analysis may include the elements of a young man being
driven out of his home by a wicked elder male relative going on a journey in which he encounters
several monsters, killing at least one of those monsters and as a reward for his efforts
being given the hand of a princess in marriage.
Whether we call that hero Jason or Perseus or Prince Charming or Luke Skywalker makes
very little difference.
The tale, the story is the same.
That's the basic understanding of formalism.
The second main category of structuralism and in fact what most people are referring
to when they talk about a structuralist approach to myth looks at the underlying structure
of the myth rather than at the surface narrative of a given myth.
This approach was developed by Claude Levy-Strauss and the main point or a main point of Levy-Strauss'
theory is his claim that myth exists to mediate contradictions, that human society and indeed
human thought in general operates through a series of binary contradictions, binary
oppositions and that myth and other structures of society exist to mediate these contradictions
or these oppositions.
Oppositions such as the opposition between nature and culture which Levy-Strauss says
appears among other ways in the opposition between raw food and cooked food, raw food
standing for nature, cooked food standing for culture.
Another opposition that myth could mediate would be between gods and humans, between
death and life, that sort of thing.
Levy-Strauss claims that not just human culture but human thought itself operates through
these binary oppositions and that many of our cultural structures and artifacts exist to
mediate these oppositions.
This form of structuralism developed as a subcategory of linguistics.
It was applied first to language and then was expanded to include other systems such
as myth.
Another structuralism under Levy-Strauss' structuralism, myth is seen as analogous
to language.
Just as the individual components of language, the sounds or phonemes have no inherent meaning
in themselves.
The sound k has no meaning by itself, the sound t has no meaning by itself.
Put a vowel in between them to get cat or cut or cot and you start to have meaning.
The individual sounds mean nothing.
It's a relationship to one another that conveys meaning.
Levy-Strauss would say that the components of myth, which are sometimes called mythemes
to press the analogy with phonemes, the components of myth have no independent meaning by themselves.
Oedipus by himself means nothing.
It's only putting these components into relationship with one another that gives them meaning.
One of Levy-Strauss' most controversial claims is his statement that a myth is made up of
all its variants and by all its variants he means all its variants.
Not just within the culture that developed it, but also within any culture that refers
to it or uses it.
So Levy-Strauss says that Freud's interpretation of the Oedipus myth, Freud's theory of the
Oedipus complex, is now part of the Oedipus myth and if we're going to analyze the Oedipus
myth we have to take Freud into account no less than we take Sophocles into account.
So he gives a very broad elongated through time definition of what a myth is.
A more recent development in structuralism is the work of Walter Burkert, the same man
whose definition of structuralism I quoted a few minutes ago, who has developed a structuralist
approach that differs from both props and Levy-Strauss' in assigning the basic impetus
for certain myths to what he calls biological programs of action.
Burkert's theory resembles props in that he isolates narrative elements that recur in
different myths, in different tales and from them identifies certain types of tale.
One example of this is what Burkert calls the girl's tragedy.
In the girl's tragedy as analyzed by Burkert, there's a sudden break in a young girl's
life which causes her to leave home.
She then undergoes a period of seclusion which comes to an end in a violent encounter with
a male, often a god, sometimes a human, sometimes even an animal.
This violent encounter results in her pregnancy.
She then undergoes a period of tribulation, suffering and punishment, but at the end of
the story she's rescued and reintegrated into society, often given a new and higher status
in society, often through the birth of a child, of a son.
Now Burkert's contribution, so far so much like prop, Burkert's contribution is to say
that these kinds of stories reflect underlying biological realities.
The male, the girl's tragedy, the female tragedy, he connects to the stages of a young girl's
puberty and maturation so that the sudden break in her life would be Menarche, her first
menstruation, followed often in many cultures by actual seclusion and kind of initiation
ceremony.
The catastrophe that the violent encounter with a male would be deforestation, her first
sexual encounter, the period of tribulation and suffering would be her pregnancy and the
happy ending, the rescue, would be the birth of her child and her emergence as an adult
woman.
His thesis that these narrative elements are rooted in the actual biological realities,
biological realities that can be traced beyond early human all the way back to pre-human
culture is controversial to say the least.
By no means every scholar accepts this thesis, but that is Burkert's main contribution.
He also assigns great importance for ritual, particularly to initiation rituals, and so
he is sometimes referred to as a neo-ritualist as well as being a structuralist.
Now, the best known theorist of myth, at least in America, the best known theorist of myth
to appear in recent decades is Joseph Campbell.
And though Campbell is often called a Jungian and shows many resemblances to Jung's theory
of the archetypes in his work, a better term to describe his approach to myth might actually
be metaphysical.
Campbell assumes that he takes as a given the idea that all myth is the same cross-culturally,
that myth functions in the same way in every society, that myth reflects a reality of the
human mind that is recognizable and is the same throughout cultures and across time.
Like Fraser's, his method depends largely on gathering examples of narrative similarities
from different cultures.
As anyone who's seen his lectures or read his books will remember, that's one of the
main things he does is cite different examples of what he sees as the same narrative elements
from many different cultures.
He assumes that myth is true in a metaphysical or spiritual sense.
By that I mean that he imputes a spiritual meaning to myth that he thinks is constant
across societies and across time but is also crucial for individual psychological and spiritual
health.
In other words, Campbell sees the main function of myth as an expression of a particular spiritual
reality in the human mind.
That's what he thinks myth is, what he claims that myth is.
Interestingly, Campbell separates this spiritual element of myth from the specific religious
doctrines held by the societies that formed the myths.
So rather than thinking that myth is understandable only within a particular culture, Campbell
tends to say that myth is most understandable outside of culture because the religious doctrines
imposed by culture he sees as distortions of the original spiritual meaning of myth.
Now Joseph Campbell is an extraordinarily engaging lecturer and author and he is very, very popular
but despite his popularity, most scholars, and I include myself here, do not have a high
opinion of Campbell's work.
There are several main reasons for this.
First of all, he never attempts any rigorous demonstration of the validity of his interpretations
of myth, instead he simply asserts his interpretations as a given.
He assumes that all myth reflects one spiritual truth or rather he assumes that there is one
spiritual cast to the human mind, that that is part of the essence of being human and
that myth reflects it.
Both of those assumptions are questionable.
Even if we agree, which many people would not, that there is one spiritual cast to the
human mind, the assertion that myth reflects that spiritual cast of the human mind needs
to be argued and not simply asserted.
As I say to my students when I assign them term papers, assertion is not evidence.
To simply say that something is so is not to give evidence that it is so.
And Campbell doesn't ever give evidence.
He simply states his belief that myth reflects one spiritual reality and takes that as a given
throughout his work.
If you agree with him that it does, if you agree with this interpretation, then his work
may be very compelling.
But if you don't agree, he never gives any evidence to show why you should.
Secondly, he claims, Campbell claims, to be discussing narratives that occur worldwide.
Narratives that he calls monomiths.
He claims that the same mythic narrative occurs worldwide throughout cultures and throughout
time.
But he constructs these narratives or demonstrates these narratives by taking one narrative element
from a story in one culture, another from a story in another culture, yet a third from
a story in yet another culture, puts them all together and says, here is the monomith.
Here is the underlying narrative.
But in fact, that underlying narrative doesn't exist in any culture.
Now, you may be thinking, but wait a minute, isn't that what you just said Prop and Berkert
do?
But there's a difference.
Prop works within Russian folktale, within one culture, and finds the different elements
that make up his tale within one culture.
So does Berkert when he's talking about the maids tragedy, the girls' tragedy, for instance.
He's looking at Greek culture.
Campbell ranges across time and across cultures, takes an element from, say, Polynesia, another
from Native American myth, another from ancient Greek myth, puts them all together and says
they all refer to a monomith, to a narrative structure that does not exist in any one of
these cultures.
That is questionable.
That's an assumption that many of us find ourselves unable to make.
He also tends to assume that mere multiplication of examples amounts to proof of his interpretation.
So if he can find 10 examples of a hero going out and slaying a dragon, he assumes that this
amounts to proof of his interpretation of what that narrative element means.
But in fact, multiplication of examples and interpretation of what those examples mean
are two very different things.
A mere listing of parallel examples tells us nothing about the validity or lack of validity
of any given interpretation of those examples.
And finally, Campbell, as I've touched on in all of these objections, assumes that similar
narrative elements must have precisely the same meanings in different cultures.
That is a very, very questionable assumption, to say the least.
To take an example, classical Greek myth, classical Athenian myth, and modern American
culture both have stories about Amazons.
Here women, women who fight against male warriors who live without males, who have sexual relationships
without marriage, who do not depend on males to protect them or to save them in any situation
of violence.
In Greek myth, they appear all over the place.
In fact, I'll deal with them in a lecture late in the course.
In modern American culture, they appear in such popular guises as the television program
Xena Warrior Princess.
The comic book Wonder Woman of many years ago.
And yet, despite the fact that these figures are very, very similar, independent, strong
warrior women who use violence as much as men use violence, it would be a grievous mistake
to think that they have the same implication in ancient Greek society and in modern American
society.
For the Athenians, the Amazons were examples of exactly what women must not be.
They were frightening, they were horrifying, they were repulsive, and they are constantly
overcome by heroes who resexualize them and put them back in their places.
In modern American culture, at least the fans of Xena Warrior Princess see her as an affirmation,
an example of a strong, independent woman of what women can do on their own to protect
themselves without men.
I have friends who encourage their young daughters to watch Xena because they think she's such
a wonderful role model.
Same idea, same image, entirely different meaning in two different cultures.
Now clearly, it could be objected that Xena is not a myth in the sense I've defined myth.
This television program is intentionally written by modern American writers with an agenda,
with an axe to grind.
Fair enough.
But what about a more basic image, a more basic narrative element, something that shows
up worldwide?
What about snakes?
In Judeo-Christian culture, snakes are symbols of evil.
The snake tempted Eve in the garden, the snake let us all astray, the snake is always
a symbol of evil.
But in Greek culture, snakes can be evil, huge, monstrous, dragon-like snakes usually
are, but they can also be beneficent.
In fact, a dead hero very frequently appears at his shrine to his worshipers in the form
of a snake.
Snakes can be, and often are, good images in Greek culture.
The same image, but we cannot assume that it has the same meaning.
The assumption that symbols must mean exactly the same thing wherever they appear cross-culturally
and throughout time is a very dangerous assumption to make.
Now I don't mean to pick too much on Joseph Campbell here.
I focused so much time on him simply because he is so popular and because many of my students
are often very disappointed when they discover that I don't like his work.
In fact, many of the objections I've just raised to Campbell's approach can be raised
to universalist why theories in general.
These theories tend to rest on unproven and unprovable assumptions.
For instance, let's look at the psychological theories of Freud and Jung again.
Both Freud and Jung espouse the idea that myths are in some sense the dreams of the
people.
That myth is to society as dream is to an individual.
But what do they mean by that?
This implies, this depends on the idea that a people or a society has a collective mind
capable of dreaming, which strikes me at least as a rather odd and very problematic assertion.
Now I know I've said in my working definition that myths are stories a society tells itself,
but that similarity of phrase I think doesn't indicate a similarity of meaning here.
When I say that myths are stories a society tells itself, that's a kind of shorthand for
saying myths are stories that a great many individuals within a society tell.
When we say that a society believes in something, American society believes in freedom of speech,
what we mean by that is that most individuals within society believe in freedom of speech.
But when Freud says myths are the dreams of a society, I don't think he does simply
mean that individuals within that society have dreams.
I think he's saying something else.
I think he's positing that a society can somehow dream just as an individual can.
I at least don't see how that's possible.
I don't see how a society can dream any more than a society can feel hunger or thirst or
fall asleep.
So Freud posits that myths are dreams of a society or function to a society as dreams
due to a human.
He doesn't ever demonstrate it.
He also assumes that dreams, the symbols in dreams and in myths, have the same significance
cross-culturally.
One of his main points in his first articulation of the Oedipus complex, one of the things
that made Freud think he was on the right track, is a line in that play where Jocasta
says to Oedipus, many a man before you has dreamed of sleeping with his mother.
Freud saw that as proof that throughout time, across cultures, male human beings desire
as small children to have sexual access to their mothers, feel terrible guilt over this
desire, repress it, and it then comes up through their subconscious and manifests itself in
their dreams.
But if we look at handbooks of dream interpretation that were current in classical Greece and
Hellenistic Greece, we find that a dream of sex with one's mother was often seen as a
good dream, a good omen.
It could indicate that a man was about to return to his native land, for instance, that
he was about to get some possessions that he wanted.
It does not seem to reflect the guilt and repression that Freud assumes must be operating
there.
And Freud is right that this guilt and repression operate in 20th century male children.
That doesn't necessarily prove that they operated in 5th century BC, male children.
Jung posits the collective unconscious and the archetypes, never demonstrates that they
exist.
Levi-Strauss assumes that the mediation of oppositions is a driving force of all cultures
and in fact underlies human thought itself, never demonstrates that this is so.
So the objections I had to Campbell's theory apply really to most of these why theories,
including Berkert.
Berkert assumes that myth is rooted in pre-cultural biological necessities.
I find that a fascinating suggestion.
I admire Berkert's work greatly, but again it cannot possibly be demonstrated.
It can only be asserted.
So where does this leave us?
The best approach may be to recognize that myth is a varied category.
A recognizable category, again we all know it when we see it, but it's hard to pin it
down to any one theory or to put that a little less discouragingly, the best approach may
be to recognize that myth can include all of these theories and more.
No one theory we've looked at of either the what category or the why category seems to
me at least to be sufficient to explain myth overall as a category.
That doesn't mean that these theories can't be useful for elucidating individual myths.
They can and they certainly are.
I would suggest that the best way to proceed what we ought to do is use these theories in
conjunction with one another, see what they can tell us about different myths, but not
try to force myth to fit the pattern of any one of them.
But to be fair I should say that while these theories I've discussed can't be proven, they
can't be disproven either.
There's no way to show that they are incorrect and they therefore should and can be employed
as tools when and where they are useful.
Now my own working definition of myth, again I define myths as traditional stories a society
tells itself that encode or represent the worldview, beliefs, principles and fears of
that society.
That definition obviously combines elements from several of the theories that we've looked
at.
I think as I hope that definition shows that myths give us a great deal of insight on what
a specific culture thinks about the nature of the world in general and about key elements
within the world and about key questions such as the nature and function of the gods.
Are there gods?
What are they like?
What do they do?
Relationship that humans ought to have to the gods.
What it means to be human?
What marks us out from other creatures?
Again, as I mentioned in the first lecture, why are there only two sexes?
Why can't they get along better with one another?
What's all that about?
In other words, I tend to see the most interesting approach to myth as one that looks at myths
within their originating culture and looks at what the myths can tell us about that culture
rather than looking at them in a more global view.
Obviously, I find the universalizing why theories of myth, psychological, structuralist or what
have you, less useful than an approach that examines myth within the culture that developed
it.
That's my own personal bias, if you want to put it that way, or the way my own personal
intellect works.
However, throughout the course, I will, as appropriate, point out particular uses of
the why theories, particular myths to which those theories have been applied or to which
I think they could usefully be applied, and we'll discuss how they work at key points
throughout the lectures.
Now, we have at this point finished our introductory material, our survey of what myth is and how
it works.
In the next lecture, we will turn to looking at actual classical mythology itself when
we begin discussing the myth of the creation of the gods and the creation of the universe
as told in Hesiod's Theogony.
