Lecture four, first was chaos.
Hello and welcome back to lecture four.
In our previous lecture we finished the introductory material by looking at some of the more important
20th century theories of what myth is and how it works.
In this lecture we're going to turn to discussing classical myth itself.
We'll begin with looking at the creation story as recounted in the work Theogony by the poet
Hecied.
This is the most complete surviving Greek account of the creation of the universe.
Hecied probably lived and composed Theogony sometime in the 8th century BC.
We don't know his exact dates, but most scholars think that he wrote around the same time as
the time when the Iliad and the Odyssey were written down, were composed.
He uses the same meter as the Iliad and the Odyssey, dactylic examiner, and a good deal
of the same dialect and language as those two poems.
Like the Iliad and the Odyssey, the Homeric epics, Theogony is a transcription of orally
transmitted material.
Hecied did not make up the stories that he tells in Theogony.
However, he did, of course, organize his material, shape it, decide which particular details
to include in Theogony and which to leave out, so he certainly had an influence on the
material.
However, Theogony is as close as we can get to the actual orally transmitted myths about
creation that were told in Greece before the invention of literacy.
There were other Theogonies, other accounts of the creation of the universe and the gods
in ancient Greece.
They haven't survived, so Hecied's version of the way the world came into being is the
most complete Greek creation story that we have.
However, it's important to realize that this was never an orthodoxy.
Hecied's work is not something that someone had to believe in order to be a member of
the Greek religion that worshiped Zeus and the other gods.
Greek religion did not work that way.
There was no sacred text.
Theogony is not analogous to Genesis in the Judeo-Christian Bible or to the Koran or to
any other set body of doctrine.
It is Hecied's version of the traditional myths about how the world came into being,
widely accepted as far as we can tell in antiquity, very influential on Greek culture, but not
in any sense an orthodoxy.
The word Theogony actually means how the gods came into existence.
That's what the Greek word means.
However, the material that Hecied presents in Theogony is as much a description of how
the whole material universe came into existence as it is a description of how the gods came
into existence.
The reason for this is that in Hecied's worldview and the worldview reflected by Theogony, the
gods are not separate from the universe.
They are part and parcel of the universe, as we'll discuss throughout this lecture.
Now, this is an example of the multivalent explanatory nature of myth, how a myth can
explain many different things at the same time and through one and only one narrative.
Theogony uses the narrative of the gods' birth, of the coming into existence of the gods,
to describe events that we would approach through science, psychology, philosophy, and
other such disciplines.
Since in Hecied's worldview, the gods comprise the universe.
The gods are not separate from the universe but are elements within it.
When he tells us how they came into existence, he's also telling us how the world itself
came into existence.
And this means, this aspect of Theogony means, that a character can be and usually is at
one and the same time, both a natural force or element, say for instance, the sun, the
moon, the sea, that kind of thing, and an anthropomorphic entity with volition, emotion, and bodily
functions, as we discussed a little bit in the first lecture when I mentioned Gaia and
Uranus, whom we will now find out much more about.
The creation story that Hecied presents in Theogony actually tells us a great deal about
the nature of the gods.
That's not what he set out to do.
He set out to describe how they came into being.
In his culture, of course, their nature was already understood.
These were the gods.
People knew what kind of gods they were.
But for us, looking at the story from outside, Hecied gives us a great deal of information
about the type of gods that he and his culture worshiped.
These gods don't create the universe.
They are part of it, as I've already said.
This implies, among other things, that these gods are not omnipotent within the universe.
They are extremely powerful, but none of them, not even Zeus, the head god, is altogether
omnipotent.
None of them is all powerful, and they are not outside the universe.
This further implies that in Hecied's account of creation, there is no external creator.
In fact, creation may be a slightly misleading word to use here, because there is no creator
As Hecied tells the story, the universe simply comes into being.
The gods and with them, the universe, simply come into existence without any creator setting
the process into motion.
These gods, in other words, are not transcendent.
They are not outside, beyond, separate from the universe.
They come into existence as it does.
However, the gods are immortal.
They cannot die.
This has important implications for several points that Hecied covers in Theogony.
A god cannot be killed, a god cannot die.
At least so long as the universe lasts, these gods are immortal.
I suppose if the universe ever ended, the gods would go with it, but as long as the
universe is there, these are immortal gods.
Furthermore, as we'll see in our discussion of Theogony, these gods are highly anthropomorphic.
They eat, drink, sleep, mate, give birth, have emotions, feel anger, all of that sort
of thing.
Theogony begins by positing several primordial entities, gods, deities, entities, whatever
you want to call them, chaos, Gaia, Tartarus, and Eros.
Chaos in ancient Greek does not mean disorder.
It simply means a gap, a yawning, and open space.
So basically Hecied says first there was an open space, first there was a gap or a yawning.
After that, Hecied tells us, came Gaia.
He doesn't make it clear whether Gaia and the other original entities were born from
chaos or whether they simply appeared after chaos.
He just says first was chaos and after her, chaos is female in Greek, came Gaia.
Gaia, or gay, her name is sometimes spelled G-E, is, as I've said before, the earth.
And since Hecied's view is geocentric, since his world view is a geocentric one, the world,
the earth is considered as the center of the universe, it makes very good logical sense
that the first main deity to come into existence would be the earth herself.
Tartarus, one of these other four primordial deities, is the underworld, the land that
will eventually house the spirits of the dead once there are some dead spirits to go there.
Eros means sexual desire.
The God Eros is the personification of sexual desire.
And this may surprise you that Eros is one of Hecied's primordial deities because in
more commonly known versions of Greek myth, Eros of course is the son of Aphrodite.
He's the equivalent of the Latin Cupid, usually shown in Greek art as a youth or a young boy
and Roman art as a baby.
And he's considered the son of Aphrodite.
In Hecied's work, Eros is one of the primordial deities.
This is a good illustration of what I've touched on before about the different versions
of myth being used according to what purpose the particular teller of the myth has in mind.
Hecied is going to describe for us how the universe came into existence.
And in his account, almost all creation, almost all development within the universe
will take place through the medium of sexual reproduction.
How he's going to describe how everything comes into existence.
Well, if he's going to do that, if he's going to describe how everything comes into existence
through the medium of sexual reproduction, sexual desire has got to be there from the
very beginning.
So, Eros must be a primordial deity in Hecied's account or else none of the rest of the development
of the world can happen.
It does not seem to have been a problem for Hecied or for his audience or later generations
of Greeks reading his work that Eros and Hecied is a primordial deity and in other authors
is the son of Aphrodite.
What seems to us to be a contradiction, he must be one or the other, doesn't seem to
have troubled them.
After the appearance of these primordial deities, Chaos, Gaia, Tartarus and Eros, birth and
sexual reproduction become the standard means of development in the world.
These first deities simply come into existence, but after that deities come into existence
through birth and birth is usually though not always preceded by sexuality, by sexual
conception.
Not always however, Chaos gives birth to Knight and Eribos on her own.
Knight is self-explanatory, Eribos is the gloomy darkness within Tartarus, it's a little
bit odd that Tartarus and Eribos should be two separate entities, but according to Hecied
they are.
Knight and Eribos mate and produce aether, that's the bright upper air and day.
Gaia on her own without mating with anyone, gives birth to Uranus, the sky, Pontos, the
sea and mountains.
In other words, the earth is taking on the recognizable shape that would have been familiar
to the people of Hecied's day.
Pontos here, the sea means the sea, the Mediterranean sea, the sea in the middle of the known world.
So Gaia first exists apparently as simply a flat disk, the earth is conceived of as
being disk shaped, then she shapes herself into the familiar earth of the Greeks by making
the Mediterranean sea Pontos in the center of the lands and producing the mountain ranges
that would have been familiar to Hecied and his audience.
So we're picturing a flat disk shaped earth and Uranus the sky will come to be a dome
over her.
Think of a cake dish, a flat round disk with a dome over it and you'll have the picture
of Gaia and Uranus, Tartarus is, Hecied tells us, as far below Gaia as Uranus is above her.
Once Gaia has produced Uranus, she mates with him, her son, and they together beget 12 children.
These 12 children, the first generation of gods to be born after Gaia, are called the
Titans.
The Titans include important natural elements or natural entities such as the sun, the moon,
and the river Okianos, a river which flows around the edges of Gaia.
To complete our picture of Hecied's world view here, imagine a never ending river flowing
around the edges of that flat disk shaped earth.
If you were foolish enough to sail out through what we would call the Straits of Gibraltar,
what the ancient Greeks would call the Pillars of Heracles, out of Pontos that is, out of
the known sea, you would get into the stream of ocean and you would sail forever, without
ever again reaching land.
Ocean flows continually around the edges of Gaia, Okianos is his Greek name.
So Gaia and Uranus mate and produce these 12 children, but all is not well because Uranus
does not allow the children to be born.
He pushes each one back into Gaia's womb as each child is born.
Uranus refuses to let his children be born.
This causes Gaia great pain as well as causing her great anger and therefore she conspires
with her youngest son, a Titan named Cronus, to overthrow Cronus' father, Uranus.
Gaia produces a sickle, she simply somehow makes a sickle.
Cronus hides inside her body and I've always thought that this is a particularly Freudian
seaming myth.
Cronus hides inside Gaia's body and the next time Uranus comes to have sex with Gaia, Cronus
from inside Gaia's womb grasps hold of Uranus' genitals and cuts them off with the scythe.
So Uranus is castrated by his son, Cronus, who is hiding inside the body of Cronus'
mother, Gaia.
Cronus throws the severed genitals into the sea and out of the foam that springs up around
them is born Aphrodite, Venus in her Roman name.
So all of these paintings that are so familiar in the story of Aphrodite being born from
the foam of the sea seldom tell you where the foam comes from, but it comes from Uranus'
severed genitals being thrown into Pontus.
And of course Aphrodite is a personification of sexual desire.
This is a very reasonable birth story for her.
At this point, Uranus retreats from Gaia and becomes the dome of the sky.
He never again takes any very active part in anything that happens in Theogony.
He cannot be killed, as I already said, a god by definition cannot be killed.
What Cronus has done is the next best thing, has disempowered, disabled his father by castrating
him.
Obviously if you can't kill a god, what you're going to do is deprive him of his power to
the greatest extent possible and depriving him of his masculinity is a very clear symbolic
way of depriving him of his power.
So Uranus becomes the dome of the sky that touches Gaia on all sides.
He doesn't go away.
He's still there.
If you walk outside and look up, there he is, but he is no longer an active participant
in the rest of Theogony.
This also leaves room, physical room, for the children to be born.
The picture that he see it seems to be presenting here is before the castration of Uranus, Uranus
was not yet the dome of the sky with which we are all familiar.
He was pressing down on Gaia.
He was flat on Gaia.
There was no separation in between them, quite literally no room for those children to develop.
It's only when Uranus retreats and becomes the sky as we know it that the Titans, the
children, can spring forth from Gaia and become powerful entities in their own rights.
Now as I mentioned briefly in the very first lecture, this story is an excellent example
of the way myth can work on several levels at once because Gaia is the earth and Uranus
is the sky, as I've said before, but at the same time she is a very anthropomorphic female
entity with a womb who can feel both pain and anger when her husband pushes her babies
back into her, who can conspire with her youngest son, who can create that scythe or sickle for
Kronos to use in overpowering his father.
All of this is going on at one level while at the same time we have the picture that
I've just described of sky pressing down on earth and there being no room for anything
to grow between them.
So you have both a physical picture of the sky and the earth as they really quote unquote
are and a story of this proto-war between the sexes, if you like, in which the female
conspires with a younger male to overthrow the dominant male.
Once Uranus has backed away, once Uranus has retreated and become the dome of the sky,
then there's room for Gaia's children to exist and not only to exist but to mate and
reproduce in their own rights.
And this is represented in the text by a whole flurry of reproduction.
At this point he see it goes into about three or four pages of text in which he describes
all the titans mating off with one another and producing literally hundreds of children.
He lays particular emphasis on all the water streams, lakes, rivers and so forth that come
into existence at this time.
So the physical earth is completed by the reproduction that can happen among the titans
after Uranus has let Gaia give birth to her children.
This story of Kronos castrating his father also lends itself remarkably well to allegorical
interpretation.
Due to the resemblance of Kronos' name to the Greek word for time, Kronos is the name
of the god Kronos with a slightly rougher K sound represented in our transliteration
by an H is the word for time, the word that we see in words like chronology, chronological.
Kronos with the H in it is the word for time.
Now if we go with the allegorical interpretation that this similarity of the name Kronos and
the word for time seems to imply, we can say that when Kronos was freed from Gaia's womb
after he castrated his father Uranus, time itself came into being.
On this interpretation we're really dealing with a fairly sophisticated concept here.
Not only is it necessary for there to be space for Gaia's children to develop in, not only
must Uranus back away and leave room for the children to develop, time is also necessary.
You've got to have space, you've also got to have time for development to take place.
And so only when Kronos, only when time has come into true being according to this allegorical
interpretation, can the reproduction that I've just described start taking place, can
the world come into full functioning order.
Now these two words, Kronos the name of the God and Kronos meaning time, are not actually
etymologically related to one another.
They come from two entirely different roots.
They're not really two versions of the same word.
I personally don't think that necessarily invalidates the allegorical interpretation.
If he see it and his audience thought they came from the same word, then that allegory
can be working there even though modern linguists know that the resemblance of sound is purely
coincidental.
This allegorical interpretation, by the way, was first suggested as early as the sixth
century BC.
It's not my own idea.
It has a long history behind it.
And I think it makes a great deal of sense.
I like to point it out because, again, it does show the level of sophistication that can
be working under the surface of what at first sight is a rather horrifically gory and utre story,
the castration of Uranos by Kronos.
Once the Titans are free from Gaia's womb, they become the main actors in the story.
As I've already said, they pair off and start mating with one another.
And the same basic pattern is repeated in the next generation as Kronos in his turn tries
to prevent the birth of, or at least the development of, his children.
Kronos marries his sister, Rhea, and they produce together six children, three daughters,
three sons.
The daughters are Hestia, Demeter, and Hera.
The sons are Hades, Poseidon, and Zeus.
Now you would think that Kronos would have learned from his father's sad fate the futility
of trying to prevent these children from developing.
He does learn enough from his father that he doesn't leave, Kronos does not leave his
children in Rhea's womb or push them back into Rhea's womb, instead he waits until
the children are born and then he swallows them.
He swallows each child in turn as it is born, so instead of leaving them in Rhea's body,
he takes control of them by placing them in his own body.
Rhea, like her mother Gaia before her, is infuriated by this and conspires to overthrow
Kronos to trick Kronos out of his evil plan.
She substitutes for the youngest child Zeus a stone, a rock, wrapped in swaddling clothes,
gives that to Kronos and he swallows it thinking it's a baby.
A point that I always like to make here at this point in the story is that we are not
dealing with realism in this kind of story.
Very frequently a hand will go up in my classroom and a plaintive voice will ask, how could Kronos
be so stupid that he didn't know the difference in a stone and a baby?
And the answer, I think the only answer I can offer to that, is that that kind of logic,
that kind of realism is not the way mythic stories operate.
I can give you a folktale parallel.
When we hear the story of Little Red Riding Hood, it doesn't occur to most of us to say
how could Little Red Riding Hood possibly mistake a wolf for her grandmother and why is that
wolf talking in the first place?
In the story, we accept the logic of the story and I think we have to do the same thing
with this sort of story as Heesied recounts it.
Within the logic of this story, Kronos does not see the difference in a rock and a baby,
despite the unreality of that assumption.
So Kronos swallows a stone thinking that it's the baby Zeus.
Zeus is sent to the island of Crete to be reared in secret.
Heesied doesn't tell us how long it takes Zeus to grow up and reach full maturity.
But once he does, Zeus returns home and helps his siblings escape from their father.
By so doing, he also sets into motion the events that will lead to the overthrow of
Kronos and Zeus's ascension to power.
Heesied, unfortunately, is very vague about the details of how Kronos is induced to spit
out his children, but induced to spit them out he is.
And since gods cannot die, Zeus's siblings have remained alive inside Kronos's body.
They're spat out in reverse order from the order in which they were born.
So in this sense, Zeus is both the youngest of his siblings and the eldest of his siblings.
He's the last born, but the first to reach maturity.
The others are spat out in reverse order, so Hestia, the first born, is in some sense
also the youngest, the last one to be spat out by their father Kronos.
Zeus and these five siblings, together with several of Zeus's children in the next generation,
together come to be called the Olympians, the gods who live on Mount Olympus.
And a little note about terminology here.
When the Greeks talked about the gods, they very frequently used that to mean Zeus, his
five siblings, and Zeus's children, who are also called the Olympians.
And yet all of these entities I've been talking about are gods.
The Titans are gods, Gaia is a god, goddess, Uranus is a god.
So the use of the term gods to mean Zeus and his immediate family is a little bit misleading,
yet it's very, very common.
The 10-year war that ensues at this point between Kronos and his siblings and Zeus and
his siblings is very frequently referred to as the war between the gods and the Titans.
It would be more correct to call it the war between the Olympians and the Titans.
But just so you're aware of it, very frequently the gods refers to Zeus and his immediate
family despite the fact that all of these entities are actually gods.
The two sides fight for 10 years, eventually Zeus is triumphant.
And at this point, the struggle for power ends, the order of rule in the universe is
set, Zeus will remain the head god forever and as such, as such is frequently often called
simply the Olympian, the primary Olympian among all the Olympians.
Now one immediately noticeable and intriguing point about this narrative is that it portrays
the struggle for power among the gods as one involving older female deities opposed by
and helped by also younger male deities.
Gaia is the oldest deity, Uranus works against her, she enlists the help of still a younger
male Kronos to overthrow Uranus.
Kronos in turn opposes Rhea who enlists the help of a still younger male Zeus to overthrow
Kronos.
What's going on with this, there are many possible answers.
Some scholars argue that this reflects the psychological anxieties of males about coming
to maturity, having in some sense to replace their fathers as mature men acting in the world,
but also worried that their sons will in turn replace them and worried about the affection
that their wives feel for those sons.
Other scholars see the increased anthropomorphism of each generation, Gaia is the earth, Uranus
is the sky, Kronos is maybe sort of time, Rhea is just the goddess who exists to give
Kronos children, by the time we get to Zeus's generation there's no direct connection with
natural forces at all, these gods may control natural forces but they don't personify them.
Some scholars see that increased anthropomorphism of each generation as representing the development
of civilization as the society progresses so does the anthropomorphic nature of the
gods.
Others point to the very apparent anxiety throughout Greek culture about the power of
women, the fear that women would exert control if they could and here in the myth we see
these elder goddesses trying to exert power though they can only do it through enlisting
the aid of younger males.
There are many many other possible explanations and again as always I think it's probably
a mistake to try to find one and only one meaning in this Uranus Kronos Zeus story but
the idea of a struggle between older female deities and younger male deities is one that
will come back to a couple of times in the course so it's worth holding in the back of
your minds.
Now theogony as we've seen presents various extremely sophisticated and difficult concepts
in the guise of genealogies.
Hesiod talks about all sorts of things by narrating the birth stories, the marriage and birth
stories of the gods.
It is I think an interesting and useful thing to do to compare Hesiod's version of the
creation story with the version told by the Roman poet Ovid some 700 years later in a
culture in which literacy was fully established.
However classical mythology covers both Greek and Roman versions of the myths.
Here we have an unusual case of two authors standing at either end of that tradition.
Hesiod in the 8th century BC, Ovid in the 1st century BC and AD he overlaps telling
more or less the same story and that gives us a rare opportunity to see how the story
is manipulated by these two different authors in two different cultures.
Ovid's overall creation story is very different from Hesiod's both in tone and in emphasis.
Rather than describing the creation of the universe through the creation of the gods
Ovid simply assumes that there are gods of some sort or another.
He uses the standard anthropomorphic gods as characters in his work.
I'm talking now about his work Metamorphoses which opens with account of the creation.
But rather than describing creation of the universe through the creation of the gods
Ovid offers alternatives for how the physical universe may have come to be.
And he does so by running through all sorts of possibilities.
The opening pages of Metamorphoses always seem to me to be a tour de force by Ovid in
which he shows off just how learned, just how erudite he is.
He runs through various possible scientific theories of his day.
Maybe the universe came into existence when discordant atoms joined together and made the forms that we know.
Maybe it happened when the four elements first separated out of chaos and then came together
to make the bodies and the entities that we know.
Or perhaps after he's run through possible scientific theories he touches on possible
theologies.
Perhaps there was a creator god, he says.
Or maybe nature simply took it on herself.
They're assuming that nature is somehow an entity outside the natural world.
Maybe nature took it upon herself to shape the world.
He runs through in a very short space a great many possible theories touching on each showing
how familiar he is with each but not committing to any one of them.
Now Ovid as I said is working in a literate tradition and writing for an extremely literate
and erudite audience.
He's doing a very very different thing than Hesiod is doing though he's using the same
basic subject matter to do it.
This is a good illustration of the problems built into a discussion of classical mythology.
In Hesiod we can feel fairly confident that we're dealing with a recounting of myth that's
pretty close to the original oral tradition that the myth draws upon.
With Ovid we're dealing with the self-consciously literary reworking of the myths in ways that
may sometimes actually go directly against the traditional import of those stories.
Ironically Ovid is our main or sometimes our only source for some extremely famous classical
myths such as the story of Apollo and Daphne, the story of Narcissus, various others have
come down to us only in Ovid's extremely literary reworking of those myths.
So in this lecture we've begun our discussion of Hesiod's creation story, looked at how
the world came into existence and the three-generational struggle for power that ensued after the world
came into existence.
In our next lecture we'll focus more on what Zeus does after he comes to power, his consolidation
of his power and in particular his matings with various goddesses before he settles
down with his permanent wife Hera.
