Lecture 5, The Reign of the Olympian
Hello and welcome back to lecture 5.
In the previous lecture we talked about Hesiod's delineation in Theogony of the three-generation
struggle for power in which power devolved from Uranus through Kronos to Zeus.
In this lecture we are going to continue discussing Theogony, look at how Zeus consolidated
his power, divided it with his siblings, and at the next generation of gods that began
to be born through Zeus' various matings with several different goddesses.
After overthrowing the Titans, Zeus consolidates his power and becomes the primary ruler of
the gods, which he will continue to be for as long as the universe lasts.
There will be no further struggles of sons to overthrow their fathers, and no further
shift of power down the generations.
Zeus is now in control, he is the head god, and he will remain so for as long as the universe
lasts.
Now, Hesiod never explicitly states any of that, which I've just said.
Hesiod never comes right out and says, Zeus is now in power and will remain so.
This is the end of the struggle for power that crosses generations, Zeus is going to
stay in power forever.
He doesn't do so for reasons that are important to remember throughout the study of classical
myth, or I would suppose throughout the study of any mythology for that matter.
Hesiod and his audience assume the reality of Zeus and the other gods.
For them, these gods are really there.
They are the gods, they are an accurate picture of how the universe works.
Therefore, everyone knows that Zeus will remain in power.
There can be no question of Zeus not remaining in power.
That's a given of Hesiod's society.
And everyone listening to Hesiod's work at the time it was composed would know perfectly
well that it was Zeus's rise to power towards which the whole story was tending from the
very beginning, that everything was leading up to, was heading towards Zeus's accession
to power.
Because this is known by everyone, it's not necessary to state it straightforwardly in
Hesiod's narrative.
This is an important point to remember any time we look at any myth.
Narrative points that viewed from the outside may seem arbitrary.
When we look at them outside the culture that created the stories, various different points
may seem arbitrary.
Why should Zeus become the head god rather than someone else?
Why should Zeus not be overthrown by a son later on?
And within the culture that created these stories, these points are not arbitrary at
all.
They're necessary because they're reflections of what that culture perceives as reality.
So Zeus is and will remain king of the gods, ruler of the gods.
He divides power among himself and his brothers as one of his first acts once he's in power.
This division is often referred to by Greek authors as the triple division, with no further
explanation than that, because everyone knows, again, which triple division is being referred
to.
Zeus has two brothers, right, Hades and Poseidon, and he allocates power to them as follows.
Hades becomes lord of Tartarus.
At this point, Hades goes literally bodily to Tartarus and stays there.
He becomes king of the dead.
He doesn't ever come back to Mount Olympus where Zeus and his siblings live.
And Hades doesn't take much active part in the doings of myth after this, except as those
doings affect or are associated with the land of the dead.
His identification with Tartarus becomes so close, in fact, that his name, Hades, comes
to be another name for the land of the dead, so that Tartarus can now be referred to as
Hades.
The god's name becomes the name of the place as well.
Poseidon becomes ruler of the seas and of waters in general.
Poseidon doesn't personify the sea.
Pontos is still there.
Pontos hasn't gone away.
But Poseidon is given power over the seas and over waters in general.
He also is the god who is supposed to send earthquakes.
He controls earthquakes as well as controlling water.
Now Zeus becomes ruler of the sky.
And as such, he controls the thunderbolt, which he can hurl as his weapon.
Theoretically, all three brothers share power over the earth.
But in practice, the earth too becomes Zeus's domain.
Poseidon, very seldom, exerts power over the earth.
Hades, also very seldom, if ever, has any direct control over the earth.
The earth, in effect, becomes Zeus's domain as well, as does most of the workings of human
society.
And so, while this is called the triple division, and supposedly Zeus divides three shares of
power among himself and his brothers, in actuality, it's more as though Zeus divides the world
into four parts, earth, sky, sea, and underworld, gives one fourth to each of his brothers
and keeps half for himself.
So Zeus is very definitely the, has the upper hand in this division of power.
Zeus's sisters also have their particular roles.
Hera, as we'll talk about later on in the lecture, is the patron goddess of marriage
and married women.
She's also Zeus's permanent wife.
Hestia is the goddess of the hearth.
Hestia's case is a good one for reminding ourselves that myth and religion are not necessarily
completely overlapping categories.
The reason I say that is that Hestia, as goddess of the hearth, Hestia, whose name actually
means hearth, must have been one of the most important goddesses in the day-to-day religious
lives and religious experience of most Greek people.
The hearth is both the literal and metaphorical center of the household.
The hearth, the fireplace, allows for heat, for light, for heating water to cook, for
all the processes that are necessary for life in society.
The hearth is absolutely crucial.
It can be said it's the focal point of the home, and that's actually a pun because the
Latin word focus originally meant hearth.
That's where we get that word from.
And yet we have almost no myth about Hestia.
She does not show up in literature much at all.
She's mentioned now and then, but there are almost no stories associated with her.
If we judge the importance of a god in religion purely based on that god's appearance in literature,
we'd have to say that Hestia is negligible, and yet everything else we know about Greek
religion would indicate that she's far from negligible.
So that's just a reminder that the two categories, myth and religion, do not always overlap nearly
as neatly as we would like to think they would.
Demeter, Zeus's remaining sister, is the goddess of grain and agriculture.
She takes part in some very important myths, most important among them, the story of her
loss of her daughter Persephone, which I mentioned in an earlier lecture and which we'll talk
about at length in lecture number seven.
As ruler, Zeus not only gains physical control over the sky and over the earth, he also takes
as part of his domain control over or the governance of various abstract concepts having
to do with human society and the orderly working of human society.
First and foremost, perhaps, Zeus oversees justice.
Zeus is the god who stands behind justice, who backs up justice.
As such, he is the god who punishes oath breakers and who validates the swearing of oaths.
He is also the god of Zenea, the patron god of this extraordinarily important concept in
Greek culture.
Zenea is often translated as the guest-host relationship or as hospitality.
Neither of those quite captures just how crucially important a concept it was in archaic Greek
society.
Anyone who has ever read the Odyssey will remember how important Zenea is.
Zeus is the god who stands behind that concept as well and punishes those who violate their
duties to guest or host.
He is also the god who oversees prophecy, particularly in his shrine at a place called
Dodona.
Now, Zeus' son Apollo, who we'll talk about in a later lecture, is also a god of prophecy
and is perhaps the most important god of prophecy in Greek myth.
It is Apollo who supervises the oracle at Delphi, for instance, the most important oracular
shrine in Greece.
But Apollo makes it quite clear several times in literature that his control of prophecy
or his prophetic gift is handed to him by Zeus, is given to him by Zeus.
He even says at times that what he's doing when he gives prophecy is prophesying the
will of Zeus.
Zeus, in other words, is the god who is most directly associated with prophecy.
He gives control over prophecy to Apollo as a kind of lending out of his control of prophecy.
But Zeus is the main prophetic god.
Zeus' connection with prophecy emphasizes both his wisdom and his power.
Prophets like Apollo often say that they're foretelling the will of Zeus.
And so what's going to happen is, at least at times, described as what Zeus wills to
happen.
Now, once he's established himself as ruler of the gods, divided his power with his brothers,
overseeing the domains of his sisters, and set himself up as the god who is patron of
these various aspects of human society, Zeus starts to mate with various different goddesses.
His first wife, or his first mate, is the minor goddess Metis.
It's not exactly clear if he actually marries her or just mates with her.
But in any case, she is his first partner.
And the important thing about Metis is that she is fated.
Fates have decreed that she will bear a son who will overthrow his father.
Thus, repeating the pattern we saw in the earlier generations, just as Kronos overthrew
Uranos and Zeus overthrew Kronos, Metis is supposed to bear a son who will overthrow
his father.
He said, says about Metis, it was fated that Metis would bear keen-minded children, first
a gray-eyed daughter who in strength and wisdom would be her father's match, then a
male child high-metaled and destined to rule over gods and men.
But Zeus lodged her in his belly before she did all this, that she might advise him in
matters good and bad.
As I said in the last lecture, Kronos takes a hint from the mistakes of Uranos, doesn't
leave the children inside his wife, but swallows them.
Zeus takes a hint from the troubles of Kronos, doesn't wait till the children are born to
swallow them, but swallows the wife, before she can conceive the troublesome son.
She has already conceived the daughter in question.
And the daughter is Athena, who is eventually born from Zeus' head.
Just as Zeus' siblings remained alive inside Kronos' body, so Athena remains alive inside
Metis' body, inside Zeus' body.
And whenever the gestation period is finished with, Athena is born from Zeus' head.
There are various works of Greek art showing this moment.
Zeus has someone, usually it's conceived of as the god Hephaestus, the blacksmith god,
hit him over the forehead with an axe.
His head splits open and out springs Athena, fully grown and wearing armor.
So very interesting subject to be portrayed in art.
But the son, who was destined to overthrow his father, is never conceived and never born.
Zeus is never overthrown.
This is one of the very few times in Greek myth that anyone, even Zeus, successfully
circumvents the workings of fate.
Like so much else in Theogony, the story of Metis and her daughter Athena offers several
interesting interpretive points.
First, as I just said, it's the only time that anyone successfully overthrows fate.
And thus it highlights or introduces the concept of fate, which affects gods as well as humans.
Fate or destiny is a huge topic in classical culture and classical mythology.
And it's very hard to get an exact handle on precisely how it works.
But it is independent of Zeus.
While prophets may say they're foretelling the will of Zeus, side by side with that is
the very strong sense that the fates operate separately from Zeus and that even Zeus, normally
speaking, cannot counteract the workings of fate.
There is a very famous scene in Homer's Iliad in which Zeus thinks about intervening in
the battle and saving the life of his human son, Sarpedon, who is about to be killed.
It reminds him that Sarpedon is fated to die and that Zeus, I don't want to say cannot,
but that Zeus should not interfere with the workings of fate.
Zeus agrees and lets Sarpedon die, though he weeps bitterly for him.
Thus the swallowing of Metis and circumvention of the conception of the fated son is a very,
very unusual thing.
Normally fate functions as a reminder that even Zeus is not omnipotent.
Fate is sometimes treated as an abstract concept.
It's sometimes personified as three goddesses called the fates, or Moirae in Greek, who
are daughters of Zeus and another minor goddess named Themis.
So the swallowing of Metis gives us an interesting take on fate, it's the exception that proves
the rule in effect that fate cannot normally be circumvented.
Fate also can be seen, the swallowing of Metis also can be seen as the moment at which the
male power, the power of male gods, is finally irrevocably established over the female goddesses.
Up to this point it's been a little bit questionable.
These mother goddesses have seemed awfully powerful.
They have conspired with younger sons to overthrow fathers up until this point.
But when Zeus circumvents any of that by swallowing Metis, one way to read what's going on here
is to say this is the moment at which male dominance is firmly established and remains
so in Greek culture, in Greek myth.
And the act is also important, I think, as the point at which Zeus matures, at which
Zeus becomes a mature, fully competent ruler.
To explain why I say that, we have to do an allegorical interpretation which works exceptionally
well for this particular myth.
Zeus is a young ruler, he's just come into power, he has power and dominance.
What else does a ruler need in order to rule well?
To rule well, a ruler needs wisdom, he must be a wise ruler.
And guess what the word Metis means in Greek, it means wisdom.
Metis, like many other minor goddesses, has a name that is also an abstract concept.
She personifies wisdom.
Just as there are goddesses who personify justice, who personify order, who personify
peace, Metis personifies wisdom.
Zeus needs wisdom in order to rule properly and thus when he swallows Metis, he is quite
literally incorporating wisdom.
Again, Hesiod says, he lodged her in his belly so that she might advise him in matters
good and bad.
Now he lodged her in his belly so that she might advise him.
In order to understand that, I have to tell you something about ancient Greek views of
physiology and about the workings of thought.
Hesiod in his contemporaries, and for that matter Greeks who lived some time after Hesiod,
did not know that thought takes place in the head.
They were not aware of that.
As strange as that sounds, we don't feel thought taking place in our heads.
We don't have any sensory nerve endings in our brains at all.
We feel nothing going on in our brains.
Hesiod in his contemporaries, and later Greeks as well, believed that thought took place
in the midriff.
This is the part of your body you think with.
Takes place in the midriff, in the torso.
That's not quite as bizarre as it sounds if you think about it with your head.
You realize that we feel emotions, which are pretty closely allied to thoughts in many
ways in our torsos.
Where do you feel fear, anxiety, happiness, anger?
You don't feel them in your brain.
You feel them if anywhere in your torso.
And we still have expressions in our language that reflect that.
We say that someone loves someone else with all their heart.
We say, I have a gut feeling about this.
Those kinds of expressions reflect our realization that we feel our mental states to a large
degree in our torsos.
The Greeks thought that that was where we also thought our mental states in our torsos.
They weren't stupid, but some of the clearest evidence that thought takes place in the brain
that we have, of course, is what happens to someone who suffered a severe head injury.
We can see all too horribly many times the impact of a head injury on the thought processes.
In the ancient world, in any time before the invention of modern medicine, an injury severe
enough to cause brain damage would almost undoubtedly be severe enough to kill.
So while the ancient Greeks knew that the stuff in the head, and by the way, that's
what in Kethalon, the Greek word for brain means, just the stuff in the head, they knew
that the stuff in the head was important.
You split someone's head open with an ax, and if someone is not Zeus, he drops dead.
But they didn't know exactly what it was important for.
One theory was that it was a regulatory system for heat, that it controlled the heat or coolness
of the body.
Another theory was that it was the source of important bodily fluids, such as blood,
bone marrow, and semen.
But it was not the seed of thought.
Again, that means when Zeus puts Metis in his belly, he's putting wisdom right where
she needs to be for him to think with her.
It also means, however, that the very popular modern interpretation of the birth of Athena,
something that you'll see in many modern myth handbooks, that Athena springs forth from
Zeus' head because she is a goddess of wisdom, and that's a proper place for her to spring
from.
That won't work.
Athena is a goddess associated with wisdom, but that can't be what's indicated by her
springing out of Zeus' brow.
I think that probably that's a connection, either with the idea that the brain is the
source of semen, so if a male god is going to give birth, that's a good place for him
to give birth from, or it's an association with the head as the top of the body, the
highest point, the crowning point.
The word that's used for head can also mean the top of a hill or a mountain, so it gives
Athena a kind of majesty that she comes out of Zeus' head.
After the swallowing of wisdom of Metis and the birth of Athena, Zeus mates with various
other goddesses and produces several children before he marries his permanent, lasting wife,
Hera.
Now, as I already said, Hera is the patron goddess of marriage and of married women,
and yet her marriage with Zeus is neither happy nor very productive.
She and Zeus have difficulties producing acceptable sons.
They have two daughters, Hebe, whose name means youthful beauty or bloom of youth or
something like that.
The moment at which a young maiden is her most beautiful is her Hebe, her Hebe.
And Zeus and Hera's second daughter is called Elithuia.
She's the goddess of childbirth.
So they have one daughter who personifies, if you like, the exact moment at which a girl
ought to be a bride, and another who personifies childbirth, both of which fit very well with
Hera being goddess of marriage.
However, their son, probably their only son, is Ares, god of war, a god whom Zeus himself
says in the Iliad, all the other gods hate.
Hera has a second son, Hephaestus, the blacksmith god.
But according to most versions of Hephaestus' birth, he was born parthenogenically.
Hera gave birth to him without mating with Zeus because she was angry that Zeus had had
Athena.
Well, Athena is, in many ways, the most splendid goddess who exists.
Hera's attempt to produce a male child on her own results in Hephaestus, who is lame,
ugly, and not a very satisfactory god in many ways.
So Zeus and Hera do not produce flourishing offspring, as you might expect that they would.
Zeus also mates with not only other goddesses, but with various mortal women, such as Alchmene,
the mother of the hero Heracles.
And one theme that runs throughout Greek hero myth is the idea that Hera hates and makes
trouble for Zeus' sons by mortal women.
She's not entirely pleased when Zeus has sons by other goddesses either, but she particularly
hates the idea that a mortal woman, a human, could produce a son with Zeus when she herself
has not been very successful in that regard.
And so she is particularly disposed to hate Zeus' sons by mortal women.
The hatred of Hera is a motivating force behind most of the adventures of the hero Heracles,
and we'll talk about it linked in another lecture.
But for right now, just as a comment, this is one reason that I was terribly disappointed
in the recent Disney movie about Heracles, or Hercules.
They used the Roman version of his name.
In that movie, the story was cleaned up to make Hercules the legitimate son of Zeus
and Hera.
Well, there are two problems with that.
First of all, if both his parents are gods, he ought to be a god, not a hero, so it leaves
unanswered the question of why he's a human at all.
Secondly, and I think more importantly, if you remove Hera's hatred for Heracles, if
Heracles is Hera's son, then you remove the entire motivation for almost everything that
happens to Heracles throughout his entire life.
So by getting rid of the illegitimacy, getting rid of the fact that Zeus is an adulterer,
is the undercut the entire story of Heracles, or Hercules.
Now Zeus's amatory exploits, the fact that Zeus is an adulterer, are not just a matter
of a god behaving badly.
There are reasons, compelling reasons within the logic of the mythological narratives for
why Zeus mates with so many other females.
First of all, many of his matings are with conceptual goddesses.
By that I mean goddesses such as Metis, Wisdom, or Themis, whose name means right order, the
right functioning of society and of the world in general.
These matings produce offspring such as justice.
Zeus mates with right order and has a daughter, Justice.
That's a fairly transparent way of talking about Zeus's attributes as ruler, making him
the father of justice underlines the idea that he supervises justice, that justice is
part of his domain.
His multiple matings also repeat a pattern that we saw in the earlier generations.
He see it, as I've said before, is describing the coming into existence of everything and
is using the sexual matings of anthropomorphic gods to describe how everything comes into
existence.
If you want to have abstractions such as justice produced through sexual union and have justice
or self be an anthropomorphic goddess, then it's reasonable in this context to have Zeus,
so important a god as he is, the father of many of the lesser gods.
So Zeus is almost by necessity paired off with various different concepts to produce
yet other concepts.
That's the means that he see it has to talk about how the world came into existence.
And another explanation for Zeus's very frequent matings with minor goddesses and even with
mortal women is that this may well reflect the synthesis of traditions about various
local gods.
Greek religion, belief in the Olympians and all the stories concerning the Olympians
did not spring full grown from the earth as Athena sprang full grown from Zeus's brow.
It developed over a period of centuries.
It's safe to assume that as it developed, it also spread that some areas of Greece that
had not originally believed in Zeus and the Olympians came to believe in them.
Now most places would have local traditions, local stories about their own gods.
When they came to believe in Zeus, there would be a strong tendency to say the stories we
have told about our local God were really about Zeus instead.
We called him something else.
Now we know his name is really Zeus.
Along with that, there's probably a reluctance to give up stories about local heroines who
had mated with this God, a local queen who had been married by this God, a local goddess
who had been married by this God.
So you simply graft all of those stories on to Zeus and that means that Zeus by necessity
becomes a God who has mated with many, many different females.
This process, by the way, is often called syncretism, putting together various different
traditions, adding other traditions on to the stories about a particular God or goddess.
So by the end of theogony, what sort of picture of the gods do we have?
There's several important characteristics that I want to enumerate at this point just
to pull together some of the threads.
These gods are clearly anthropomorphic.
They share many of humanity's characteristics.
Now we are so accustomed to the classical mythology as our primary example of what mythology
is and how it works as our primary example that we know of in this culture of polytheism,
belief in many gods, that it may not seem at all surprising that the gods are anthropomorphic.
You may be thinking, well, of course they are.
How else would a God be portrayed?
The answer is a God can be portrayed in many other ways.
There are many cultures that have gods who are theromorphic rather than anthropomorphic.
That is, gods who resemble beasts, animals, not humans.
And there are some cultures that have gods who are a combination of the two.
In Egyptian culture, for instance, there are gods with heads of jackals or crocodile gods.
So the fact that the Greeks conceived of their gods as anthropomorphic in nature is not a
given of a polytheistic system, and simply how the Greeks happen to do it.
And these gods are very anthropomorphic indeed.
They have actual bodies.
Now it's taken for granted that in their natural state, as they appear to one another on Mount
Olympus, their bodies are larger, more beautiful, and more glorious than human bodies.
Human-like, but better than ours.
In fact, they are so glorious in their natural state that if a human being sees a god as
the god really is, the human being goes up in smoke, we're incinerated by the sight,
we can't tolerate it.
But though their bodies are larger and more beautiful than ours, they are functioning
anthropomorphic bodies.
The gods eat.
They eat ambrosia.
We eat grain or meat.
They eat ambrosia.
The gods drink.
We drink wine.
They drink nectar.
The gods have a substance flowing through their veins.
We have blood.
They have ikor.
So they have fully functional human-like bodies.
And of course, as we've already talked about, they share many human emotions and passions,
both good and bad.
However, anthropomorphic, though they are, they're also very different from human beings.
They have the ability to move vast distances apparently almost instantaneously.
When a god wants to appear to a human, he or she can, almost just by thinking it.
And they very constantly do.
They simply appear in front of human beings in many myths.
Although their normal appearance, their real appearance, is anthropomorphic, they can and
do disguise themselves as other creatures or even as non-animate objects.
Zeus is particularly known for this.
When he wants to seduce a mortal woman, he may appear to her as a bull or as a swan or
in one memorable case when a girl was locked up in a tower as a shower of gold that fell
through the window and landed in her lap.
The defining difference between gods and humans, the one true dividing line between
them and us, is that the gods are immortal.
Humans must die, but gods cannot die.
One of the most frequent terms used to describe the gods in Greek literature is to call them
the Athanatoi, the deathless ones, whereas humans are called the Thnatoi, the dying ones
or the ones who are bound to death.
And I think this helps us understand why the most powerful oath a god can swear is an oath
by the river Styx.
When a god swears by the river Styx, the god is bound to do what he has sworn.
The Styx is the river that flows around Tartarus, as Okanos flows around Gaia.
It is therefore the actual dividing line between the land of the dead inside Tartarus and the
land of the living.
Since the absolute defining characteristic of a god is that he or she cannot die, an
oath sworn on the river Styx is in effect an oath sworn on the essence of what makes
a god a god, their immortality, and is therefore inviolable.
So in this lecture, we've continued our discussion of Hesiod by looking at Zeus's consolidation
of power and his matings with various goddesses.
In our next lecture, we'll turn to the one missing element that we haven't talked about
yet, human beings, and see how Hesiod treats them and particularly what he says about the
creation, not of the first man, but of the first woman.
