Lecture 6 Immortals and Mortals
Hello and welcome back to lecture 6.
In our previous two lectures we looked at what Hesiod's Theogony tells us about the
gods, their creation and the creation of the universe through the creation of the gods.
In this lecture we're going to turn to seeing what Hesiod has to tell us about human beings.
We'll look at the myth of Prometheus and Pandora as it appears in Theogony and in Hesiod's
other great work, a poem called Works and Days, and we'll consider the implication of
this myth for the Greek view of society and particularly of women and gender roles.
Theogony, as I've said several times, concentrates on the coming into existence of the gods.
It does not contain a creation story about humans or at least about men at all.
This often surprises modern readers because we, for whatever reason, tend to think that
how we came into existence, how human beings came to be, would be one of the primary points
of interest in any creation story.
But what Hesiod is doing in Theogony is describing the birth of the gods.
Humans are largely irrelevant in that context.
And therefore when humans are mentioned in Theogony, or at least when male humans are
mentioned in Theogony, Hesiod doesn't describe how they came to be created.
They're simply there.
They are simply taken as a given.
Hesiod launches into the one place in Theogony where he really discusses humans and their
relationship with gods by simply saying that when the gods and men met at a place called
Mykoni, a series of things happened there.
So he doesn't tell us where the men came from.
He doesn't even make it clear immediately that he really does mean just men, not men
and women.
But as the story progresses, we find that that is in fact what he means.
So though Hesiod doesn't tell us how men came to exist, he does posit an original state
in which humans were males only and there were no women.
The men and the gods met at a place called Mykoni.
Among other things, what they did there was to establish the appropriate ritual for sacrifice,
to establish the way in which men would offer sacrifice to the gods.
And this was the beginning of all of men's troubles.
Though they were trying to set up a way to sacrifice to the gods in order to honor the
gods, the idea of sacrifice backfired for the following reasons.
Prometheus was present when gods and men met at Mykoni to work out the method of sacrifice.
Now Prometheus is a son of Yapatos, one of the original titans.
Prometheus himself has also called a titan, though actually if you draw a little family
tree for yourself, you'll see that he's Zeus's first cousin and that he's in the same generation
as Zeus, but he's not one of the Olympians.
He's called a titan as is his father Yapatos, brother of Kronos.
In Hesiod's account, Prometheus tries to trick Zeus into taking the less desirable portion
of the first sacrifice so that men will have the better portion.
What Prometheus does is he disguises the inedible part of the sacrificial animal by putting
the meat under the hide and the hoofs and the horns and the parts of the animal that
look inedible and hiding the inedible portion, the inedible portion, the part that actually
can't be eaten, the bones, he hides under fat so that it looks like it would be the
meat and then he tells Zeus to choose whichever portion Zeus desires.
Now there are a couple of points to notice here.
First of all, this reflects an assumption that is very frequent in myth, I think of
most cultures, in etiological myths in particular, that the way something is done the very first
time is the way that it will then be done forever after.
If Zeus chooses the worst portion on this occasion, that will mean that forever thereafter
the gods will get the inedible part of the sacrifice, the humans will get the edible
part.
Again, there's no logical reason why it should be so.
There's no logical reason why the way things are done the first time is how they're done
forever after, but that shows up very frequently in myth.
Secondly, though I said at the end of my last lecture that gods eat ambrosia and drink
nectar, apparently in this very early stage of society when things were still being settled,
the gods could eat meat if they wanted to because the idea is that Zeus could have chosen
the edible portion of the sacrifice for the gods and left the inedible portion to the
humans.
Now Zeus is not fooled, he tells us Zeus knows perfectly well what Prometheus is doing and
is angered by it.
In retaliation for his anger at Prometheus, Zeus punishes humans.
Now you may remember that in the last lecture I said Zeus is the god who has dominion over
justice.
This seems like a remarkably unjust way for a god of justice to deal with human beings.
Zeus' first reaction to Prometheus' deceit is to punish humans by hiding fire from them
and he says quite distinctly that Zeus is punishing human beings.
He says that Zeus plots evil for men in his mind because he's angry at what Prometheus
did.
How can we square this with the idea that Zeus is a god of justice when he punishes
innocent men for the transgressions of his own cousin Prometheus?
Well this is the first view we have had of the relationship between gods and humans as
it's delineated in Greek mythology and I think it is a very important glimpse that we're
given here of the Greek view of the way humans and gods interact with one another.
These gods do not love humans, they do not feel compelled to treat humans fairly.
The relationship between gods and humans as he said presents it is not a relationship
of love, compassion or mercy on the part of the gods.
Humans are useful to the gods.
We offer them sacrifices, we do nice things for them, they find us useful but they do
not find us particularly worthy objects of love, pity or mercy and they do find us expendable.
In his role as god of justice Zeus supervises justice between humans, justice in human actions
towards other humans.
He punishes humans who break their oaths towards other humans or for that matter towards gods
but this does not necessarily imply any correlation of a just system between gods and humans.
The fact that humans have to treat one another fairly does not imply that gods have to treat
humans fairly.
They don't have to and they don't as we'll see in a great many of the myths we'll study.
So Zeus decides to punish Prometheus by punishing humans and he steals fire for human, he takes
fire away from human beings, sorry Zeus takes fire away from human beings to punish Prometheus.
Prometheus then steals the fire back for humanity which brings further punishment down both
on his own head this time and on men.
Prometheus himself of course is punished in a way that is extremely famous.
He is chained either to a rocky crag or according to Hesiod to a pillar and has his liver eaten
out every day by an eagle, Zeus's sacred bird.
Every night his liver grows back so that it can be eaten out by the bird again the next
day.
Now one point I always like to make here is again a demonstration of just how extraordinarily
anthropomorphic these gods are.
Not only the external appearance of their bodies is like humans but even their internal
organs are like humans.
Prometheus has a liver and it's his liver that the eagle can eat every day and that
will grow back every night.
Zeus apparently intends this punishment to be permanent, Prometheus is supposed to be
there forever.
In fact he's freed by Heracles, some generations later Heracles happens to be passing by and
unchains Prometheus and lets him go.
So much for Prometheus.
Men are also punished in a way that Hesiod seems to consider no less horrible than what
happens to Prometheus.
Men get women.
In the person of the first woman Pandora, although she's not named in theogony.
The first woman is created and sent to men in general, we're not supposed to think about
this too literally I suppose, as a source of womankind and a punishment and a trouble
for men.
And Hesiod delineates very quickly just what a trouble women are.
He says they're worthless, they don't contribute anything to their own upkeep, they're a burden
and a nag and you don't want to have them around but on the other hand if you don't
have them around then you can't have any children and you die old and friendless and strangers
get your property.
So he ends on a cheerful note, there's no way to escape the will of Zeus.
In other words, men are going to suffer no matter what they do.
Now the Prometheus story highlights several of the problems of studying myth through literature
that I touched on in the first lecture.
There are unexplained elements.
Zeus appears to have a grudge against Prometheus' whole family for one thing.
Prometheus' brother Atlas is the one who is condemned to hold the sky up on his shoulders
forever.
We're not told why Zeus has a grudge against Prometheus' whole family.
That seems to be one of the elements that Hesiod thinks his audience can simply take
for granted.
Secondly, and perhaps more importantly, Hesiod doesn't tell us why Prometheus wants to help
humans.
Other gods, as I've said, don't seem particularly interested in helping us or being kind to
us.
Prometheus goes out of his way and risks dreadful punishment and suffers dreadful punishment
for helping us.
Hesiod doesn't tell us why.
Later authors said that Prometheus was the creator of men, that Prometheus was the one
who had created male human beings.
That's why he tried to help them and that's part of why Zeus thought he could punish Prometheus
through punishing men.
That may be, it may be that Hesiod assumes we know this so he doesn't say it, or it
may be that later authors made that version up to account for Hesiod's portrayal.
We just don't know.
This story is obviously a very important one and it has many crucial implications for our
understanding of the Greek view of the world and of humans place in it.
The first thing to notice is that fire equals civilization.
I touched on that when I talked about Hestia and her role as goddess of the hearth.
Perhaps it would be better to say fire equals culture rather than fire equals civilization.
Without fire, there can be no human culture as we know it.
Therefore, what Prometheus brings men is culture.
When he brings them fire, when he returns fire to them, he's bringing culture to them.
Later authors specifically make this equation.
The Tragedian Escalus in his play Prometheus Bound has the character of Prometheus say
that he brought men all the arts of culture including even writing in that account.
The impetus for Prometheus' story, the first sacrifice which leads to the hiding of fire
which leads to the punishment of woman.
This is extremely important in this context.
Sacrifice here can be seen, Berkert reads it as representing the transition from pre-civilization
to civilization or from pre-culture to culture.
Berkert, the neo-ritualist I mentioned in my third lecture, thinks that sacrifice is
a means to displace the guilt humans felt in the early stages of culture over hunting
and killing animals.
If he's right about this, his argument further continues that the first sacrifice would represent
the moment at which guilt-free hominids, animals who are incapable of feeling guilt, made the
leap into being humans who can feel guilt.
In other words, the first sacrifice, the moment at which guilt enters the picture and humans
feel a need to expiate that guilt would also be the moment at which culture or society
enters the picture.
If we read the myth in this way, it's probably no surprise that sex appears at just this
point as well, since one of the main functions of society is to regulate sexual relationships.
So that connection, sacrifice, sexuality, women, marriage, the problems of marriage,
if we follow Berkert's reading, that's not merely a coincidental throwing together
of elements, but a very important connection with the representation of the beginning of
human culture.
Guilt over killing animals is not the only possible guilt that humans might feel in
connection with sacrifice.
I talked a few minutes ago about the choice that Prometheus gives Zeus to choose the worse
or better part of the sacrifice, and in actual Greek ritual practice, the human beings ate
the meat of the sacrificed animal and the gods were given the bones.
Supposedly the gods enjoyed the smell of the smoke rising up on their altars, but they
did not get the meat or the fat, the edible part of the animal.
Now, when we look at the myth from outside its original culture, there's no difficulty
at all in understanding why that should be so.
Ancient Greece was a hard place to live.
Culture tended to be subsistence level only.
In such a society it would make no sense whatsoever to burn in honor of the gods precious protein.
When you have sacrificed an animal, the only reasonable thing to do with it is to have
the human sacrifices eat the animal after it's been sacrificed.
Protein was hard to come by.
That's the only thing that would make any sense at all as a cultural practice.
But that's looking at it from outside the culture, assuming that these gods don't exist.
Looked at from inside the culture that developed this myth with the gods who are awe-inspiring
dangerous beings who need to be propitiated to keep them from harming us, it's very problematic
indeed that we, the humans, get the good part of the sacrifice and throw the bones to the
gods, so to speak.
And so a kind of sense of guilt over why is that?
Why do we eat the animal and only burn the bones for the gods?
It's probably very much there in the story, and so the idea that sacrifice, the establishment
of sacrifice somehow entails punishment for the establishment makes sense that there's
something there that needs to be punished.
The punishment, of course, as I've already said, is the woman, the creation of the first
woman.
Now, the story of the first woman occurs not only in theogony but also in Hesiod's other
great works and days, which for the most part doesn't deal with myth.
It's mainly a farming manual, as it happens, but the first few hundred lines of works and
days do deal with myth, and among other things, they retell the story of the first woman.
In works and days, the woman is given the name Pandora.
In theogony, the emphasis is on Prometheus' wrongdoing and his punishment, and Pandora,
the first woman is mentioned almost as a sideline.
In works and days, the emphasis is on Pandora herself.
She's named while in theogony, she's nameless.
The name Pandora is ambiguous.
It may mean gift of all, i.e., gift of all the God's two men, or it may mean all giver,
i.e., someone who gives everything herself.
In works and days, her creation is described in more detail than is the case in theogony.
We're told that most of the Gods and Goddesses unite in giving her something, that Aphrodite,
because of passion, makes her irresistibly beautiful.
Hermes, the messenger God, who we'll talk about in the later lecture, gives her a thievish
nature and the mind of a bitch, as Hesiod puts it.
And then she is sent, in works and days, not to men in general, but to Prometheus' brother,
Epimetheus.
Perhaps the most important detail in the works and days account of Pandora is that she has
with her a jar, not a box, as later versions of her story tend to say, but a jar.
And in that jar are contained all the evils that afflict humankind, diseases, old age,
care, trouble, all of that kind of thing, as well as hope.
Pandora opens the lid of the jar, the evils fly out, but hope remains inside just under
the lid of the jar.
Now, the story of Pandora is very frequently compared to the story of the biblical Eve.
A lot of mythological handbooks will say it's more or less just the same story, woman brings
evil into the world.
There are similarities, but I personally think the differences are more significant and more
interesting than the similarities.
And I think the differences are important, again, for our understanding of the relationship
between the sexes, as it's depicted in Greek mythology.
It's true that both Pandora and Eve are responsible for the advent of evil into the world.
There's no doubt about that.
But Eve was created in the first place as a helper for Adam.
God looked at Adam, decided it was not good for him to be by himself, and decided to make
him a help suitable for him, a help meet for him in the language of the King James Version.
Pandora is evil from her very creation.
She is not created to be a help to man.
She's created to be a curse to man.
She's sometimes referred to as the beautiful evil.
So there is a complete difference in motivation in the creation of the first woman.
Also Eve is created out of Adam's own body.
She's not just the same kind of creature he is, she almost is the same creature he is.
She can be seen as the completion of humanity made from Adam's own body.
Pandora is an entirely different creation.
She's made not from the same substance as man, or at least if she is, we're not told
so.
She's certainly not made from man's own body.
She is created separately, individually, and with malice of forethought.
And this seems to me to imply that women are seen in Greek myth and Greek society as different
in kind from men.
Not just as a female of the human species, but as different in kind, different in nature,
and in some sense almost artificial, created as an afterthought.
This is our first real example of a very deep-seated misogyny that runs through much of classical
myth.
We talked in earlier lectures about the anxieties that may be demonstrated by the stories of
the mother goddesses competing for power with their male consorts.
But there is more than just anxiety going on in Greek myth.
There seems to be a real distrust and dislike of women that shows up in many of these stories.
This is our first example of that.
Let's go back to Pandora's jar and the fact that hope is in that jar.
The presence of hope in a jar of evils is very striking, but it's also extremely difficult
to interpret.
Many commentaries on Hesiod's works and days, big learned tomes that talk about just about
the meaning of every word and every line, will say things at this point like, the presence
of hope in the jar seems very surprising.
And leave it at that, which doesn't do us much good.
I always like when I teach myth in the classroom to send the students away one day with the
instruction to think about what hope is doing in the jar, then have them come back the next
day and tell me what they think about it.
And the most usual suggestion I get, the most common modern interpretation, is a rather
optimistic one, that hope is there to indicate that no matter how bad things get, we still
have hope.
Well, that's nice, but I think it ignores two very important points.
Hope is still in the jar.
She's not out in the world, I say she because it is a she in Greek.
She's not out in the world with the other evils or with the evils in general.
She's still in the jar.
She is somehow different, her status is somehow different from the other things that were in
the jar.
And secondly, if hope is a good thing, why is she in the jar of evils to begin with?
What is she doing there?
The other interpretation I get, which is equal but opposite, very interestingly, is extremely
pessimistic.
Someone will usually say, hope's retention in the jar is meant to indicate that there
is no hope, that even that tiny consolation for humankind is utterly absent, that the
Greeks were completely pessimistic, there's no hope, we might as well just lie down and
die.
I think that goes a little bit too far in the opposite direction.
I don't have a good answer for this.
I'm not sure why hope is in the jar, but what I've worked out over years of thinking about
this with my students is that the key may be that the word we translate as hope, elpis
in Greek, is not an unambiguously good thing.
We after 2,000 years of Judeo-Christian tradition tend to think that hope is unambiguously good.
It's one of the three cardinal virtues, faith, hope and charity.
The Greek word elpis might be better translated as expectation rather than hope.
It can be good, but it can also be bad.
If hope is the only thing that gets you through a dreadful situation and things do come right
for you in the end, then hope was a good thing.
But what about if you go for years and years with the false expectation that something
will happen that never does and all of your possibilities run out and all of your chances
disappear because of the expectation that was never fulfilled?
Then it's a very evil thing.
And I think the ambiguous nature of hope may be the key point here.
That hope is both good and evil, could be both good and evil.
This might even explain why it's caught under the lip of the jar.
It's not entirely good, so it's in the jar to begin with.
It's not entirely evil, so it doesn't escape into the world.
At any rate, that's the best I can do with it.
Now the whole myth of Pandora lends itself exceptionally well to psychological interpretations.
The jar can be read as representing Pandora's womb, and I think that's part of why it's
important to realize that it is a jar and not a box.
It is a womb-shaped object.
If we take it that way, we can follow the idea a little bit further and say that Pandora
and all women are responsible for evil in that they are responsible for life itself.
They give birth.
They put new humans in the world to experience life, which as anyone who's read The Iliad
will remember from Achilles' words in Book 24, means experiencing a lot of evil.
But at the same time that birth inflicts all the evils of life on the individual person
who is born, birth also provides the only hope for continuity available to the human
race by providing a new generation.
And so birth, like hope in the jar, is ambiguous.
It both imposes evil on the individual, but it gives hope to the race.
And so in this interpretation, the jar, Pandora, women as source of evil all work together
to make a statement about birth and about life.
On a wider level, the whole description of Pandora can be read as reflecting, once again,
male anxieties about and resentments of sexual reproduction.
This is a theme that is surprisingly common in Greek literature.
Over and over again, a male character will say something about how he wishes it was possible
to get sons without having to resort to women to get them.
In one of Euripides' plays, a character says something about how the God should have arranged
it so that a man could go to a temple at night, leave a certain amount of money, come
back in the morning, and get a baby boy.
None of this dealing with women whatsoever, though there's a very strong current in Greek
myth of anxiety about and resentment of sexual reproduction on the part of men.
In a strongly patriarchal society, and the society reflected by Hesiod's works is definitely
strongly patriarchal, it is all important for men to have sons.
They've got to have sons to carry on their family to leave their property to and so forth.
But the only way to achieve sons is through women.
And a woman or women can thus be seen as controlling men's ultimate destiny.
If the woman remains barren, the man remains barren.
The man has children only if the woman provides them.
Thus, again, the jar which Pandora can choose to open but supposedly could also have chosen
to leave closed could represent this fear or resentment of women's power over reproduction.
I want to end this lecture as I did the previous one by recapping some points about the essential
nature of the gods as we saw them in Theogony and picking up some points that I've touched
on before.
First of all, the term God is regularly used to translate the Greek word Phaos, but it's
a rather surprisingly misleading translation in some ways because of the assumptions we
tend to make about what gods are.
I've even toyed with the idea of teaching a course on Greek mythology without ever using
the word God at all by keeping the Greek word Phaos in place.
The only problem with that is I'd either have to send my students through their books with
bottles of whiteout to whiteout God every time it occurred and put in Phaos, or I'd
have to do all the translations myself, neither one of which is terribly practical.
The reason I've even toyed with that idea is because the word God brings with it so
many unquestioned, unconscious assumptions in our society.
Whether we ourselves are believers or not, we come from a society that makes certain
assumptions about what the word God means.
When we disbelieve in God in this society, we disbelieve in a particular kind of God.
We tend to assume, modern Western readers tend to assume, that by definition a God must
be good, merciful and just, that by definition a God must be omniscient and omnipotent, that
by definition a God must have created the universe including human beings and must feel
affection and concern towards human beings.
And we tend to assume, despite the anthropomorphic language we use to describe God, we tend to
assume that a God does not really have a body or human-like passions and appetites.
All of these assumptions, as we've seen several times now, are false with reference to the
Gods of classical mythology.
They are not consistently good.
They are not consistently merciful.
They are not even apparently consistently just towards human beings or towards one another,
for that matter.
Their anthropomorphism means that they share in humanity's less appealing emotions as well
as in our more appealing ones.
They can be cruel, they can be spiteful, they can be jealous, and they frequently are.
They know a great deal, but they are not omniscient.
They're very powerful, but they are not omnipotent.
So those assumptions as well are false with regard to these Gods.
As I've said before, but it's worth underlining, just because it seems so strange to our assumptions,
they are not transcendent.
They are not outside or beyond the universe, they're part of the universe, and according
to the earliest traditions that we've been working with, they did not create human beings.
It's almost as though they are a parallel kind of creature.
There are three kinds of beings living in the world, gods, humans, and animals.
None of them created the others, they're all just there.
They're not loving, devoted caretakers of humanity.
They do not care about us as a species, and they very rarely care about us as individuals.
There are examples in Greek myth of gods who feel affection for particular individuals.
Athena in the Odyssey seems to feel affection for Odysseus, for example.
There are other stories that work in similar ways, but by and large, the gods do not seem
to feel affection for individual human beings, and they certainly don't feel affection for
us as a species.
And we'll see this brought out over and over again in some of the myths about individual
gods that we'll discuss in the next few lectures.
Now I think part of the reason for this rather unappealing nature of the gods has to do with
their role as personifications of natural forces, emotions, or processes.
They are not just personifications.
In particular, the Olympians are not just personifications, they're much more than that.
Zeus is not just the personification of any one thing, but in a system in which the oldest
gods, and perhaps ultimately in their earliest incarnations, all of the gods are to some
extent personifications of natural forces.
It perhaps makes sense to conceive of such entities as being merciless, capricious, and
not caring about humans.
If you are out on the sea in an open boat and a storm comes up, it does no good to ask
the sea not to drown you.
If you're on land when an earthquake happens, it's useless to cry out to the land, to the
earthquake, why are you being so cruel, I never did anything wrong, why are you killing
me?
If Poseidon is seen as on some level this personification of the sea and the personification
of earthquakes, it makes no more sense to call out to Poseidon for mercy.
Poseidon as acting as natural forces act, mercy doesn't enter the picture.
Now as I said, that's not all that's going on with these gods, but I think it at least
helps to explain why they were conceived in the first place as so detached emotionally
from human beings in so many ways.
So we've talked now about the creation of the gods, about their essential attributes,
and about the creation at least of female human beings.
In our next lecture, we'll move on to looking at a specific myth about a specific goddess,
the myth of Demeter and her daughter Persephone, and in fact the next several lectures will
cover the most important stories about particular individual gods and goddesses.
