Lecture 7, Demeter, Persephone and the Conquest of Death
Hello and welcome back to lecture 7.
In our previous lecture, we discussed the story of Prometheus and Pandora and looked
at some of its implications for the Greek view of gender relationships and for the relationship
between gods and humans.
In the next several lectures, starting with this one, we'll be examining individual Olympian
gods, looking at their characteristics and why they are important.
We begin in this lecture by examining the goddess Demeter.
And we look at Demeter through one of the richest works of literature to survive from
the ancient world, the Homeric hymn to Demeter, which tells the story of Demeter's search
for her missing daughter, Persephone.
Now before I talk about the myth itself, I need to explain what the Homeric hymns are.
These are a series of poems in honor of various different gods and goddesses.
They range in length from just a few lines to several hundred lines.
The Homeric hymn to Demeter is several hundred lines long, in fact.
And they're called Homeric because they are written in the same dialect of Greek using
the same poetic meter, dactylic examiter, and many of the same terms of phrase and vocabulary
as we see in the Homeric epics, the Iliad and the Odyssey.
The classical Greeks themselves assumed that the Homeric hymns had in fact been written
by Homer, the person they believed to have written the Iliad and the Odyssey.
Modern scholarship finds it problematic to posit even that one man named Homer wrote
the Iliad and the Odyssey, and modern scholars are quite certain that the Homeric hymns were
not composed even at the same time as the Iliad or the Odyssey, let alone written by the
same author.
The hymns, in fact, were composed over a period of several centuries.
The earliest one may well be the Homeric hymn to Demeter.
It's certainly one of the earliest.
It was probably written down between 650 and 550 BC.
So they're called Homeric because they're written in the style of Homer.
They're called hymns, which originally in Greek just meant songs.
They happen to be songs in honor of various gods and goddesses.
And the longer Homeric hymns in particular are very useful for understanding the essential
nature of the deities to which they're dedicated because they tend to tell a story that is
in some way key for understanding the nature of the God whom they honor.
So the Homeric hymn to Demeter tells the story of Demeter's search for her missing daughter,
Persephone.
Now the work is important not just because it's a beautiful poem from a relatively early
era of Greek literature.
It's also important because the myth it recounts, the story of Persephone's abduction by Hades,
God of the Underworld, and Demeter's search for her, is open to a great variety of interpretations.
It's a very fruitful myth to look at from all sorts of angles.
And because mainly because it deals with those important questions again, questions of gender
roles, of sexuality, of marriage customs, the relative power of different deities what
Demeter can and cannot accomplish to rescue her daughter, and last but by no means least,
the hymn touches on the whole issue of human mortality, of human death, and how we approach
death.
In addition, the myth of Persephone's abduction and Demeter's search for her is one of the
very few myths preserved in ancient literature that has a clear and direct connection with
a specific ritual where we know what the ritual was, at least more or less we know what the
ritual was, and we can see how the myth interacts with it.
The ritual in question in this case is a ceremony held in honor of Demeter at Elusis, a town
near Athens.
The ceremony was called the Elucinian Mysteries.
It was one of the most important religious festivals of ancient Greece, and we'll talk
about it in detail in the next lecture.
Finally, the Homeric hymn to Demeter preserves one of the most clearly and transparently
etiological of all surviving myths.
As I mentioned in a previous lecture, Persephone's disappearance into the underworld and reappearance
for two-thirds of each year, during which time grain grows while the grain is gone when
she's in the underworld, that very clearly serves as an explanation or an etiology for
the seasons for why grain does not grow during a portion of the year.
So this one myth encapsulates all sorts of angles on myth, all sorts of aspects of myth
as well as being in itself an interesting and compelling story.
Now the basic story of Persephone's abduction by Hades is fairly simple.
Demeter, again the goddess of grain and agriculture, had a single daughter Persephone.
Persephone's father was Zeus, so Zeus and Demeter mated once and produced a daughter
Persephone.
With Zeus's permission, Hades, god of the underworld, comes out of Hades, out of Tartarus
one day, seizes Persephone as she's picking flowers in a field, and takes her down to
Tartarus with him to be his bride.
This is one of the very few times in myth when Hades actually leaves Tartarus and comes
back to the world of the living.
He does so to get Persephone.
Demeter does not know what's happened to her daughter.
She wanders the world looking for Persephone.
During her wanderings, she visits the town of Ellusis near Athens.
Eventually, Demeter forces Zeus's hand to try to get Persephone back by causing a famine,
refusing to let any grain grow.
If the famine continues, all humankind will die out, and therefore Zeus strikes a bargain
between Hades and Demeter so that humanity will not starve to death.
Zeus begins by ordering Hades to return Persephone permanently.
However, while Persephone was in Tartarus, she ate a seed of a pomegranate, and this
means she can't leave Tartarus permanently.
The idea, apparently, is that if you eat a substance while you're in the underworld,
you have to stay in the underworld.
So the compromise that's reached under Zeus's mediation is that Persephone will spend one
third of the year in Hades in Tartarus with her husband Hades, and two thirds of the year
on Olympus with her mother Demeter.
That's the basic storyline, but there is much more going on in this basic story than
is immediately obvious.
As told in the Homeric hymn to Demeter, Demeter's search for Persephone tells us a great deal
about, or a better way to put it, might be reflects in great detail various aspects of
ancient Greek life, or perhaps it would be more accurate at this point to say of ancient
Athenian life.
That's something I haven't really mentioned in detail yet, but when we talk about ancient
Greek culture, that's really a rather inaccurate expression we would probably normally be better
off saying ancient Athenian culture.
Because of all the ancient city-states in Greece, Athens is the one about which we know
out and away the most, and the bulk of ancient Greek literature that has survived the present
day comes from Athens, as does the Homeric hymn to Demeter.
So it's probably safer to say that the Homeric hymn to Demeter gives us insight onto several
important aspects of Athenian life rather than to say Greek life in general.
First it reflects quite clearly actual Greek marriage practices.
A marriage in Athens was a contract between the groom and the bride's father.
It was a business transaction almost, undertaken by two males in which the girl was simply
the object that was exchanged between the two males.
The girl did not have to consent to the marriage.
Her consent was not necessary.
There was no legal or social requirement, I suppose, that she even had to be told ahead
of time that she was going to be married.
Now we can hope that most human fathers did at least tell their wives and tell their daughters
that they were arranging a marriage for the daughter in question.
Zeus is giving Persephone to Hades without even telling Demeter that this is going to
happen is a bit extreme but it's an extreme of normal practice.
The idea that the marriage is arranged between Zeus and Hades rather than Hades asking Persephone
would you like to marry me?
That's completely normal.
Secondly Persephone marries her own uncle.
Now we've seen a lot of incest already among the gods.
Zeus marries his sister Demeter as Zeus's sister and so forth.
But this the marriage of a girl to her uncle to her father's brother would not be considered
incest in ancient Athens.
In fact when a man had only daughters, when he had no male heirs, it was not only appropriate
it was considered necessary that his eldest daughter marry his closest male relative which
normally meant the father's brother, i.e. her own uncle.
Such a girl was called at Epiclaros, there was a particular term for her.
And Epiclaros was a daughter who was her father's heir and yet legally speaking women could
not inherit property in ancient Athens.
Now a man wanted his property to remain within his family.
Normally he would hand it down to his sons.
A woman can't hold property in her own right.
If she marries outside her family then the family's property goes to another family.
That is considered unacceptable so what do you do in this case?
You marry the girl to the father's nearest male relative normally her uncle and therefore
the property stays within her direct male family.
So Persephone is acting as Epiclaros when she's married off to her own uncle.
She is the only child of the union between Demeter and Zeus so of course she's not Zeus's
only child in general.
Another point that's worth making in this context is that human marriages in Athens and
elsewhere in Greece as well were patry local.
What that means is that the bride moved in with her husband's family.
Now I'm always interested at students reactions when I say that because so often I get the
reaction of well of course or that's only natural or something along those lines.
It's not natural.
Nothing about marriage customs is natural.
They're all constructed by cultures.
The reason we tend to find the idea that the bride goes to join her husband's family rather
than vice versa natural is because that's the same system that we still have in our
culture.
We see marriage as a woman joining her husband's family.
That's why most American brides take their husband's names.
Not all of us do but most do because we see marriage as a woman joining the husband's
family not vice versa.
There have been cultures in which marriage means that a man joins his wife's family.
But in ancient Athens marriage was definitely patry local.
So Persephone's being taken to the underworld is a rather severe example of that.
But again it's part of normal practice.
Now the reason I stress that the reason this is important is because in Athenian society
the patry local nature of marriage meant that human mothers and daughters would have greatly
restricted contact after the daughter was married.
Athenian women at least Athenian women of the middle and upper classes were not supposed
to leave their homes.
They stayed inside.
They were sequestered.
They went out of their homes normally only for family funerals and for a few religious
festivals per year.
This means if you think about it that if a daughter moved more than a very short distance
indeed away from her family home upon her marriage she and her mother would quite likely
never or almost never see one another again.
If the daughter moved next door undoubtedly Athenian women went over to talk to the next
door neighbor from time to time.
I don't think they were actually locked up in their houses and unable to go out at all
but they were not able to move through the city freely.
And of course transportation pretty much meant your own feet or perhaps an animal or a cart
that you could be carried in.
So if a daughter on her marriage moved more than the very shortest distance away she and
her mother would almost never or perhaps never at all see one another again.
And so the fact of marriage for girls and their mothers probably did invoke a great
deal of sorrow of the kind that Demeter shows in the Homeric hymn of mothers longing to
get their daughters back and of daughters perhaps not being altogether willing to be
married.
The age of a bride at marriage by the way would have been about 13 or 14.
So we're talking about very young girls here.
The Homeric hymn to Demeter reflects not only the human experience of marriage it also reflects
the human experience of death and separation.
And this is one of the very unusual things about this myth.
In it we see Demeter grieving for her daughter who is in effect dead.
Now that needs a little bit of explanation perhaps.
Why doesn't Demeter simply go to Tartarus to see Persephone?
The answer to that is that Olympians can't or at least don't go to Tartarus.
Hades is an exception because in the triple division he was given Tartarus as his domain
so he for the most part stays there and rules over Tartarus.
Hermes is the only real exception to this rule.
Hermes is a god we'll talk about in a later lecture.
He's the messenger of the gods among other things but he's also the god who conducts
the souls of dead humans to their new abode in Tartarus.
So Hermes can cross into Tartarus and come back out again.
But aside from that Olympians normally cannot go to Tartarus Persephone is there only because
Hades has bodily taken her there as his bride.
So the assumption that Demeter makes when she hears where Persephone is Helios the god
of the sun tells Demeter where Persephone is because from his vantage point in the sky
he's seen her abduction.
Demeter's assumption is that Persephone is gone, is lost and Demeter's reaction is very
much like a human being's reaction at the death of a loved one.
She even goes through some gestures tearing her robe and so forth that would normally
be gestures a human being would do while grieving for the death of a loved one.
So in Demeter's reaction to Persephone's disappearance we have the only time that we
see a god or goddess in effect mourning the death of another god or goddess.
So Demeter has lost her daughter to marriage and she's lost her daughter to at least the
land of death if not death itself.
This underlines a symbolic connection that we see in a great deal of Greek literature
between marriage and death.
In part that's probably because those are two great transition periods in life.
Also more grimly it's probably a quite factual connection.
A great many women died because they married, they died in childbirth.
Infant mortality was high, maternal mortality was very high.
As far as we know it's hard to tell there are no records but it seems that maternal mortality
would have been very high.
A girl who was married at 14 and who had a baby a year would quite likely die in one
of those childbirths fairly early on in her life.
And one way we know this is that we do have records of men marrying two or three or even
more wives as they lived a more normal lifespan.
Normal by our terms that is.
Now the Homeric hymn not only reflects marriage practices and reminds us of the reality of
death for humans.
It also gives us a picture of the God's attitude toward and relationship with humans as we've
talked about a little bit before.
Humans are useful to the gods but we're not objects of affection.
We see this in the hymn to Demeter when Zeus strikes the compromise so Demeter can have
Persephone back for part of the year to keep Demeter from starving the humans to death.
That sounds like Zeus is concerned for humans is worried about us feels pity for us not
at all.
The hymn says very clearly that Demeter would have killed off the race of human beings and
deprived the Olympians of the honor of sacrifices if Zeus had not interfered.
What Zeus is concerned with is that he and the other gods will no longer receive honor
through sacrifice if the humans die.
He doesn't care about the humans in and of themselves.
He cares about his own honor through sacrifices that humans make to him.
Now the Homeric hymn to Demeter really consists of two interlocked or intertwined story.
The story of Persephone's abduction and return to her mother or at least partial return to
her mother is the main story the framing story.
But inside that story as I already mentioned there's an account of Demeter visiting the
town of Elucis, a town near Athens and the story of what she does while she's there.
This second story is no less important in the Homeric hymn though it is sandwiched in
the middle between the disappearance of Persephone and the return of Persephone.
We have this other story, the story of Demeter's visit to Elucis.
In this second narrative framework of the Homeric hymn Demeter goes to Elucis and visits
the queen there, Metanera, queen of Elucis.
There's also a king of Elucis but he figures very little of the story.
Demeter's interaction is with the queen, the queen's daughters and the queen's baby son.
When Demeter wanders to Elucis she's disguised as an old woman, a human being.
And while she's sitting by a well she meets the four daughters of Queen Metanera.
These daughters are teenagers.
They're presented as being young women about old enough to get married so that means they're
teenagers.
They tell Demeter that they have a baby brother and Demeter volunteers to be the nanny for
the baby brother.
Now Demophone, that's the baby boy's name, is described as a late born and much desired
son.
The implication is that his mother had had these four daughters who are now teenagers
had probably almost given up on ever having another child and then finally has the baby
boy who in a patriarchal society is so crucially important.
In other words this would be a more than normally cherished son.
Metanera is probably near the end of her childbearing years at this point.
If Demophone dies there's not likely to be a baby brother to replace him.
In a culture where infant mortality is very high an old woman who has experience caring
for babies and that's how Demeter presents herself as an experienced nanny would be an
invaluable addition to a family circle because she knows what to do.
She has experience.
She's seen babies through childhood illnesses.
She can take care of him and Metanera says to Demeter when she hires her as a nanny,
if you nourish him and raise him up to adulthood I will give you great gifts and great honor.
We tend to take it so much for granted that a baby once born is going to grow up to adulthood.
We see it as an inversion of the natural order if the baby does not reach adulthood.
In this culture it's a very tenuous thing.
Having a baby is just the beginning of it.
You cannot assume that he'll live to maturity.
So Demeter is hired to take care of this remarkably precious late born and much desired child.
She however has another agenda.
She sets out to make baby Demophone immortal.
She does this by anointing him with ambrosia and by putting him in the fireplace in the
fire every night.
The ambrosia apparently keeps him from burning.
Metanera comes in one night, observes what Demeter is doing and reacts in an understandable
way as a human mother.
She is absolutely horrified because what she sees as a crazed old woman burning her baby
in the fireplace.
Demeter's reaction to Metanera's horror is to grow angry.
Demeter becomes very angry, scolds Metanera and says that now Demophone will not become
immortal.
And it's after that that Demeter causes the famine and Zeus strikes the bargain by which
she gets Persephone back.
Now the Homeric hymn does not recount Demophone's fate after this encounter with Demeter.
But other authors, including Apollodorus, tell us that he died.
That when Demeter lost interest in him, stopped trying to make him immortal, the upshot was
he died.
So through this encounter with Demeter, the family loses their son, Demophone probably
The Homeric hymn hints at that.
It says when Metanera interferes, Demeter tosses the baby Demophone down on the ground.
His sisters run over to try to comfort him, but he won't be comforted because he's used
now to an immortal nurse and mortal ones do him no good.
So the hymn seems to hint at a short life for Demophone.
Like the surrounding story of Persephone, the Demophone episode offers a window into
the nature of the gods it describes and the society that created them.
First of all, Demeter seems to be using Demophone as a Persephone substitute.
She seems to be trying to provide a substitute child for herself.
This is a pause in her search for Persephone.
She's going to try to get herself another child instead.
And in this context, I think it's noteworthy and important that she picks a male child.
First of all, we can see this as Demeter attempting to repeat the pattern that we saw with Gaia
and Rea before her, gaining an immortal son that she's going to bring up to be her helper.
Perhaps she's thinking in terms of when he grows up, she'll take her vengeance then on
Zeus for depriving her of Persephone.
Now of course it doesn't work, but that may be the motivation for trying to raise up an
immortal son.
Secondly, and this is a point my students very frequently see as the crucial point here,
a male child won't be taken away from her through marriage.
Why does she pick a male substitute for Persephone rather than getting a baby girl?
The male child stays with his mother.
But Demeter's attempt to immortalize Demophone does not work, and that of course is consistent
with the picture we talked about in Theogony.
Once Zeus is in power, the order of the universe is fixed.
It's not going to be possible now for a goddess, no matter how powerful, to bring up a male
child who will help her overthrow her brother, in this case, the child's father, usually.
By trying to immortalize a human child, Demeter may also be attempting to redress the balance
between herself and Hades.
What I mean by that is that Hades has taken an entity, a being, that should not belong
to him.
He's taken Persephone, who ought to be immortal.
Perhaps Demeter is in effect saying, all right, you took one of mine.
I will take one of yours.
Hades is ruler over all the human souls who have ever died, which means, in effect, all
the human souls who ever have or ever will live.
One of Hades' titles is the Lord of All or the Receiver of All.
He's also described as a very rich god.
And so when Demeter tries to immortalize Demophone, she is in effect taking away from Hades a
being that ought, in the normal run of things, to belong to Hades.
Again, the next point I want to make about the Demophone episode is that, again, it shows
us the god's unconcerned with human emotion and their tendency to see humans as useful
rather than as proper objects for affection.
Demeter does not seem to love Demophone.
As I already said, when she replies to Medanera's interference, when she grows angry at Medanera,
she throws Demophone to the ground.
She loses all interest in him.
She doesn't even look at him after that, as far as we can tell from the text.
More importantly, perhaps, it doesn't seem even to cross Demeter's mind that she, if
she succeeds in immortalizing Demophone, she will be inflicting precisely the same kind
of anguish on Medanera as Hades and Zeus inflicted on her, on Demeter.
She's stealing someone else's baby.
She's taking him permanently away from his mother.
It does not even seem to cross her mind that she ought to have empathy for Medanera, that
she ought to understand Medanera's grief if Medanera loses her child.
That doesn't enter the picture.
Another point that I want to make here is that Demeter says to Medanera, in effect, that
this is all her own fault.
Demeter says to Medanera when Medanera interferes, men are too foolish to know ahead of time
the measure of good and evil which is yet to come.
You too were greatly blinded by your foolishness.
The relentless water of the sticks by which God swore be my witness, immortal and ageless
forever would I have made your dear son, but now it is not possible for him to escape the
fate of death.
So it's Medanera's fault, and Demeter doesn't seem to even entertain the idea that a human
mother might prefer to keep her child with her rather than have him become a god.
Also, those lines reflect something that we've seen before and we'll see again.
The idea that once a process has been initiated, that's how it will have to be done forever
after.
Think of sacrifice in the case of Prometheus.
The flip side of that is when a process is interfered with, it's over.
Demeter can't simply say, oh, never mind Medanera, I'm not burning him, I'm making
him immortal.
Why don't you go pay attention to your daughters and I'll start this process over.
It doesn't work that way.
Once Medanera has interrupted Demeter, apparently the attempt to confer immortality on Demofoone
cannot then continue.
Now the Homeric hymn to Demeter, along with all its other aspects, is an almost perfect
example of the complex, multivalent nature of myth.
It works on many levels at once.
There are many different approaches to the Homeric hymn to Demeter, many different ways
to bring out different aspects of it.
It can be analyzed according to probably just about every theory of myth that's ever been
invented.
Those who espouse Jungian psychology love this poem for the appearance in it of the archetypes
of the mother, the maiden, the crone when Demeter is disguised as an old woman.
Demeter is persuaded to agree to the compromise suggested by Zeus by her mother, so Rhea appears
as the wise old woman as well.
So the archetypes seem to be very fruitful in this myth.
It can also obviously be read, I suppose in a more Freudian way, as a wish fulfillment
fantasy for women or for humans in general.
Human mothers in Athens must at times have wished very strongly that they could unmarry
their daughters, so to speak, that they could get their daughters back.
Human mothers can't.
Once a daughter is married off, she's gone.
But Demeter almost can.
She gets Persephone back at least for two thirds of the year, which is pretty good.
She undoes the marriage of her daughter, at least to a large extent.
Similarly, all human beings, I think it's safe to say, at least at times, wish that
death could be reversed.
We want to get back those we love who have died.
We can't do that.
But in this case, death, in effect, is reversed.
Persephone comes back from the land of the dead.
So both as a wish fulfillment fantasy for women in regard to marriage and for humans
in general in regard to death, the Homeric hymn works very well.
Structuralists can find all kinds of contradictions to be mediated in this myth.
The acceptance of death as opposed to the desire for life, the desire to remain a child
as opposed to the necessity for marriage, those sorts of things are very present in
this myth.
Adherents of the ritual theory can point to the Eleusinian Mysteries, which we'll talk
about in the next lecture, and say, look how this myth grew directly out of ritual.
In Fraser's Die in God, whom you remember was represented by the king of the wood who
was killed each year and annually replaced, even the Die in God is not too far a stretch
since you can, if you like, see Persephone as personifying the grain, the grain that
is cut down and buried each year and returns as new grain in the spring.
That would be a Die in God S rather than a Die in God, but close enough.
But none of these theories, at least I think none of these theories or others that I haven't
run through quickly, accounts for the entire appeal of the hymn.
It's a perfect example of what I said in the end of my lecture about theories that each
of them can be useful to elucidate parts of myth, but none of them seem to elucidate
myth in general.
All of these approaches to the Homeric hymn are valid, but none of them is sufficient.
So in this lecture, we've looked at the story of Demeter and Persephone and we've mentioned
how it interacts with the Ellucinian Mysteries.
In the next lecture, we'll look in detail at the Ellucinian Mysteries themselves and
then move on to look at other views of the afterlife and of what happens to the human
soul after death.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
