Lecture 9, Apollo and Artemis
Hello and welcome back to lecture 9.
In the previous lecture we talked about the Ellicinian mysteries and other Greek views
of the afterlife and what happens to the soul after death.
In this lecture we are going to resume our examination of individual Olympian gods and
goddesses by looking at two of Zeus' children, the twins Apollo and Artemis.
These two are among the most important of the Olympians.
They are the offspring of Zeus and a minor goddess named Leto.
She really has no function in myth except to be the mother of Apollo and Artemis.
They play, these two deities play crucial roles both in reference to the other gods
and throughout Greek mythology for our understanding of the Greek construction of human experience.
They are two extremely important deities.
Now many modern dictionaries of classical mythology will say, if you look up Apollo
for instance, that he is the god of the sun and that his sister Artemis is the goddess
of the moon.
They did come to have these associations eventually, although the association of Apollo with the
sun is fairly late in classical culture.
Certainly at the time of Homer and even in the time of the high point of classical culture
in the 5th century B.C. Apollo was not associated with the sun, that association came later.
Artemis is associated with the moon but even there that's only one aspect of this goddess.
Both Apollo and Artemis are far more complex than the identification of them with the sun
and the moon would tend to indicate.
So if Apollo is not simply a sun god, what is he?
Well he is a god of youth, medicine, healing, music, prophecy and in general moderation
and rationality.
However, he is also associated with sudden death for men.
When a man drops dead, he is said to have been shot by the arrows of Apollo and he
is the god who brings plague and sickness in general.
So he is not entirely a positive or beneficent god, he does have a negative side from the
human point of view as well.
Most of the younger generation of Olympians, not just Apollo and Artemis but the other
younger gods as well, tend to be depicted in art as young adults in their 20s.
The older generation of gods, Zeus and his siblings, are depicted as mature adults in
or around their 40s.
For instance, this illustration on this wall is of Zeus or Poseidon, we don't know which.
Some scholars think one, some the other.
You can see that's a mature man probably in his 40s.
Apollo is represented as a younger man as are his siblings, younger Olympians.
The Apollo is represented as the ideal of youthful beauty, the young man par excellence,
the ideal of manly beauty.
One point to bring out here is that the different gods have their appropriate ages and they
seem to age from birth until they reach the age that's considered appropriate or fitting
to their role, to their area of powers and then they stop.
So Zeus is born as a baby, reaches the age of maturity, of full maturity and stops their
never ages any further.
Persephone we have to conceive of as being about the right age for a bride, so she's
about like a girl of 14 when Hades abducts her, she's not going to age any further either.
Apollo and his siblings and his generation are fixed as youths, are fixed as young gods
and goddesses.
Apollo as I said is associated both with medicine and healing and with sudden death
in general, plague and death through disease.
The double association, healer and plague bringer, anyone who's read the Iliad will
remember how at the beginning of the Iliad, Apollo brings the plague that devastates the
Greek army.
This double association, healer and plague bringer is very good to bear in mind for the
complete and rounded picture of Apollo it offers us.
He is not entirely beneficent towards humans despite his many positive qualities.
He's often shown in art as wearing a quiver and carrying a bow.
When he shoots men with the arrows from his quiver, the men fall dead.
So deaths that we would explain as being the results of stroke or aneurysm, that sort of
thing would according to the Greek view mean that the man had been shot by the invisible
arrow of Apollo.
When a woman dies suddenly the same way she said to have been shot by the arrows of Artemis.
Apollo is patron of music and of the arts in general.
As such he presides over nine goddesses called the muses.
I mentioned the muses in the last lecture when I said that Orpheus was the son of one
of them.
The muses in the earliest stages of Greek culture were simply the personifications or
the representatives of the creative arts in general.
They did not yet in the earliest stages of culture and literature have their own proper
areas of expertise.
Later on the nine muses come to be associated with an individual kind of creative endeavor
each one with one individual area.
So for instance Cleo is the muse of history, Melpomani is the muse of tragedy, that sort
of thing.
But in their earliest representations they are simply together as a group the goddesses
of creative endeavor.
So Apollo presides over the muses.
This means that he presides over art, poetry, music, creative ability in general.
Another aspect of Apollo which is perhaps his most important aspect is that he is the
main god of prophecy.
Now I mentioned earlier on in the course that Zeus stands behind prophecy, Zeus gives
prophecy to Apollo which Apollo then passes on to humans.
And this is true that Zeus is perhaps the primary god of prophecy and Apollo is in effect
his lieutenant in this area.
But the most important prophetic shrine, the most important oracular shrine in Greece
was at Delphi and was sacred to Apollo not to Zeus.
So Apollo's role as a god who provides prophecy for humans is central to our understanding
of him and that role was most important in his shrine at Delphi.
People could travel to Delphi to ask the priestess there in this particular shrine, Apollo's
oracles were given out by a woman by a priestess.
People could travel to Delphi to ask the priestess who was called the Pythia, questions
about anything they wanted to know.
The idea was that they would give their question to the Pythia, she would give an oracular
answer and that answer would have been given to her by Apollo.
She was inspired by Apollo.
So people will say they're going to Delphi to ask Apollo for an answer to a question.
Oedipus says this for instance in Sophocles play Oedipus the King, Oedipus says he went
to Delphi to ask Apollo for an answer.
What that means of course is asking the priestess the Pythia and the assumption is that she
tells you what Apollo tells her.
Now we have preserved for us in literature several examples of the kinds of answers,
the kinds of prophecies, the kinds of oracles that the Pythia gave to questioners.
Many of them are very, very ambiguous.
I suppose the most famous in that category is the oracle given to the king of Lydia,
Cresus, who came to ask Apollo if he, Cresus, should declare war on Persia whose emperor
was Cyrus.
So Cresus wanted to know should I attack Cyrus' kingdom.
The answer that the Pythia gave him was if you cross the river Hallus, which was the
boundary between their two empires, you will destroy a great empire.
Cresus took this as a positive answer, went to war with Cyrus, and of course destroyed
his own empire.
So that's one kind of oracle that we see frequently represented, a completely ambiguous oracle
that can be read either way.
Others were given in such symbolic and raciaché language that it can be very difficult to
tell what exactly they meant.
Looking at the culture from the outside, as we tend to do, it's easy to be cynical about
this, to say the priestess, the Pythia, very carefully gave responses that were either
so ambiguous or so wrapped up in vagueness that they could mean anything and therefore
she could never be proven wrong.
But from inside the culture, for whatever reason, the oracle of Delphi was taken extremely
seriously by the Greeks and their neighbors.
Cities sent representatives to the oracle to ask for advice before any important undertaking.
Athens, for instance, when it was being besieged by the Persians in the Great Persian Wars
of 490 and 480 BC, asked Apollo's oracle at Delphi, what should we do?
Should we evacuate our city or should we stand and fight?
This was taken extremely seriously.
There are some authors who recognize that a particular Pythia could be corrupted, that
Pythias could sometimes be bribed to give false answers, but that does not imply any
disbelief in Apollo's prophetic ability and in the possibility of getting prophecies
from Apollo.
So the idea of prophecy and Apollo as the patron of prophecy is a central factor in
Greek culture and Greek myth.
Apollo's role as the patron of prophecy reflects his overall association with reason and with
moderation, with the idea that there is an order in the world and that Apollo somehow
knows and foreknows this order so that he can tell you what will happen in the future.
Greek religion, as I've said several times before, had no orthodoxy.
Along with that, it did not have any prescriptive commandments, know thou shouts and thou
shalt nots, that had to be believed in and obeyed in order to be a member of this religion.
However, carved on Apollo's temple at Delphi, there were two sayings that come as close as
Greek religion ever came to commandments and that are absolutely crucial to our understanding
of the presumptions of Greek religion and Greek culture.
These two sayings carved on the temple, two words each, very short, were gnothi sautone
and maiden agan.
Gnothi sautone means know yourself.
Made in agan means nothing in excess.
Know yourself in this context is not some sort of pop psychology, touchy-feely advice
to get in touch with your own feelings or your inner child.
It means remember what kind of a creature you are.
Remember your limitations.
Remember above all else that you are not a god.
And these two sayings together encapsulate or lead us towards a theme that runs throughout
Greek myth.
The idea that humans are liable to transgress the boundaries that separate them from the
gods and that to do so inevitably brings suffering.
If you forget what kind of a creature you are or if you have an excess of anything, particularly
an excess of good things, you are in danger of transgressing the boundaries of offending
the gods and you will suffer the consequences of doing so.
Humans must remember their own status and must not seek to exceed it.
In particular, humans should avoid hubris.
Hubris is a word that has actually come into the English language directly from Greek.
It's often translated as excessive pride and it can mean that, but more basically it means
insolence or wantonness, the kind of excessiveness in behavior which leads a person to claim
more than is his or her due.
To illustrate the dangers of hubris and the importance of Apollo's maxims, know yourself
in nothing in excess and the necessity of obeying them, the story of Nairobi is a perfect
one to turn to at this point.
Nairobi was a queen of Thebes.
It's interesting how often Thebes pops up in Greek myth as a place where bad things
happen to main characters in myths.
Nairobi was a queen of Thebes, sister of Tantalus, so it's a family that has its problems already,
and she boasted that she was more worthy of worship than Leto, the mother of Apollo and
Artemis, because Naiobi said, Leto has only a paltry two children, whereas she, Naiobi,
had 14 children.
So Naiobi claimed that the people of Thebes ought to build a temple to and worship her
rather than Leto, because Naiobi had seven times as many children as Leto had.
Clearly, Naiobi has failed to abide by the maxim, know yourself here.
She has forgotten the crucial difference.
Her children are humans, Leto's children are Apollo and Artemis, and the result, of course,
is that Apollo and Artemis get to work with their bows and arrows.
First Apollo shoots Naiobi seven sons.
Their seven sons, described by the Roman poet Ovid as young men out exercising, taking
parts in hunting exercises, in boxing and wrestling, that kind of thing, they all fall
dead at Naiobi's feet.
Does she learn her lesson?
No.
She says she's still better off than Leto.
She still has her seven daughters, whereupon, of course, Artemis starts putting arrows to
the bow and begins to shoot Naiobi's seven daughters.
When only the youngest is left, Naiobi begs for mercy, asks Artemis to spare her youngest
child, but it's too late.
The arrow has already left the bow, and even the youngest, normally pictured as a little
girl of about two or so, dies at her mother's feet.
So there Naiobi is surrounded by the 14 corpses of her 14 children who have died because of
her own hubris.
Supposedly, she transforms into a cliff face with water running down it forever to symbolize
her eternal tears for her children.
Now there are all sorts of points that can be brought out in this story.
First of all, it underlines a theme that is quite frequent in classical mythology, and
I suppose in the mythologies of many other cultures as well, that to use a biblical
phrase, the sins of the fathers will be visited upon the children.
Naiobi transgresses, her children die as a result of her transgression.
But most importantly, for the point I'm making here, it shows us how those two maxims should
be interpreted and what happens when you fail to abide by them, and how the two maxims work
together are almost two sides of the same coin.
Naiobi has failed to know herself.
She has failed to remember what it means to be human.
She has failed to remember that humans are by definition vulnerable to death, and that
the fact that she has 14 children today does not mean that she will have 14 children tomorrow.
She may lose some of them, she may lose all of them.
They are human, therefore they can die at any moment.
Human good fortune is an unstable thing that's stressed over and over again in Greek literature.
It's changeable, it's unstable, it can disappear in the blink of an eye.
Why has she failed to know herself?
Why has she fallen into the error of hubris and so far forgotten the vulnerability that's
part of being human, the vulnerability to death?
Because of excess, she has so many children, all of them alive, that she thinks she's safe.
If two or three die, she would still have 11 or 12.
Even if half of them die, she would still have seven.
She thinks because of this excess, she thinks that she's safe, she thinks that she is not
liable to normal human experience, and that is her great error.
So Apollo as a god of reason and moderation, that's often seen as a very good aspect of
Apollo and in many ways it is, but there's also a kind of warning implicit there as well
as it being a good thing.
We should have nothing in excess because that's so dangerous, we should practice moderation
or else.
So even in these two maxims, know yourself in nothing in excess, we see the somewhat
dangerous side of Apollo represented as well as his appealing and good side.
Artemis as I already said is Apollo's twin sister.
Like her brother Apollo, Artemis brings sudden death as we saw in the Nairobi story, it's
Artemis who shoots Nairobi's daughters.
But in other ways, Artemis is almost her twin's opposite, where he's associated with reason,
moderation, rationality, the arts of culture, music, healing, all of those things.
Artemis is mainly and primarily associated with wildness, untamedness, the wild animal
side of nature.
She is primarily associated with wild beasts.
She's a huntress, the patron of wild beasts, and the protector of the young of all species.
I used to think that Artemis's role as huntress was in some way contradictory to her role
as a protector of the young of all species until I had hunters in my mythology classes
on several different occasions.
They saw no contradiction there whatsoever.
Hunters are concerned with protecting the young of species so that the species will
continue to be there in order to be hunted later.
And I think that's actually a very valid insight that my students gave me in that regard that
Artemis as a huntress, Artemis as a protector of the young are really two complementary
aspects, not contradictory aspects at all.
Her association with wild animals in various aspects seems to date back to very, very early
times.
This may in fact be the original characteristic of Artemis.
She may have begun as a goddess of wild beasts before she was identified as Apollo's sister,
before she gathered any of the other associations that she has.
Homer calls Artemis the Potnia Theeron, a Greek phrase that means the mistress of wild
beasts or the lady of wild beasts.
And there are several very archaic artistic representations that seem to show her in that
role as the lady or mistress of wild beasts.
If Apollo's most important shrine was at Delphi, one of Artemis's most important shrines
was not in Greece at all, but in modern-day Turkey in at Ephesus.
Now the western coast of Turkey was Greek-speaking and culturally Greek in the ancient world.
This was Artemis's most important shrine in Asia Minor and really in all of the Greek-speaking
world.
It was Ephesus, of course, where St. Paul preached against Artemis or Diana as her Roman
name would have it.
And there at Ephesus, her role as Potnia Theeron as the lady or mistress of wild beasts seems
to have been her most important aspect.
Her very famous cult statue there shows her with wild beasts on her headdress and on her
garment, and her torso is covered with objects that may be breasts.
She's sometimes called the mini-breasted Artemis of Ephesus, which seems to show her as a nurturer
of the young of all species.
Other scholars think that the objects that appear on her cult statue at Ephesus are not
breasts at all, but something else that they're questionable.
What exactly those objects are, but in any case, Artemis at Ephesus seems to have been
mainly understood as a goddess of wild beasts and wild animals.
As a huntress, of course, she carries a bow and wears a quiver, just like her brother
Apollo does.
Another way to recognize her huntress aspect in art is that she wears a dress which is
belted up to her knees to allow her to run.
So if you see an image in Greek art, statue or painting of a goddess with a short tunic
that would let her run, that's almost definitely Artemis.
Now along with this association with beasts and with the young of all species, Artemis
is also associated with women in several important ways.
First of all, she is the protector of women in childbirth.
Hera, as we talked about a few lectures back, is the patron goddess of marriage.
And Hera's daughter, Elithuia, is the daughter who embodies childbirth, who comes to a woman
and allows the child to be born.
But Artemis is the goddess to whom women would pray for protection in childbirth, to whom
they would pray not to die in the process of labor.
Artemis is also a virgin.
There are three goddesses who remain forever virgins, Artemis, Athena, and Hestia.
Artemis is a virgin and is particularly associated with young girls before and up to the time
of their marriage.
There were ceremonies that young unmarried girls performed in honor of Artemis and she
is seen as somehow their patron in the way that Hera is the patron of married women.
And of course, as I've already said, she's the bringer of sudden death to women, so she's
associated with crises of women's life, lives with virginity up to the point of marriage,
with childbirth after marriage and with death of women.
Now her status as a virgin and her role as a protector of women in childbirth, at first
glance, seem contradictory.
Why would a goddess who is a virgin herself, who will never undergo childbirth herself,
why would she be given the role in a culture of protecting women in childbirth?
I think that this particular apparent contradiction really is not a contradiction at all if we
see both of these aspects of Artemis as tying into her essential wildness, to the side of
her nature that makes her the patron of wild animals.
In human existence, I think there are two main times when it is almost impossible to
deny our connection to the animal kingdom, to see us as in some way separate from or
different from other animals, and those two instances are, of course, birth and death.
In those two times, in those two crises of our lives, culture falls to one side, does
us no good, doesn't separate us from the animal kingdom in any significant way.
Another way of putting this would be to say that when women are giving birth, that is
when they are closest to wild nature, closest to animal nature, closest to other animals.
Of course, Artemis' role as the protectress of the young of all species comes in here
as well because she is the protector of human babies as well as of the babies of other species.
But I think the crucial aspect here is that women, when they are giving birth, are women
or humans at their wildest, at their least impacted by culture.
And Greek thought in general makes a strong distinction between nature and culture and
tends to identify women with nature, men with culture.
So Artemis as a god of wildness, Artemis as a god of nature as opposed to culture, which
her brother Apollo represents, is a fitting goddess to be associated with women in childbirth,
with women in their role as representatives of nature rather than of culture.
Similarly, I think Artemis' virginity is understandable through and because of her association with
wildness.
And to understand why I think that, we have to talk a little bit about the Greek view
of sexuality, of what sex implies, and of the roles of the two sexes.
We talked in the lecture about the Homeric him to Demeter, about Greek or at least Athenian
marriage practices.
And I pointed out then that marriage was a contract between the groom and the bride's
father.
This implies, though I don't think I specifically said so in that lecture, this implies a underlying
assumption about the relative roles and relative importance and relative authority of both
sexes.
And in ancient Greek culture in general and Athenian culture in particular, there is no
doubt that men were seen as being an authority and women were seen as being submissive.
Males were dominant in every respect.
Males had authority.
Women were seen as quite definitely secondary, second class citizens if you want to put it
that way.
This carried over into the view of sexuality and how sexuality worked.
The act of sexual intercourse was seen as a domination of the female by the male.
And I think it is this that Artemis rejects when she remains a virgin.
I don't think she's rejecting sexuality per se.
I don't think she's rejecting sexual pleasure as somehow inappropriate to her.
I think she is rejecting domination by a male because of her essential wildness, domination
by anyone, but specifically domination by a male.
And one interesting little tidbit of the Greek language that I think backs me up in
this interpretation is that a word for wife in Greek, not the only word, but one word
for wife in Greek, is damar, which literally means tamed.
A wife was a tamed woman.
What a man did when he married was, and it was pictured as catching a wild creature,
a young unmarried woman, taming her, domesticating her, and then she was a wife.
I think what Artemis rejects is precisely that, being tamed, being controlled.
And so I don't see her virginity as contradictory to her role as a protector of the young.
And a goddess of childbirth, but rather as complementary.
Now her rejection of sexuality in any form is the impetus for another myth that illustrates
the danger of crossing a god or transgressing the boundaries between humans and gods as
the myth of Nairobi did.
In this story, the story of Actaeon, we see how even unintentional violations of the boundaries
between gods and humans can lead to disaster for the human.
Actaeon was a great hunter.
He was out of the woods one day.
He was also from the town of Thieves, by the way.
He was out of the woods one day hunting with his friends and was separated from his companions.
As he was wandering through the woods, he came to a grove of trees.
He pushed his way through the trees and discovered that they surrounded a lake.
And in the lake, Artemis and her attendant nymphs were bathing naked.
Now Actaeon did not intend to see Artemis naked.
He did not decide he was going to go spy on Artemis.
He saw her unintentionally, by mistake, he did not mean to.
This matters not at all.
Artemis punishes him for seeing her naked by turning him into a stag, into a deer, but
leaving his mind perfectly aware of what has happened to him.
So he has an animal body, but a human mind.
That might seem to be torment enough, but just wait.
As Actaeon, now a stag, runs through the woods, his own hounds pick up his scent.
With his friends encouraging them, the hounds tear Actaeon to shreds and kill him, while
his friends stand around wondering where Actaeon is.
Actaeon is missing the sport.
Actaeon would enjoy this so much.
One of the most dreadful stories, really, that I know of in Greek mythology.
And the point I want to close with here is that this tells us something I think very
important about the worldview represented in classical mythology.
In this worldview, intentions are quite frequently irrelevant.
Actions are what matter.
Our culture tends to make a very strong distinction, in most cases, between intentions and actions.
If I kill someone but don't intend to do it, we call that involuntary manslaughter.
If I stalk my victim and plot ahead of time how to kill him or her, we call that first
degree murder.
And we consider those two actions very different in kind, and we punish them very, very differently.
Despite the fact that the result is the same, the person I kill is dead.
In the worldview represented by the myth of Actaeon, that would be nonsensical.
What matters is not what Actaeon intended.
What matters is what Actaeon did.
He saw Artemis naked.
He suffers the consequences.
This idea that intentions are less important than actions comes up in a great many Greek
myths, though the story of Actaeon is probably the most obvious example of it.
So in this lecture, we've looked at Apollo and Artemis.
We've seen how, in many ways, they're polar opposites of one another, he representing
culture and moderation, she representing nature and wildness.
In the next lecture, we'll move on to talk about two other very important children of
Zeus.
Gods, Hermes, and Dionysus.
