Lecture 10 Hermes and Dionysus
Hello and welcome back to lecture 10.
In the previous lecture we discussed Apollo and Artemis, two of Zeus' most important children,
and talked about some of their attributes, their characteristics, their domains, and so forth.
In this lecture we're going to continue our examination of individual Olympian gods
by looking at two more of Zeus' children, his two youngest sons, Hermes and Dionysus.
Hermes is the son of a minor goddess, Maya,
and like I said, Leto really exists to be a mother for Apollo and Artemis,
so Maya has no distinguishing characteristics of her own except that she is the mother of Hermes.
There are no independent stories about her.
Dionysus, interestingly, is the son of a human mother, a woman named Semeli,
and we'll talk about the oddity of a god having a human mother later in the lecture when we deal with Dionysus.
Now, just as Apollo and Artemis are often identified simply as the god of the sun and the goddess of the moon,
so Hermes tends to be identified over, simplistically, as the messenger of the gods.
That is one of his roles. He takes messages for Zeus to other gods in particular,
but he is a much more complex god than merely describing him as a messenger would tend to indicate.
His description does not begin to do him justice.
Like his siblings Apollo and Artemis, Hermes presides over a group of characteristics
that at first glance seem almost bizarrely unconnected with one another.
He is, among other things, the patron god of messengers, heralds, merchants, thieves, beggars, travelers,
roads and crossroads, cattle and cattle herders, liars and tricksters.
In addition, he is, as I've mentioned before, the god who guides the souls of the dead to the underworld.
And in that regard, he's given the title psychopompos or psychopompos in Greek,
which means guide of souls, the soul guide.
So is there any way to unify all these different attributes of Hermes,
as I attempted to do with unifying Artemis's different attributes under her essential characteristic of wildness?
I think that there is with Hermes.
Many scholars say that his primary characteristic is to be a god of boundaries and transitions,
boundaries and the crossing of boundaries.
So property crosses boundaries in commerce or in thievery or in other such activities
over which Hermes presides, taking the souls of the dead to the underworld is very clearly crossing a boundary.
That's one way of giving him a unifying characteristic.
Another way, which I tend to use to look at Hermes,
is to see him as a god whose primary characteristic is an association with exchange and commerce,
exchange of all kinds, exchange of goods, but also exchange of other things.
The Homeric hymn to Hermes, which is a very important document for understanding this god,
describes his birth story and in its description of Hermes' birth and his first day on earth,
the Homeric hymn to Hermes supports the idea that he is first and foremost a god of exchange.
The very first thing he does as a newborn is to go outside the cave in which his mother Maya gives birth to him,
find a tortoise, kill it, strip it out of its shell and then use the shell to invent the lyre,
the musical stringed instrument that was essential in Greek music and poetry.
In other words, the very first thing he does after his birth is provide himself with an item that he can later exchange
and exchange it he does later on in the Homeric hymn to Hermes.
He steals Apollo's cattle. When Apollo catches him and wants the cattle back, Hermes proposes a trade, a barter.
He trades the lyre that he has invented to Apollo in exchange for authority over Apollo's cattle.
So right there in this little story about Hermes, we see him presiding over exchange with the lyre,
which he exchanges for the cattle, presiding over stealing because he steals the cattle in the first place,
presiding over barter. He strikes a bargain with Apollo.
And I think it's significant that his very first action after birth is to start giving himself the means of exchange,
something that he can later trade for something else.
If we view him primarily as a god of exchange, then Hermes' association with both merchants and thieves becomes understandable.
In our normal way of looking at things, it would seem contradictory to have one god, the patron of merchants,
and the patron of thieves because you would expect the merchants to want this god to protect them against the thieves and vice versa.
But if we zero in on the idea of exchange, then these two seemingly opposite areas work together and make sense
because in both the legitimate selling of property and the stealing of property and thievery, property exchanges hands.
And I think Hermes is less concerned with the means by which it exchanges hands, whether a merchant is paid for the goods
or whether a thief takes them than he is concerned with the actuality of the exchange of goods itself.
His association with cattle also becomes intelligible if we look at him as mainly a god of exchange
because in the earliest strata of Greek culture, as in so many cultures, cattle were a primary means of reckoning wealth.
A man's wealth was reckoned early on in many cultures in terms of the number of cattle he owned.
An interesting linguistic fact about the Latin language, not the Greek language this time,
is that the word for money, pecunia, is derived from related to the word for a herd of cattle, pecus.
In other words, the Latin word for money preserves the idea that cattle were the original means of describing wealth or means of amassing wealth.
So the association with cattle and cattle herding also ties into Hermes' role as a god of exchange.
What about his association with messengers and heralds if we look at him as primarily an exchange god?
I think there are two ways to explain that.
First of all, we can expand the idea of exchange past the exchange of material goods and say that messengers and heralds
preside over the exchange of information, which they do so that Hermes could be here concerned with information traveling from one person to another
rather than with purely the exchange of goods.
Another way of viewing his association with messengers and heralds is to realize that in an ancient society in which travel was difficult
when a messenger is sent from one city to another to take a message from one ruler to another or when a herald gives a proclamation
very frequently such a person would be entrusted with other tasks to accomplish as well.
You're not going to go to all the trouble of sending a messenger from, say, Thebes to Athens and not see to it that if there are any goods that need to be delivered
any messages other than his primary one that needs to be delivered, letters and so forth, you're going to see to it that he takes those things along as well.
So messengers and travelers in general are associated, again, with the exchange of goods in a culture in which travel is difficult and only undertaken by a few people.
Even Hermes' role as psychopompost, as the guide of souls, fits into this overall view of him as a god of exchange.
The souls of the dead, as I've mentioned before when discussing Demeter's attempt to immortalize Demophoon, the souls of the dead belong to Hades.
They are his property. While humans are living, they're mainly under the control of Zeus.
But once they die, they become the property of Hades.
And so when Hermes escorts the soul of a newly dead person from the land of the living to the land of the dead,
he is presiding over a kind of exchange of goods, the exchange of a soul from being under Zeus' dominion to being under Hades' dominion.
And last, Hermes, in the hymn to Hermes, is clearly a trickster figure.
He's clever. He's manipulative. He's very good at speech.
He's very good at getting his own way by dazzling other people with the power or other gods with the power of his rhetoric.
This too would be a characteristic that would certainly be useful in a god associated with exchange,
particularly in a culture where barter is still very much part of the exchange process.
The ability to talk someone else into your view of things, to drive a good, clever bargain,
very much works to underline Hermes' role as a god of exchange.
Now, along with these characteristics that I've been talking about, all of which are to some extent highlighted in the Homeric hymn to Hermes,
Hermes was also associated with a very unusual kind of statue, very common in ancient Greece,
but unlike other statues that came out of ancient Greek culture, Hermes is associated with what are called herms.
Those are pillars that stood in the marketplace in front of private houses and often at crossroads.
This association with this particular kind of pillar statue called a herm pretty clearly reflects Hermes' aspect as a god of boundaries.
The herm was a marking pillar. It was a way to indicate this is where the marketplace begins and other parts of the city end.
This is where my property begins and my neighbor's ends, that sort of thing.
Hermes' association with these marking pillars, with herms, is probably the very oldest element of this god's essential character.
The word herm originally just meant pile of stones in Greek.
And this means that the pillar, the pile of stones which was later developed into or schematized into a pillar,
gave its name to the god rather than the other way around.
Hermes, in other words, at first was probably simply a personification of a boundary marker,
a personification of a boundary stone or pile of stones or pillar.
Hermes are, as I've been saying, pillars, but they're very unusual pillars.
They are topped with a very realistically carved head, anthropomorphic head,
usually showing Hermes fully bearded despite the fact that he's a young god, he has a full beard.
Other than that, the pillars are featureless, no hands, no feet, no arms, no legs,
except that they also contain or also feature an erect phallus about midway up the pillar.
So they are extremely unusual statues, both because other Greek statues of their gods were fully anthropomorphic,
were carved to show the entire god's body presented as a beautiful human body and very naturalistically done.
In the case of Hermes, we have a pillar with a head and a phallus and nothing else.
Now, the presence of the erect phallus on a herm is something of a puzzle to scholars.
We don't really know why that aspect of the statue should have developed or should have been maintained.
It's most obvious function. What you would think was going on with that would be that it would be a symbol of fertility.
That's a pretty easy guess to make and yet Hermes is not anywhere that we know of associated with fertility.
So whatever the reason is, it is probably not a symbol of fertility.
That's not one of his areas of control or an important part of him.
Many scholars say that the presence of the phallus on the herm is supposed to be apotropaic.
That's a word that simply means turning away.
An apotropaic symbol is one that is supposed to turn evil away.
Gargoyles on Gothic cathedrals are considered apotropaic.
They're supposed to frighten away even evil spirits.
Well, maybe that's what the phallus on the herm was there for,
but that leaves unanswered the question of why a phallus should be considered apotropaic.
Why would it scare away evil spirits?
Burkart, the scholar I mentioned in earlier lectures who traces many elements of myth back to biological patterns of behavior,
has made a very intriguing suggestion about this.
Again, one that cannot be proven but is at least worth considering.
He suggests that this representation of Hermes, the pillar with a head and an erect phallus,
has its origin in pre-human primate behavior.
In certain monkey species, according to Burkart, males who guard their particular tribe
or clan or flock or whatever we should call a group of monkeys,
males who guard their particular group sit around the edges of the group facing outwards
and their penises are erect as they sit there.
Burkart theorizes that the herm, this representation of Hermes,
is a reflection in human culture of this very archaic biological reality
in which that is part of how a male guards his territory.
His idea for why that should be so is that it's a symbol to other male monkeys
who may be thinking of invading the group to try to steal the females
that this group already has fertile males back off, keep away, these females are spoken for.
If that, if Burkart is right, then here we have an example of human culture
reflecting an extremely ancient pre-human primate behavior.
It's a fascinating suggestion.
I don't see any way that it could be either proven or disproven
and it certainly hasn't been accepted by every scholar who studies Hermes.
Whatever the origin of the herm, they were important elements of public and private religion.
Modern people talking about them tend to find them comical.
We don't really know how to deal with this kind of statue, so we tend to laugh at it.
In ancient Athens, where we know most about their use and their function,
they were anything but comical.
Defacing a herm was considered a very serious offense indeed.
We know of at least one time when this happened when a group of rowdy young men
near the end of the 5th century BC got drunk one night,
went around Athens and knocked all the fallacies off all the herms.
This was not considered amusing.
This was not considered merely a matter of adolescent high spirits.
It was taken very, very seriously as an act of sacrilege.
So despite the fact that we find these herms amusing
because of our own views of sexuality and nudity and so forth,
they were not considered amusing in their own culture.
Well, so much for Hermes, a god of exchange of boundaries
who is represented by this particularly strange kind of statue.
What about his brother Dionysus?
When we turn to Dionysus, we're looking at perhaps the most complex
and unusual god in the Olympian pantheon.
He has power over, or his domains include,
the fertility of plants, wine, frenzy, irrationality, and drama or theater.
It's hard to make a unified statement about Dionysus.
He has so many different aspects,
but perhaps the irrationality and frenzy is as close as we can get
to isolating one characteristic essence of Dionysus.
As a god of plant fertility, the first element in his character that I mentioned,
Dionysus complements Demeter.
Demeter, as you remember, is the goddess of grain and the harvest.
She's usually described as a goddess of controlled growth,
the controlled growth of dry, self-contained plants.
Dionysus is a god of wild, uncontrolled growth of wet, moist, fruit-bearing plants
like the grape, like the fig,
and also of extremely rapid growing, luxuriant plants such as ivy.
He's often shown in art crowned with a wreath of ivy.
So if Demeter supervises controlled dry plants,
Dionysus supervises wild, uncontrolled wet plants.
He's also associated with madness, frenzy, and irrationality.
In this aspect, he's directly opposed to his elder half-brother Apollo,
and this opposition is represented in myth by the idea that Apollo leaves Delphi
each year during the winter months and Dionysus takes up residence there instead.
So the idea that Apollo and Dionysus are somehow complementary to one another
or somehow mirror images of one another is reflected in the idea that Dionysus,
for part of the year, lives in the shrine that is normally associated with Apollo.
Of course, very famously, Friedrich Nietzsche identified the Dionysian and the Apollonian
as the two main strands of Greek thought that were constantly in tension with one another.
In the birth of tragedy, Nietzsche saw these two elements as productive in many ways of Greek culture.
The tension between the reason of Apollo, the irrationality of Dionysus,
he thought was one of the motivating forces of Greek culture.
Dionysus' connection with frenzy is represented in myth
by the idea that he literally possesses his followers.
He enters into them, possesses them, and drives them mad,
makes them do things that in their right minds they would never either consider doing or be able to do.
In myth, Dionysus has two main groups of followers, a male group and a female group.
His male followers are called satyrs, and they are creatures who are at least partly animal,
mainly human, but with some animal characteristics.
In classical Greek art, they're normally shown as men with animal-like ears,
ears that look rather like goats or horses' ears, and a horse's tail.
In later art, particularly Roman art, they're shown as human from the waist up, goat from the waist down.
They're always male, and their main characteristics are drunkenness and extreme sexual aggressiveness.
Dionysus' female followers in myth, again, not speaking in reality here, but in myth, are called menads.
Those are women, human women, who are under the influence of Dionysus, are driven entirely mad,
and are given unusual strength and unusual abilities.
The menads are said to be able to tear animals apart with their bare hands and eat the flesh raw.
They can handle snakes without suffering any harm.
There's one very famous Greek painting of a menad who has a living snake wound around her head as a wreath or a garland
and who is holding a leopard by the hind foot at the same time.
They are also able to do things like making milk, honey, and wine flow out of the ground when they hit it with a stick,
so they have both magical powers and extreme strength that allows them to tear an animal apart with their bare hands.
Now, it's worth pointing out that as far as we know, actual worship of Dionysus,
worship of Dionysus done by actual, normal, everyday humans, did not include ripping animals apart with one's bare hands
or even eating raw meat, as far as we know.
These frenzied celebrations in honor of Dionysus, these completely wild patterns of behavior
in which the eating of raw animal flesh figures us a larger part,
they seem to have happened only in mythic stories about Dionysus rather than in actual practice in his worship.
The most common definition of Dionysus, the thing that you'll find if you go to that handbook of mythology
I keep mentioning as a possibility and look him up, the same place where you'll find Apollo as the sun,
you'll find that Dionysus is the God of wine and he is certainly associated with wine.
That's an association that unites his rule over growing plants with his attribute of frenzy and irrationality
because obviously wine taken in large amounts drives one into irrational and even mad or manic behavior.
Dionysus is said to have invented wine in that regard, he is a beneficent God to human beings.
Wine is considered a very great good, it was the main drink of classical culture,
but he is also a very dangerous God because he can inflict irrationality upon his followers so easily.
Finally, Dionysus is also the patron God of theater.
Though the exact reason for his connection with drama is still a matter of scholarly debate,
we know that both tragedy and comedy were performed in Athens at festivals in honor of Dionysus
and tragedy and comedy both were originally purely Athenian phenomena, they were invented in Athens, they were performed in Athens.
And we know that they were performed at festivals in honor of Dionysus specifically and only at festivals in honor of Dionysus.
There was no way in which theater was performed year round in a secular context, theater was part of a celebration in honor of Dionysus.
But why were tragedy and comedy performed at festivals in honor of Dionysus?
Here is where the scholarly consensus is not so easy to come to.
One theory is that tragedy and comedy both developed out of rituals in honor of Dionysus,
that there were originally rituals performed for the God that those took on a dramatic character as time progressed
and that drama then detached itself from its purely ritual function and became a matter of playwrights writing plays
but those were still performed in honor of Dionysus because they had originated in rituals in honor of Dionysus.
This could be so.
The problem is, there is very little evidence of such ritual origin in the surviving plays themselves.
Most of the tragedies written by the three great Greek tragedians, Escalus, Sophocles and Euripides, have nothing whatsoever to do with Dionysus.
Most of the plots do not involve Dionysus in some of the plays he has not even mentioned.
One exception, Euripides play Baki, is about Dionysus. He is a main character in it, but it is the only one that is about him.
The mere fact that the plays were performed at festivals in honor of Dionysus does not prove that they must have originated in rituals in his honor.
The Homeric epics, Iliad and the Odyssey, were recited at festivals in honor of Athena, for instance,
but no one has ever suggested that those epics developed out of rituals held to worship Athena.
At the very least, we can say that a god whose domains include possession, behavior inconsistent with one's normal character,
acting out of things that one would not normally do, is an appropriate god to be associated with a theatrical tradition
in which the actors wore masks, in which an actor actually put on the face of another character before taking part in a drama.
It may simply be that Dionysus is seen as the appropriate god to supervise an art form in which people are acting as something that they are not.
Other than that, I don't think the exact origin of drama has yet been fully explained.
Now, along with his unusual association with irrationality and frenzy, many aspects of Dionysus's story are unusual or even unique among the Olympian gods.
The first such aspect is his birth from a human mother.
Normally, the offspring of a god and a human is a human, and so Dionysus should have been.
He was the offspring of a sexual union between Zeus and a human named Semile.
And yet Dionysus is a god.
The reason for this originates in Hera's jealousy over Semile's affair with Zeus.
Hera disguised herself as Semile's old nanny, went to visit the girl, and persuaded her that she needed proof from her lover that he was indeed Zeus.
Hera suggested to Semile that her lover might be a human being who was simply saying he was Zeus in order to seduce her.
And Hera suggested that Semile should inveigle Zeus into swearing upon the river sticks that he would do whatever she asked.
And then, once he had promised, she should ask him to show himself to her in his full glory as he appears to Hera on Mount Olympus.
Semile followed the advice of, as she thought, her nanny, in actuality Hera, got Zeus to promise on the sticks that he'd do whatever she liked,
asked him to show himself to her in his full glory when he regretfully did so because he could not break his promise.
Semile was incinerated.
Remember, human flesh cannot withstand the sight of the gods in their full glory.
Semile went up in a puff of smoke, but she was already pregnant with Dionysus.
Zeus snatched the embryo from Semile's womb as Semile was being incinerated, implanted the embryo of Dionysus in his own thigh, in Zeus' own thigh,
and within a few months Dionysus was born out of the thigh of Zeus.
This gives Dionysus his epithet twice-born.
He's often called the twice-born god.
And also, apparently, it accounts for Dionysus' immortal status.
I think the idea behind it is that it would be inappropriate for Zeus, the greatest of the gods, to produce a child out of his own body who was human rather than god.
So it's because of his gestation within the body of Zeus that Dionysus turns out as a god.
Now, throughout Greek myth, Dionysus and his worship seem to be somehow less given than those of any other god.
There are several stories about people resisting the worship of this god.
There are several stories about people not thinking that he really is a god.
There are several stories that indicate that he somehow is a late arrival and is different from the other gods.
One of the most famous of such stories involves Dionysus' cousin, Pentheus, king of Thebes.
Did I mention that Semile was from Thebes? We have Thebes in the story again.
Semile's sisters did not believe after her death that she had ever had an affair with Zeus at all.
They thought she had had an affair with a human and had been punished by Zeus for claiming it was Zeus.
Therefore, they and Dionysus' extended family did not think that Dionysus was a god at all.
And the play Baki by Euripides, Dionysus comes to Thebes to prove his divinity and to avenge the slight on his mother's honor.
He does this by driving all the Theban women mad and in their madness they rip apart Pentheus.
Dionysus' cousin, who refuses to believe in him, is ripped apart by his own mother and aunts who think that he is a mountain lion.
They are under an illusion that they are tearing apart a lion when they are actually tearing apart Pentheus.
So by the end of the play Baki, Dionysus has proven his power, his divinity, and avenged the slight against his mother by those who say she was not a goddess.
Sorry, that she was not the mother of a god. She did not have an affair with a god.
Now, all of these aspects of Dionysus, the idea that his worship was somehow something that people resisted,
that he was different, that he was born of a human mother, that he was a late addition to the pantheon of the gods, born after the other gods were all already there.
All of those aspects scholars used to think could be accounted for by the hypothesis that Dionysus really was a latecomer.
There used to be a theory that seemed to make a great deal of sense that Dionysus was actually a Near Eastern god,
a god from Asia Minor, who had been brought into Greece, whose worship had been introduced into Greece relatively late,
and therefore he was seen as being different in kind. His worship was somehow different.
He was seen as being a latecomer. He was seen as being, in some sense, a human invention reflected in myth and the idea that he had a human mother.
This seemed to make perfectly logical sense. It was a very compelling theory.
Unfortunately, recent archaeological evidence in the form of very early inscriptions has indicated that Dionysus was worshiped in Greece as early as the rest of the Olympians.
Whatever he is, he does not seem to be a late arrival on the scene of the Olympian pantheon.
So the questions of why Dionysus is so different from the other gods and why he is represented as a latecomer to Greek myth are thus left open.
Some scholars think that the representation of Dionysus as a latecomer reflects the Greeks own discomfort with and distrust of irrationality and frenzy.
They say this god is late. He is an addition. He is somehow not part of the original group of gods as a way of distancing themselves from his irrationality
and from the less attractive aspects of his worship.
Another possibility is that Dionysus' association with young, verdant, rapidly growing things carries over into his myths in the idea that he himself is young.
That is a recent arrival in the pantheon. I don't think there's any definitive answer to account for the difference in character of Dionysus from the other gods.
It's simply a given that we have to bear in mind when we look at him and his myths.
So in this lecture we've looked at Zeus's two youngest sons, Hermes and Dionysus, and described some of their essential attributes.
In the next lecture we'll talk about the one remaining crucially important Olympian deity, Aphrodite, the goddess of sexual passion.
