Lecture 12, Culture, Prehistory and the Great Goddess
Hello and welcome back to lecture 12.
In the previous lecture, we finished our discussion of individual gods and goddesses with an
examination of Aphrodite and her role as the embodiment of sexual passion.
In this lecture, we're going to look at the possible cultural and historical background
material that may have helped shape the myths we've been discussing so far.
We'll consider the similarities between Mesopotamian myth and the myths that we've seen in Theogony
in particular, and we'll also look at the possible influence of two great prehistoric
cultures in and around Greece, the Minoan and Mycenaean cultures, and what we can and
cannot theorize about their influence on Greek myth as it's come down to us.
Now no culture exists in a vacuum, obviously.
Greek religion and Greek mythology must have been influenced to some extent by other cultures
that were in the general area of Greece.
They took place between ancient Greece and other cultures such as the Mesopotamian culture,
Egyptian culture, and so on.
When people meet to exchange goods and to take part in trade, they also of course talk
to one another.
They tell one another stories.
There are all sorts of possibilities for cultural influence, for stories about gods and goddesses
to be passed from one culture to another.
And it is an important fact to understand about polytheism that as opposed to a monotheistic
system in which believers in one god have to say, if our god is true, then your gods
are false.
In a polytheistic system, it's almost infinitely expandable.
There's room for many more gods and many more myths.
If you meet people who talk about a god you've never heard of before, that's not a difficulty
in a polytheistic system.
They simply say, oh, there's another god we hadn't heard of before.
So the possibility of cross-cultural borrowing between, say, Greece and Mesopotamia or Greece
and Egypt is much greater because Greek religion was polytheistic than it might have been otherwise.
Furthermore, a culture's mythology does not simply appear complete and finished all at
once.
The myths as we have them developed over centuries and must almost inevitably have been influenced
by events in Greece's prehistory.
By prehistory, all I mean is the period before we have written records, that is, the period
before about the eighth century BC.
The myths that have come down to us after Greece became literate have to have been influenced
to greater or lesser degrees by the events of the centuries before writing was introduced
into Greece.
However, determining the exact nature and extent of such influences, whether the cross-cultural
influences of myths developed in other societies or the historical influence through time of
Greece's prehistory, to determine the exact extent of either of those kinds of influence
is extremely difficult, again, almost by definition, since we're dealing with events that are not
described for us in our written record.
To try to examine the difficulties inherent in this kind of effort, I'm going to take,
as a test case, the question of the idea of a prehistoric great goddess, the idea that
there was once a great mother goddess worshipped in Greece and in other ancient cultures.
At the end of this lecture, we'll look at that supposition and see to what extent the
evidence we have does or does not support it.
So let's begin by looking at the influence of Mesopotamian myth, in particular, on Greek
myth.
There is no longer any doubt that the Greek creation myths, as recounted by Hesiod, share
a great many points in common with Mesopotamian creation myths.
The literature of Mesopotamia is a fairly recent discovery, it's only been translated
in the last century or so, and so up until fairly recent times, Hesiod was considered
in a vacuum.
We weren't able to look at cross-cultural influences.
Now that Mesopotamian myths have been studied, analyzed, and translated, it's possible to
do a comparison of Hesiod and Mesopotamian myth, and there are so many points in common
that there's got to be some sort of cross-cultural influence at work here.
To take just one example, the Hesiodic story of Kronos shows strong parallels with the Mesopotamian
story of a god named Koumarbi.
Zeus and Koumarbi are both sons of a god whose name means sky, Uranos and Hesiod, Anush,
in the Mesopotamian story.
Each one gains power by castrating his father, and each is in turn overthrown by a younger
god who is associated with storms, Zeus in the case of Kronos, Teshub in the case of
Anush.
This sort of parallel demonstrates a relationship of some kind between the two cultures, between
the myths of the two cultures rather.
The parallel is too exact for it to be purely coincidental.
Either there was a direct influence, Mesopotamian stories were told to Greek travelers who
then took them back to Greece for instance, or the two stories derived from a common source.
We could posit yet another myth further back in time from which both Mesopotamian and Greek
stories derived, but there is some kind of connection between the two.
However, the details differ from culture to culture, again to give just a couple of examples
from this same story.
Koumarbi castrates his father Anush by biting off his genitals.
Kronos, as we saw, castrates Uranos with a sickle provided by Gaia.
Koumarbi swallows Anush's genitals and becomes pregnant.
He then gives birth to Teshub through his penis.
You thought that the Hesiodic story was strange, the Mesopotamian one is even stranger.
Kronos swallows his children who were conceived and born normally and then spits them out.
So in both cases you have castration of the father, in both cases you have swallowing
the male god being in some sense pregnant with his own children, but the details are
quite different.
Another way of putting that would be that the Greek myths, wherever they came from, whatever
the Mesopotamian influences may have been, the Greek myths are characteristically Greek.
The plot may have traveled, but the details are worked out within each culture and have
implications and resonances within each individual culture.
Now cross-cultural influence between Mesopotamia and Greece, for instance, is only one of the
kinds of formative influences that I want to talk about here.
The other important formative influence behind Greek myth as we know it would be the prehistoric
cultures that existed in Greece itself.
And there there are two primary cultures that I want to talk about.
First, there is a culture that existed on ancient Crete called Minoan culture.
And secondly, there is a culture that was imported in mainland Greece itself called Mycenaean
culture.
Minoan culture, centered on the island of Crete and the nearby island of Santorini, flourished
between about 2000 and about 1470 BC.
So that was its time of greatest development and greatest influence.
One of the great archeological discoveries of the 19th and early 20th centuries was the
uncovering of Minoan civilization.
This was a civilization that had been entirely lost.
No one knew that it had ever existed until in the late 19th century, an English scholar
named Sir Arthur Evans, decided to try to discover if any of the Greek myths about ancient
Crete might have some basis in historical fact.
As Heinrich Schliemann decided to see if the Homeric epics had any basis in historical
fact by excavating until he found the site of Troy, so Evans decided to see if any of
the myths about Crete, particularly myths about Theseus and his visit to Crete, were
based in fact.
Evans went to Crete and began to excavate there and did in fact uncover evidence of
a great Thalysocracy, a great sea-based empire that had existed on Crete.
At a site called Knossos, Evans found extensive ruins of a huge palace, which we'll talk
about more in a lecture on Theseus.
And he connected this palace that he had found at Knossos with the legendary King Minos
of Myth, and that's why we now call this culture Minoan.
We have no idea what they call themselves.
We call them Minoan after the legendary King Minos on Crete.
So Evans had found evidence of a great seafaring culture based on Crete, just as he hoped he
would.
Minoan culture, although it was obviously very highly developed, extremely artistic,
is still a great puzzle to scholars in many ways, mainly because, as you may have guessed
by this time, we don't have written records to explain what was going on in Minoan culture.
The Minoans left very little behind them in the way of written records.
They did have two writing systems called Linear A and Linear B, very boring names.
They're called that because they're both linear in nature, and A and B are simply ways of
distinguishing the two different systems from one another.
Linear A has never been deciphered.
We don't know what language it is.
We don't know what system it is.
We haven't ever been able to decipher it.
So the few records that exist in Linear A are still a closed book to scholars.
Linear B was deciphered in the 1950s and turns out to be a very ancient form of Greek.
And the story of the deciphering of Linear B is both one of the great triumphs and one
of the great disappointments of 20th century ancient studies.
Because it was a marvelous bit of detective work to decipher Linear B at all to discover
that it was, in fact, a very early form of Greek and to be able to read the clay tablets
that are inscribed with Linear B. But once that was done, what do those clay tablets
say?
Well, they turn out to be mainly inventories of palace supplies.
So if you can imagine being a scholar who worked for years and years and years to decipher
the Minoans' writing system, hoping that you would find some very early versions of myths
or maybe one of the earliest versions of an epic or some great poetry or something like
that, and you find instead a list that says 10 jars of olive oil, 19 sheep, 15 robes.
It's incredibly disappointing.
It's useful for social historians, obviously, but it doesn't tell us the kind of thing that
many of us would like to know about ancient Minoan culture.
Furthermore, Linear B only came into use in Minoan culture after the Minoans had come
under the domination of the other great prehistoric culture I'm going to discuss, the Mycenaeans,
who were Greek speakers.
We assume that in the earliest stages of Minoan culture they did not speak Greek.
They spoke some other language, probably the language preserved in the Linear A tablets,
which we can't read.
So historians have to try to interpret the architecture, artifacts, paintings, artwork,
and so on of the Minoans pretty much in the absence of any written works that might tell
us what's going on in these archaeological artifacts.
Unfortunately, Minoan culture is not known to be related to any other culture.
We can't look at sister cultures of Minoan culture and see what they say about their
myths or their belief systems because we don't know of any related culture to Minoan culture.
To make things even more obscure, Minoan art shows many scenes that may well be religious,
that may have some connection therefore with myth, but it's extremely difficult to interpret
these scenes without any context to guide us.
So Minoan culture is fascinating and frustrating in about equal proportions.
It probably almost undoubtedly had some kind of influence on later Greek civilization.
It was an extremely sophisticated and important culture and when it waned, that doesn't mean
that all the Minoans simply packed up and went away.
They were still there.
They would have intermarried with Mycenaeans.
Their descendants would have been among the peoples of later Greece.
So they almost undoubtedly did have some influence on the development of Greek culture and specifically
of Greek mythology, but we can't know just exactly what that influence might be or at
least it's very hard to determine what that influence might be.
Now the other great pre-classical civilization of Greece was Mycenaean civilization, the
direct ancestor of later Greek culture.
With the Mycenaeans we're on slightly less shaky ground than we are with the Minoans.
Mycenaean civilization flourished from about 1600 to about 1100 or 1050 BC.
It was discovered by Heinrich Schliemann, the same man who excavated the site of Homer's
Troy.
He also excavated Agamemnon City.
He not only looked for the Trojan side of the Trojan War myth, he also looked for the
Greek side and excavated the city associated in Homer with Agamemnon, a city called Mycenae.
Now unlike Minoan culture which had disappeared entirely, which no one knew existed at all,
the site of Mycenae had never been lost.
Parts of that citadel, including its famous great gate which features two lions as the
crowning part of the gate to stone lions, had never disappeared entirely under the level
of the earth and so everyone knew where Mycenae was.
What they did not know was how huge and intricate a site it was until Schliemann investigated
it.
Schliemann also found many other cities dotted around mainland Greece that clearly belonged
to the same culture as the citadel he found at Mycenae.
And most importantly, for our purposes, the cities that Schliemann found dating from Mycenaean
times, which again is the period about 1600 to about 1100 BC, those cities corresponded
remarkably well with the cities mentioned by Homer in the Iliad.
When Homer said that there was a city at a particular place in Greece, Schliemann very
frequently found the ruins of a Mycenaean city on that site.
When Schliemann found the ruins of a Mycenaean city, Homer almost always mentioned that there
had been a city at that spot.
So there's a correspondence.
In other words, the Greek cities that Homer talks about seem to be, to a large extent,
the Mycenaean cities of which Schliemann found the ruins.
Now this implies a couple of things for us.
It implies that Homer in some sense remembered some of the actualities of Mycenaean culture.
I'll get back to that point in just a minute.
The Mycenaeans were descendants of Indo-European migrants.
That is, the people who spoke the parent language which later developed into most of the modern
languages of India and of Europe.
Those are called the Indo-Europeans.
They migrated widely throughout Europe and India in prehistoric times.
And the Mycenaean Greeks were descendants of a band of Indo-European immigrants who
came into Greece around 2200 through 2000 BC.
The Mycenaean language is a very early form of Greek.
The Mycenaeans interacted with the Minoans, with this other prehistoric culture that I
just talked about.
And by about the 15th century, the Mycenaeans had gained dominance over the Minoans.
One way we know that is the Minoan use of linear B. Again, the language of linear B is Greek.
The fact that the Minoans had begun to speak Greek probably indicates that by this time
they were under the control of the Mycenaeans.
The Mycenaeans too used linear B, just as the Minoans did.
But like the Minoans, the Mycenaeans used linear B mainly to make lists of supplies.
So once again, we don't have any proto-epic or any Mycenaean myth recorded for us.
We have lists of supplies.
Now Mycenaean civilization waned during the 11th century BC for reasons that we're still
not sure about.
It lost its ability to make great citadols, its artwork declined sharply, and most importantly
for our purposes, the Mycenaeans lost the art of writing.
They forgot how to use linear B.
So from the 11th century BC until the time when the alphabet, the Greek alphabet that
we know, was introduced into Greece in the 8th century BC, Greece went through a period
that is often called its Dark Ages, a period in which Greece was once again illiterate.
So there's a gap of three to four hundred years between the waning of Mycenaean civilization
and the reintroduction of writing in the 8th century BC.
Once writing had been reintroduced, the Homeric epics were among the first things to be written
down, and there's an implication here that's worth contemplating.
The Homeric epics were written down in the 8th century BC.
As I just said, they referred to cities that had flourished in and before the 11th century
BC.
That implies that there was a continuous oral tradition, a continuous remembering of those
great Mycenaean cities, that covered that gap when there was no writing, no way those
cities could have been memorialized in writing.
They were remembered in the oral tradition.
And that means, or that implies at least, if the Homeric epics remember the location
of Mycenaean cities and some of the details about those cities and those details are reflected
in the Homeric epics written down centuries later, it's at least possible that many other
details in the Homeric epics, including some of the storylines, the myths and so forth,
may also stretch back to Mycenaean times.
So Greek myth, as we know it, probably has a fairly strong Mycenaean origin and some
fairly strong Mycenaean elements in it.
The Trojan War is just the most obvious example of this kind of thing.
There probably was some sort of war between Mycenaean Greeks and the people who lived
in what we call Troy.
The epics that describe that war undoubtedly have been exaggerated, mythologized, made
into legend, however you want to put it, but there is some sort of actual trace of Mycenaean
culture still present in the myth of the Trojan War.
Now when we're dealing with this kind of thing, all of it is obviously rather vague and rests
on a lot of supposition.
And a very obvious question is, how much can we safely deduce about prehistoric religion
or prehistoric mythology from either the comparative method looking at other cultures
that flourished at around the same time or from looking at these prehistoric cultures,
the Minoans and the Mycenaeans?
To demonstrate the difficulties involved in trying to talk about prehistoric religious
practices, prehistoric beliefs, prehistoric myth, I want to look at the theory of the
Great Mother Goddess as a way to demonstrate some of the problems involved in this kind
of reconstruction of prehistory.
There is a widespread modern belief, rather surprisingly widespread modern belief, that
classical myth and ancient European myth and nearest Eastern myth in general contain
traces of a prehistoric, pre-Indo-European worship of something that's often called the
Great Mother Goddess.
There are all sorts of books out now about Goddess worship.
There are all sorts of people who identify themselves with the idea that there was a
Great Mother Goddess in prehistory and that the Indo-Europeans came in and suppressed
her religion, but that she was in fact there to begin with.
Now this belief has become almost an article of faith for many modern people, but the evidence
for it is not nearly so straightforward as we might wish for it to be.
The primary problem, again, is that of interpreting archeological evidence without any written
context to explain the archeological evidence.
The literary evidence that's often used to argue that there was in fact a Great Mother
Goddess is ambiguous at best, and many of the same objections can be made to the Goddess
theory that I discussed when I was talking about psychological theories of myth.
Its adherents tend to simply assert their ideas about what may be true and then treat
those assertions as established fact.
We're on very shaky ground when we do that in any case, and here when we're dealing
mainly with archeological records, with images that have no texts associated with them, it
becomes all the more dangerous to say an image that appears in this culture, in this culture,
and another culture must be an image of the same type of Goddess or even of the same Goddess.
There's no doubt that very ancient female figurines are widespread throughout ancient
European and Near Eastern cultures.
They're all over the place.
There are lots of them.
There are many very famous examples, but the interpretation of these figurines is far
from straightforward, whether they represent goddesses at all is uncertain, and if they
do represent goddesses, whether they represent a Great Mother Goddess is yet more uncertain.
There's no compelling reason to assume that a figurine, simply because it's a figurine
of a female, must represent a goddess, and even if they are goddesses, there's no reason
to assume that they're the same goddess.
It's worth thinking for a minute about figurines.
My famous future archeologist that I refer to sometimes in this course, who comes back
in 2,500 years, excavates McDonald's and thinks that it's a Gothic cathedral, might also find
figurines from our culture.
If this person assumed that all figurines serve the same function, then he or she would
assume that statues of the Virgin Mary from a Catholic church and Barbie dolls from a
toys or us had to be representations of the same goddess.
They're both figurines.
They're both female figures.
We can't assume that they serve the same function even within a culture, let alone assuming
that they serve the same function cross-culturally.
But some of the widest-reaching claims about a great goddess are made from Minoan civilization
based largely on its art.
Minoan art without question features powerful female figures.
The most famous of these is the so-called snake goddess.
She's a figurine about so big who holds in either of her outstretched hands a snake.
So she has two snakes.
She has powerful, staring eyes.
She's wearing a bell-shaped skirt.
She's bare-breasted and she's holding these snakes.
She is without doubt an extraordinarily beautiful and very arresting figurine, and I think it's
safe to say that she must have had some important significance in Minoan culture.
But what was her significance?
Was she a goddess?
People have tended to assume that she is an image of a goddess without ever even really
considering other possibilities.
She could be an apotropaic image of a demon.
She could be a snake demon rather than a snake goddess.
She could be a priestess performing some sort of ritual ceremony in honor of a goddess.
She could be a ghost figure, some sort of figure used to frighten children.
She could be anyone of a number of things.
There's no immediate reason to assume that she must be a goddess, and yet any other possibility
tends to be dismissed with little or no consideration.
Without other information about Minoan religion beyond the images preserved by art, we simply
can't know, in short, what the snake goddess figurines represent.
I've described the most famous one.
There are others as well.
There are several of them.
We need not assume that every figurine must have been used for ritual or religious purposes.
There could be figurines that were merely there for decorative purposes.
I myself have a collection of figurines of pelicans in my house.
This does not mean that I worship a great pelican god.
It means that I like pelicans and I like the way the figurines look on my shelf.
The possibility that figurines are merely decorative, it seems to me, is at least worth considering.
Even if we assume that the figurine of the snake goddess was a goddess, we can't deduce
religious practice, let alone religious belief from an image alone.
This is perhaps a point that doesn't seem immediately obvious to many people, but I
think it's true.
Again, a future archeologist excavating Notre Dame de Paris would probably come to the conclusion
that that church, that cathedral, was built to honor a great mother goddess.
After all, her image is all over the place, merry and throned, holding the much smaller
Christ child on her lap.
And yet we know that Roman Catholicism is not a religion that worships a primary mother
goddess.
If she worships a primary father god, merry is there in that cathedral, but that doesn't
imply that the religion in general held her as its highest entity.
Reasoning that tries to deduce religious belief from artistic imagery is very often circular.
Many of the arguments about the Minoan snake goddess seem to go something along the lines
of, if the Minoans worshiped a goddess, this must be her image.
Or since this is the image of a goddess, the Minoans must have worshiped her.
And you really can't reason that way.
That doesn't work.
Now, what about literature?
Some scholars read Hesiod's Theogony as providing evidence for a clash between mother goddess-focused
Minoan religion and father god-focused Indo-European religion that was brought in by the Mycenaeans
and overthrew the Minoan religion.
The three-generational struggle for power under this reading can be seen as representing
or reflecting the slow process whereby through interaction and intermarriage and so forth,
the newer culture represented by Zeus and the younger male gods gained dominance over
the older culture represented by the older female mother goddesses.
That is a fascinating reading of Hesiod, and it can be very persuasive.
When I first started teaching mythology, I really liked it and I used it in my classes.
But unfortunately, it overlooks the fact that similar stories exist in Mesopotamian
myth as we saw, and Mesopotamia did not undergo any Indo-European invasion.
So one could just as persuasively come up with other explanations for the three-generational
pattern in Hesiod as we talked about in the lecture on Hesiod.
In fact, one of the most easy and obvious explanations of it is to say that the pattern
of a younger male gaining power over an older female simply represents in psychological
terms the maturation of men and their separation from their mother.
We don't have to posit an actual clash of a mother goddess worshipping civilization
and a father god worshipping civilization to account for it.
If we assume that Minoan civilization worshipped a great mother goddess, theogony can be used
to provide evidence for that.
But if we don't assume it, theogony alone isn't going to bring us to it.
To sum up, there seems to be little good evidentiary reason as opposed to desire to believe in
an original great mother goddess in ancient Europe and the ancient Near East.
For various reasons, the goddess hypothesis perhaps shows a monotheistic bias.
Many modern Westerners find polytheism uncongenial and tend to assume that polytheism must be
a later development from or degradation of some kind of original proto-monotheism.
That is ahistorical.
That's not how the history of religion seems to have worked.
Polytheism seems to have been the original form, monotheism, to have come later.
And as I've said before, there's no compelling reason to assume that all representatives
of a female divinity must be representatives of the same female divinity unless one starts
from that assumption.
In other words, there's no reason to assume that the Greeks originally worshipped one
great mother goddess who later fragmented into Demeter, Aphrodite, Hera and all the others.
If we start from the assumption that there must have been one unified goddess, then we
can see those later ones as fragmentations of her.
But if we don't start from that assumption, there seems to be no good reason to come to
it.
In fact, it seems to me that the goddess may well be a modern myth, not an ancient one.
She functions in many of the ways that we talked about myth functioning.
She provides a charter for modern women who find themselves dissatisfied with the patriarchal
caste of much traditional religion.
She reflects the very common mythic sense of a golden age, a time in the past when things
were better, so her adherents tend to assume that goddess worship must imply a society
in which women have a very high status, despite all sorts of evidence to the contrary.
Cultures that worship goddesses do not, by and large, accord high status to their women.
Classical Greek culture is a perfect example of that.
The Athenians worshipped Athena with great devotion and reverence.
They also kept their women sequestered and accorded them almost no civil rights whatsoever,
so worshiping a goddess does not equate to high status for women, and yet modern adherents
of the great goddess theory assume that it did.
The story of her defeat by the Indo-European sky father god provides an explanation or
an etiology for how society came to be as it is.
So I think she is a myth, but I think she is a modern myth rather than an ancient one.
The great goddess is just one example of the pitfalls involved in trying to reconstruct
the origins and development of classical myth in prehistory.
I picked her because I think she is a fascinating example, but there are many others.
This is a problem that confronts us almost at every turn in studying classical myth.
Now in the next lecture, we'll turn back to looking at classical myth itself and we'll
examine humans and particularly heroes, as Hesiod and other authors describe them to
us.
I'm Tom Rawlins, president of The Teaching Company.
We hope you've enjoyed the lectures on these tapes.
To order more courses or to receive a copy of our most recent catalog, call 1-800-Teach-1-2,
or visit our website at www.teachco.com.
Thank you very much for listening.
