These lectures are part of the great courses on tape series.
The great courses on tape cover a broad array of university level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in
just weeks.
Browse our catalog or website and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just
30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lecturers are university professors carefully selected by the teaching company and its customers
for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
The lectures on these tapes are titled Classical Mythology Part 2.
The lecturer is Professor Elizabeth Vandiver.
Dr. Vandiver teaches classics at the University of Maryland at College Park.
After receiving her MA and PhD from the University of Texas at Austin, she held visiting professorships
at Northwestern University, the University of Georgia, the Intercollegiate Center for
Classical Studies in Rome, Loyola University of New Orleans and Utah State.
Professor Vandiver has published Heroes in Herodotus, The Interaction of Myth and History
and is currently working on a second book examining the influence of the classical tradition
on the British poets of the First World War.
In 1998, Dr. Vandiver received the American Philological Association's Excellence in
Teaching Award, the most prestigious teaching award available to American classical scholars.
Her other awards include the Northwestern University Department of Classics Excellence
in Teaching Award for 1998 and the University of Georgia's Outstanding Honors Professor
Award in 1993 and 1994.
Each of Dr. Vandiver's lectures is outlined in the course guide that comes with these tapes.
The course guide also includes a glossary, timeline, biographical notes and bibliography.
You may find it useful to review the outlines before and after listening to the lectures.
Lecture 13, Humans, Heroes and Pathgods
Hello and welcome back to lecture 13.
In the previous lecture, we concluded our examination of the gods of Greek mythology
by discussing the possible cultural and prehistorical background for the myths that we looked at.
In the second half of the course, we're going to move on to concentrating on the heroes
of Greek myth and we're going to begin our examination of the heroes by setting them
in context through looking at the story of how humans were created as Hesiod tells it
in works and days.
Now as you'll remember, we saw that Hesiod's theogony, his main account of the creation
of the universe in general and the gods in particular, does not contain a creation story
for men, though it does mention the creation of the first woman.
However, in works and days, Hesiod's other great poem, he does include an account of
how humans in general came into being.
This story that he tells in works and days is often referred to as the myth of the five
ages or myth of the five races because in it, Hesiod describes five successive races
of human beings starting with the golden race or golden age and ending with his own time,
his own group of humans whom he describes as being a race of iron.
The overall pattern in Hesiod's account of the five different races of human beings is
one of degeneration and increased hardship.
He begins by describing the first race of humans, the golden race.
He says this race was created by the immortals who dwell on Mount Olympus and that the golden
race was created during the reign of Kronos so far back in time before Zeus overthrew
his father Kronos, before the universe was set into the form that it would hold thereafter.
According to the myth of the five ages, there was a golden race of humans.
Their existence was characterized first and foremost by the lack of any kind of care or
trouble. They had no difficulties and specifically old age did not exist.
According to Hesiod, people in the golden age did not have to work for food.
The earth simply produced food for them so there was no necessity for work, for toil,
no cares, no hardship and no old age. They did however die out and Hesiod says they
became benevolent spirits who still are around watching out for later human beings.
So even in the golden age, Hesiod does not suggest that there was ever a time when humans
did not have to die. As we talked about before, mortality is there for human beings as a defining
characteristic of human beings from the very beginning.
After the golden race came the silver race and there you see the beginning of the pattern
of degeneration. Silver is less than gold so the second race of humans is less than
the first race. They too, Hesiod says, were created by the Olympians and they are a rather
odd race in that their main characteristic is that they lived for 100 years as children
nourished by their mothers, Hesiod says, so they had a 100 year long childhood. Then when
these people reached maturity they lived a short while because they were violent and
irreverent. In particular they refused to pay proper sacrifices to the gods and so Zeus
wiped them out. Zeus destroyed the silver race of human beings. Then Hesiod says Zeus
himself created the third race of humans, the bronze race. They, according to Hesiod,
were made by Zeus from ash trees. That seems like an odd source for a race of human beings
but probably the implication there has to do with the fact that the word that means
ash tree in Greek is also used by Homer in particular to mean a spear because the handle
of a spear was made from the wood of the ash tree and so the word itself came to mean spear.
Probably what Hesiod is implying here is that the bronze race was extremely violent and
warlike and that they owed their origin to the same material from which spears are made.
He said that they used bronze for everything including their homes and that they were extraordinarily
warlike. They too died out. Hesiod seems to imply that they killed each other off. Now
following the pattern of degeneration as symbolized by metals of lesser value you would expect
the next race after bronze to be the iron race but in fact Hesiod inserts here the race
of heroes to whom he does not assign a metal and who he says were actually better than
superior to the preceding bronze race so there's a little bit of a break in the pattern which
allows Hesiod to account for the race of heroes who are so important in the myths that he
and his culture know. The race of heroes Hesiod says was also created by Zeus as the bronze
race before them had been. Hesiod calls them demigods by that he's probably referring to
the idea that many heroes had one parent usually the father sometimes the mother who was a
god. He calls them demigods and he says that they were the men who fought around Thebes
and Troy i.e. these heroes this fourth race of human beings whom Hesiod calls the heroes
are the people who figure in the stories of Greek myth the stories of the Theban cycle
such as Oedipus the king and his family and the stories of the Trojan War but they too
died according to Hesiod. Most of them died and went to the underworld where humans normally
go some he says Zeus settled in the islands of the blessed referring to that idea we discussed
before that a very few very extraordinary humans get some kind of happy afterlife but
most of the race of heroes simply died off. This brings us to the fifth and worst race
the race of Hesiod's own day which he calls the race of iron. For the fifth race no creator
is mentioned and Hesiod describes the fifth race the iron races lot as one of increasing
hardship and unhappiness. He says describing it I wish I were not counted among the fifth
race of men but rather had died before or been born after it this is the race of iron
neither day nor night will give them rest as they waste away with toil and pain growing
cares will be given them by the gods and their lot will be a blend of good and bad.
He goes on to say that Zeus will eventually destroy this race of mortals as well when
children are born already gray haired. That is a vivid and I think very chilling description
of the increasingly bad lot of the iron race. One of the main characteristics of the iron
races trouble is old age disease and care. Children being born gray at the temple seems
to imply that there will come a time when human beings are old from the moment of birth
when just as a golden age never suffered old age there will come a time when the iron race
will know nothing but old age and at that point Zeus will destroy us as well. The only
end in sight for the iron race as Hesiod describes it is for things to get worse and
worse and worse. He goes through a list of how bad things will get. He says that as the
iron race continues to deteriorate sons will not reverence their fathers, friends will
not be trustworthy with one another, brothers will fight brothers and eventually he says
shame and retribution. Eidos and nemesis in Greek will veil their faces and flee the
earth and then in effect society will break down entirely without shame and retribution
there will be no controls on human activity whatsoever. So the iron race, Hesiod's own
race is painted in very, very pessimistic tones indeed. The only slight element of hopefulness
in this picture is that Hesiod states he wishes he had been born before or after the iron race
which seems to imply that there will be an after, that there may be another race of humans
eventually created. Now one thing to notice about this myth of the five ages or five races
is that it seems to contradict the Pandora story which Hesiod has recounted just a very
few lines before the myth of the five ages in works and days. If it doesn't flat out
contradict the Pandora story at the very least the myth of the five ages does not dovetail
neatly with the Pandora story because for instance there are mothers in the silver age
the silver race lives for 100 years as babies or as small children nourished by their mothers
Hesiod says. Well where do those mothers come from? If there are no cares or evils yet
in the silver age and there aren't then how can there be mothers when Pandora just a few
lines before is said to be the source of all females and to bring cares and troubles with
her. This I think should remind us that Hesiod is not attempting here to come up with the
one and only orthodox account of the creation of human beings. Just as we talked about before
with Theogony so here too he's not attempting an orthodoxy. Rather he's using the traditional
myths that he knows to look at the realities of human society from one angle then from
another angle. The fact that the myths sometimes don't fit quite perfectly with one another
is only a problem if you're trying to construct an overall coherent logical narrative and
that's not what he's trying to do here. Rather he focuses first on the Pandora story and
secondly on the myth of the five ages. Another implication here is that the question of where
humans came from is not the most pressing issue by any means in Greek mythology. That
often surprises modern readers. We tend to think that our origin, how we got here, what
we're doing in the world has got to be the focal point of any religious or mythological
system. But for Greek myth it isn't. Humans, particularly male humans, are more or less
just a given and the myths that we have looked at so far and will continue to look at are
far more concerned with how humans should act given that we're here and how society
should function than with the origins of human beings. Now I think it's fair to say
that Hesiod's account of the five races gives a very pessimistic view of human existence
in general and of the iron race in particular. With the exception of the race of heroes we
have an overall deterioration from good to not so good to bad to really bad and Hesiod
doesn't offer any hope for people of his own race that things will ever get better. Once
again I want to compare Hesiod's account with the account given by the Roman author
Ovid in his work Metamorphoses some 700 years later. You'll remember Ovid was writing in
the first century BC and first century AD. He was right on that dividing line in Rome
and in Metamorphoses which he begins by giving his version of the creation of the universe
Ovid also recaps and modifies Hesiod's story of the different ages or races of humans and
I think it's interesting to see the different emphasis that Ovid puts on the story and how
he makes it a far more optimistic account than it is in Hesiod's presentation. Ovid
recaps the myth of the ages but there are significant differences in his telling of
this myth. Most importantly there is no intervening race of heroes. Ovid simply takes the underlying
pattern gold, silver, bronze, iron and leaves the heroes out entirely. He agrees with Hesiod
that the iron race was absolutely terrible and that it would eventually be destroyed
by Zeus or Jupiter to give him his Roman name since Ovid is a Roman author but in Ovid's
presentation all of that is in the past. The iron race is in the past as much as any of
the other races are and he tells us that in fact Zeus did destroy the iron race. He wipes
them out by a great flood. So who then are we? Well we are descendants through a very
odd process of the two survivors of that flood. Now just one quick side note here. Obviously
the flood story is a very clear example of cross cultural parallels in different mythic
traditions perhaps of cross cultural influence. There is the flood story as recounted for
us by Ovid in classical mythology. There is a flood story in Mesopotamian myth and of
course the most familiar flood story occurs in Genesis with the story of Noah. So here
again we may have cross cultural influence between these different mythologies coming
up with a very similar story. According to Ovid the only two people to survive the great
flood, the only two members of the iron race who survived were Eucalian and Pyrrha. Eucalian
is the man, Pyrrha is the woman. Their little boat ran aground on Mount Parnassus which
is where Delphi is and they went to ask the oracle of Delphi now how there can be an oracle
speaking in Apollo's temple if everyone including the Pythia is dead. Ovid doesn't bother to
tell us. They go and ask the oracle what they should do. They're the only two surviving
humans in the world. What should they do? The oracle tells them throw the bones of your
mother over your shoulders. They react at first with horror at the idea of desecrating
their mother's graves until they realize that what the oracle means is to throw the
stones of the earth over their shoulders. The earth is the great mother of all living
things. Rocks, stones are to her as bones are to the human body. Therefore they're not
sure it will work but as Ovid says how could it hurt to try? They pick up rocks, throw
them over their shoulders as they walk. The rocks that Eucalian throws become men. The
rocks that Pyrrha throws become women. Now let's think for a moment about the implications
of that. In Ovid's presentation not only are we not the iron race, we're not even related
to the iron race. We are a whole different separate creation. We grow out of the rocks
of the earth that Eucalian and Pyrrha threw over their shoulders. And Ovid says we show
our origin in the fact that we are a hardy race able to endure a great deal of toil and
trouble. We show where we came from by our hardiness. Once again as I talked about very
briefly when we discussed Ovid's creation story we can see here how Ovid is using the
traditional myth of the five races as he see it preserves it as a literary device rather
than as a still functioning living mythic tradition. He puts in a lot of authorial comment
like how could it hurt to try throwing the stones over their shoulders. He also writes
in a tone that is much less serious than he see its tone. There's a lot of humor in
Ovid. And more particularly I think we see in Ovid a kind of self conscious pointing
out of the ideological nature of the story as he tells it. Where he see it or myths that
are closer to oral tradition to the original status of myth don't say now look we come
from stones that's why we're hardy. That may be implicit in a traditional myth but it's
not spelled out. Ovid spells it out for us. Ovid is almost doing a commentary on the myths
that he recounts. Also another aspect of Ovid's telling of the story is again that since we
are separated from the earlier races since we have no real connection with the iron race
that was destroyed by the flood it's easy for Ovid to be more optimistic about the future
of whatever we would call us. I guess we'd have to call ourselves the stone age misleading
though that might be. It's easy to be much more optimistic about our future than he see
it allows for because all of the trials and tribulations he see it describes Ovid puts
firmly in the past. As I said Ovid simply omits the race of heroes. What I want to do
now is turn to discussing who these heroes are whom he see it places right before our
own day and who seem to be so important in he see it's account of the different generations
of humans that he has to put them in even though they break the pattern of metals and
they break the pattern of degeneration. Who are they? Why are they so important to he
see it? What's implied by Ovid leaving them out? Well just as God is a misleading translation
of the term theos as I discussed before so too hero is a misleading translation of the
Greek word heroes or at least the modern understanding of what's implied by the term hero in modern
American culture is misleading when we look at the heroes of Greek mythology. The heroes
of classical myth are not necessarily noble, good or morally exemplary. Sometimes they
are quite the opposite. Sometimes they are extraordinarily bad people rather than extraordinarily
good people. And by the way this is one reason many scholars find fault with Joseph Campbell's
treatment of heroes particularly his discussion in his book the hero with a thousand faces.
Campbell takes it as a given that cross-culturally and throughout time the hero is motivated by
a desire to provide a boon as Campbell calls it for his fellow humans that that's what
motivates the hero's adventures the desire to bring a boon back to humanity. But in the
case of many if not most Greek hero tales this is emphatically not the case. Many Greek
heroes undergo adventures yes and sometimes their actions in those adventures may have
beneficent consequences for other humans but the hero's motivation is not normally to help
other humans and at times in fact his actions have bad repercussions for other human beings.
What does the word heroes in Greek mean if it doesn't mean an exceptionally good morally
exemplary person out to help his fellow human beings? Well it has three basic meanings in
ancient Greek. Hero could refer to a dead person who was revered and to whom sacrifices
were offered. This is the the meaning of hero when you read about hero sacrifice hero worship
and so forth. These dead people who were seen as somehow still being spirits to whom sacrifice
could and should be offered were very frequently associated with one particular city. Often
a hero would be considered protective of a particular city because he had founded it
or ruled over it though that's not always the case. And in this meaning the term hero
really can refer to a person who has died at just about any period they don't necessarily
have to be in the remote past. In other words these heroes are not necessarily connected
with myth at all. There's one example for instance of a hero named Cleomedes who died
in 492 B.C. and the historian Pausanias tells us that he was a boxer who in anger over a
judge's judgment that had gone against him that said he lost a contest. Cleomedes went
on a rampage, pulled down a school building, destroyed a school building. There happened
to be 60 children in the school at the time who were all killed. Cleomedes fellow citizens
obviously were unhappy about this. They pursued him and he miraculously disappeared. His fellow
citizens were told by an oracle that he had become a hero and they should offer sacrifices
and worship to him. Now clearly that indicates that a hero does not have to be a good man.
He has to be extraordinary in some sense. There's some aspect of his story that is unusual
but he can be unusual for performing an extraordinarily bad deed as well as for performing an extraordinarily
good one. The second main meaning of hero apart from someone who is offered sacrifices
after death is someone who lived in the remote past particularly someone who lived up to
and into the time of the Trojan War. And this is the sense that's most important for
us because the heroes of myth are almost without exception the people who took part
in the stories gathering around the Trojan War and the generations before the Trojan
War. So when a Greek author referred to a hero he could mean someone who lived in that
past time up to the time of the Trojan War. A third meaning hero could be used to refer
to a human who had one divine parent as we've seen in several stories already. Achilles,
Heracles, Perseus are all heroes in that sense. A fourth sense hero meaning the main character
of a tragedy or other literary work is post classical and we don't really have to worry
about it here. Classical writers did not refer to the main character of a tragedy or another
literary work as its hero. So we've got the three basic senses. A dead person who has
worshiped after death, someone who lived in the past up to the time of the Trojan War,
someone with one divine parent. There's a great deal of overlap between those senses.
Ecied, you'll remember, refers to the race of heroes as both demigods, i.e. people with
one divine parent and men who fought around Thebes and Troy. So he's combining those two
senses in saying that the people who fought the Trojan War and who fought in the Great
Expedition of Seven Against Thebes were also men with one divine parent. The same legendary
heroes, the same heroes who fought at Thebes and Troy were very frequently claimed as ancestors
by families who lived in the classical period of Greek culture. They were very frequently
claimed as ancestors and very frequently revered as founders of cities. So there you see a
combination with the idea of hero as a dead person who received sacrifice after death.
It could very well be that you would offer sacrifices to someone who had died back at
the time of the Trojan War and who was therefore a hero in that sense as well. It's worth remembering,
however, that the three senses are not always present in the same hero. In particular, many
of the most famous heroes of Greek mythology, such as Oedipus and Agamemnon or for that
matter Odysseus, do not have one divine parent but have only two human parents. So hero is
a rather malleable term. We will mainly use it in the rest of this course to refer to
the men who took part and women who took part in the stories of Greek mythology, i.e. hero
and the second sense I outlined, people who lived up to the time of the Trojan War. Now
the stories of those heroes, the stories of the heroes of the remote past often involve
the sense that we've talked about before that myths so frequently reflects that things
were different in the past, that there was a time when the world operated in a different
way than it now operates. We are so accustomed to classical mythology that we may not see
how unusual it is to have so strong an emphasis on heroes as classical myth has, but actually
that is an unusual aspect of classical myth. We see that both in the free interaction of
humans and gods, that's the way in which classical myth reflects the idea that things were different
in the past, and we also see the unusual emphasis on heroes when we compare a classical mythology
with the mythology of other cultures. Many, many other cultures do not have nearly so
many heroes in their mythology as classical myth does. For instance, Mesopotamian myth,
which we've used before as a comparison to classical myth, contains almost no stories
of heroes. Mesopotamian myth, by and large, is about the gods. Gilgamesh is a notable
exception to that. There's a very famous Mesopotamian myth about the hero Gilgamesh,
but for the most part, Mesopotamian myth does not focus on humans, rather it focuses on
gods. The heroes of classical mythology, however, play an absolutely crucial role in
classical mythology. Most, I think it's safe to say, of the stories about classical myth
are stories that involve heroes in one way or another. So why is this? Why does classical
mythology lay such an emphasis on heroes when that's not necessarily an element of mythology
at all? Well, there's several possible ways to answer that question, of course, as is
so often the case. It's possible that because Greek culture, as we've seen, laid so much
emphasis on the dichotomy mortal, immortal, saw that as the primary defining characteristic
of humans, that we must die, it's possible that the heroes were a means of mediating
that opposition, a means of bridging that gap. Men who had one divine parent could be
seen of us in some sense partaking of the state of being that the gods enjoy. Also,
the interaction between gods and humans at the time of the heroes could be seen as in
some sense mediating that difference, making a transition between gods and humans. And
by the way, it's worth noting that the idea that gods and humans could interact with one
another and could interbreed with one another is very much restricted to the remote past.
I don't think any young Athenian girls say in 430 BC, who found herself pregnant out
of wedlock, would have gotten very far if she tried to tell her father that Zeus had
fathered her child. Everyone knew that Zeus did that kind of thing in the remote past.
Everyone also knew that he didn't do it anymore. Another possibility that I find absolutely
fascinating to account for the heroes of Greek mythology is that they preserve a kernel
of historical memory in their stories. Remember in the last lecture, I talked about those
two great prehistoric cultures that flourished in Greece before the development of what we
call classical civilization, the Minoans and the Mycenaeans. Let's think for a moment
about Mycenaean culture and how it might be reflected in the stories of the heroes and
the idea of a lost golden age. As I mentioned in the previous lecture, Mycenaean culture
waned after about 1100 BC. But when we say a culture waned, we don't mean that it just
suddenly disappeared. The Mycenaeans did not just all pack up and leave Greece and go somewhere
else. We mean that for reasons that historians still are unsure about in the case of Mycenaean
culture, the culture went into a period of decline in which many of their skills were
lost very, very rapidly. They lost the ability to build their magnificent buildings, which
were excavated in the 19th and 20th centuries. They lost the ability to make their extraordinarily
beautiful and intricate jewelry and so forth. But their descendants would have continued
to live probably in and around the same sites that had been occupied by Mycenaean culture
at its high point. And these descendants would have been therefore living within view of
the architectural ruins from the earlier state of the culture. They probably would even
have been using for at least a couple of generations the implements that the Mycenaeans had made
at their high point. Jewelry, pottery, other artifacts would probably be handed down and
continue to be used. So the Mycenaeans descendants would have been confronted on a daily basis
with the fact that they were living in and around cities and using artifacts that they
could no longer themselves create, that showed a level of skill, a level of cultural development
far beyond what they themselves had. Also, oral tradition would have, and we know that
from the Homeric poems that oral tradition did preserve memories of Mycenaean culture,
some traces of Mycenaean culture. The Homeric epics have several references in them that
refer directly to Mycenaean culture, not just the names of cities, but also of artifacts.
For instance, there's a particular kind of helmet described in Homer, a boar's tooth helmet,
a helmet that is covered with the teeth of boars, that corresponds perfectly to actual
helmets that excavations have found in Mycenaean cities. So oral tradition preserves the memory
of the people who built these cities. Their descendants live therefore surrounded by artifacts
that they can no longer create, and with an oral tradition telling them who created these
artifacts and telling them that those people were their ancestors. So by the time you get
to the 8th century BC, when Hesiod writes down theogony with the myth of the heroes
in it, I think it's quite possible that what we have there is folk memory of a greater
culture that actually, in fact, did precede classical Greek culture and that actually,
in fact, was the ancestor of classical Greek culture. So in this lecture, we've begun
our examination of heroes and their role in Greek myth by looking at Hesiod and Ovid's
stories of how the human beings came into existence and by suggesting some possible
interpretations of heroes. In the next lecture, we'll focus on one particular hero, Thesias,
the legendary hero of Athens.
