Lecture 14 Thesias and the Test and Quest Myth
Hello and welcome to lecture 14.
In our previous lecture we began looking at heroes and discussed the three basic meanings
of the term hero in Greek mythology.
A person who has worshipped after death, someone who lived in what's often called the heroic
age i.e. the time period that ended with the Trojan War, and an ancestor of people
who live in the present age.
Now in this lecture we're going to move on to discussing one particular hero, Thesias,
and see how important a role he plays both in terms of Athens local mythology and for
Greek myth in general.
There are a good many heroes in Greek myth whose stories fit what is sometimes called
the test and quest pattern, the pattern of an adventure story where a young man goes
out and performs various different deeds of valor.
Among these Thesias's myth is a particularly valuable one for investigating some of the
mythic themes that appear in this type of story and for possibilities of interpretation.
Now Thesias is probably less well known to modern readers, modern non-specialists than
heroes such as Heracles or Jason who have tended to be focused on much more in modern
culture, but he is a particularly good example of how hero myth works largely because of
the role he played in Athens.
As I've mentioned before, Athenian literature makes up the bulk of the surviving literature
that we have from classical Greek.
And so a hero who is especially associated with Athens is a hero who shows up in a great
deal of literature indeed.
Now Thesias's connection with Athens is that he is seen as being the legendary Sunoi Kiestes
as the Greeks would call it, of Attica, the area in which Athens is located.
Sunoi Kiestes means more or less unifier.
What this refers to is the idea that Thesias persuaded all the various small independent
towns and villages of Attica, the peninsula on which Athens is located, to unify, to come
together under one centralized control.
And the centralized control was of course focused in Athens.
So Thesias is seen as the hero who unified Attica under Athenian control.
This element of his myth, this role of being the Sunoi Kiestes of Attica, really as far
as we can tell developed for Thesias fairly late in the 6th century BC.
And it seems to parallel pretty neatly political developments that were actually going on in
Athens in the 6th century BC.
In other words, as Athens actually was gaining control over Attica, over the surrounding
towns and villages in its area, it simultaneously developed myths saying that Thesias had done
this in the far past.
And there we can see how myth serves as a validation, a charter in Malinovsky's term
for political realities.
The Athenians apparently felt a need to have a mythic predecessor, a mythic justification
for their own political developments in the 6th century BC, and Thesias provided that
justification.
It's perhaps because of the important role Thesias plays in Athens that a great many
stories accrued around him, a great many adventures were attached to his name, which makes it
very difficult to work out a consistent chronology for him, as we'll see later on in the lecture.
However, the earliest part of his life, his conception birth and early adulthood, is fairly
easy to describe and fairly well set.
We don't get into chronological difficulties until we get to later parts of his story.
In his birth and childhood stories, Thesias demonstrates typical hero elements, i.e. typical
elements of narrative which appear in stories about many heroes.
These are what Vladimir Prop, whom we discussed in an earlier lecture, will call the functions
of Thesias's story, by which he means more or less individual narrative elements, such
as the idea that there is a difficulty surrounding the hero's birth that appear over and over
again in different stories about different characters.
In Thesias's case, we very clearly see the idea that there is some sort of oddity or
ambiguity surrounding his conception and his birth.
For Thesias, the strangest thing about his conception is an apparent double fatherhood.
He is said to be the son both of the human Aegis and of the god Poseidon, or in some
versions he's said to be son of one, in other versions he's said to be son of the other.
The reason there's a confusion about his fatherhood is as follows.
Thesias's human father, the man who is credited with begetting him, was Aegis, king of Athens.
Thesias had gone to consult the oracle at Delphi to find out what he needed to do to
have a son, because he was, at this point in his life, childless.
The oracle told him, in a typical oracular fashion, that to be sure of begetting a son,
he should not loosen the dangling foot of the wine skin until he returned home to Athens.
Aegis had no idea what this meant.
On his way back to Athens from Delphi, he stopped overnight at a place called Troisen,
which is close to Attica, but not actually in Attica, and asked the king there what
this oracle could possibly mean.
The king recognized that what it meant was Aegis should not have sexual intercourse until
he returned home to Athens, the implication being that the next time Aegis did have sex
with anyone, he would beget a son.
And the king, therefore, wanting to connect his family with the royal house of Athens,
offered his own daughter to Aegis as a sexual partner for that night.
This daughter was Aethra, Theseus' mother.
So Aegis and Aethra go to bed together on the advice and consent of her father and have
sex with one another.
Later that night, Aethra is told in a dream that she should go to a particular temple.
She gets out of bed, dresses, goes to this temple, and while there she is raped by the
God Poseidon.
So this means that on the same night, Aethra has had sexual intercourse with both Aegis
and Poseidon.
Therefore no one will ever know who Theseus' real father is.
And I think here we can see a very clear logic at work behind this story.
Theseus is the great hero of Athens.
As such, Athenian myth wants him to be a top-notch hero.
And top-notch heroes have a God as a father, right?
So Theseus, sorry, must have a God as his father.
So there's the story about Poseidon.
But Theseus is also the most important legendary king of Athens.
How do you become king?
You inherit the kingship from your father.
So Theseus must have a father who is king of Athens, and therefore there's the story
about Aegis' parentage.
Since Theseus has to fill both of these roles, really top-notch true hero who needs a God
as a father, absolutely legitimate king of Athens, who needs a king of Athens as a father,
he's given two fathers, and the two are left side by side without any decision ever being
made in the myths of Theseus, which one is really his father.
Now Aegis, when he left Aethra and continued on his way to Athens, performed another element
that comes up very frequently in folktale and in hero myth.
He left tokens for his son to discover at a later time in his life.
Specifically, Aegis put a pair of sandals and a sword under a boulder.
And he told Aethra that if she bore a son, when that son was old enough to lift the boulder
and retrieve the sandals and the sword, he should make his way to Athens, show these tokens
to Aegis, and Aegis would recognize that this was indeed his son.
If Aethra bore a daughter, Aegis apparently doesn't want to know about it.
That's not what he's interested in.
And you notice also that Aegis is perfectly happy to let Aethra have all the trouble, expense,
and worry of bringing the baby up.
Aegis only wants him once he's grown, once he's big enough to lift that boulder and
make his way to Athens.
So Theseus grows up, lifts the boulder, retrieves the tokens, and sets off on a journey to Athens
to claim his patrimony.
This journey to Athens, which he makes by foot, involves a series of encounters with
monsters and brigands, that is wild outlaws who are terrorizing the people of Attica.
The most famous outlaw whom Theseus encounters as he walks from Troy's into Attica to Athens
is named Procrustes.
Procrustes is famous for his bed.
He had a bed in which he compelled all travelers who passed by his house to sleep.
But Procrustes insisted that the traveler had to fit the bed precisely.
So if the traveler was too tall for the bed, Procrustes lopped his legs off to make him
fit.
If he was too short for the bed, Procrustes put him on a rack and stretched him out to
make him fit the bed.
This is where we get the term Procrustian, if someone says that a particular solution
is a Procrustian solution to a problem, for instance.
By that they mean that the problem is made to fit the solution rather than the other
way around.
This is the most famous outlaw Theseus encountered and killed on his way to Athens.
Another was Sinus, surnamed the Pine Bender.
He was a giant who had a habit of bending two pine treats down, tying a hapless traveler
between them and then letting the pine trees go, which of course rips the traveler into
two pieces.
Now Theseus killed him as well.
Theseus also killed a monstrous boar who was ravaging the countryside.
Now these adventures, again, seem to work allegorically or symbolically, or however
you want to put it, to underline the idea of Theseus as the Sunoiki Stace, the unifier
of Attica under Athenian rule.
What is he doing?
He is ridding Attica of dangers, of things that make Attica unsafe for people to travel
in, make it unsafe to go from one town to another town.
These mythic monsters and outlaws whom he overcomes seem pretty clearly to represent
the idea of lawlessness, of lack of unification, of lack of safety on the roads.
So Theseus as the person who wipes out these monsters parallels the idea of Theseus as
the person who unifies Attica under Athenian control.
When Theseus reached Athens, he was received as a guest.
He did not declare who he was.
He was in disguise according to some versions.
He was dressed as a girl.
He declared, he presented himself to his father, Theseus.
Now Theseus at this point was married to a woman named Medea.
Medea is of course much more famous for her previous marriage to the Greek hero Jason,
the man who sailed the Argo to get the Golden Fleece.
And Medea is a sorceress, a witch, one of many very powerful women who use magic and
who show up throughout Greek myth.
In this particular element of her story, Medea was pregnant with Theseus' child and
she feared that Theseus, whom her magic allowed her to recognize as Theseus' son, would supplant
her own as yet unborn child in Theseus' estimation.
So therefore Medea acted as Medea always does.
She was a lady who was not at all averse to killing her enemies to get them out of her
way.
Medea persuaded Theseus that this young stranger guest was planning to kill him, to kill Theseus.
And she persuaded Theseus that to protect himself, Theseus should poison the guest before
the guest had a chance to kill him.
Theseus went along with this idea, terrible violation of the guest-toast relationship,
though it might be, and at dinner presented Theseus with a cup of poisoned wine.
And here we get yet another element that is very common in folk tale, in myth, in traditional
tales in general.
The idea that a disaster is averted just in time, that a stranger is recognized as being
a relative just in time.
Theseus was sitting at the dinner table, the poisoned goblet of wine is in front of him.
Before he drank it, however, he drew his sword to carve his meat.
And that, by the way, tells you something about ancient table manners.
He drew his sword to carve his meat.
Eachus recognizes the sword, realizes that this is his son, tells him not to drink the
wine.
Medea beats a hasty retreat.
One very noteworthy element of Medea's story is that she always manages to escape before
she pays the consequences of her crimes.
And so she does in this circumstance.
So eachus and Theseus recognize one another as father and son, they have a joyous reunion,
and the next element in Theseus' story gets into what is often, as I've already said,
called the test and quest kind of a hero's story.
He sets out on a dangerous journey to the island of Crete, and he goes specifically
to try to free Athens from the dreadful tribute that it has to pay every year to the Minotaur.
The Minotaur is a monster who lives in Crete.
Its body is that of a man, its head is that of a bull.
It is a human eating monster, a monster who devours human beings.
And Athens has the obligation of sending every year seven youths and seven maidens, seven
young men and seven young women, to Crete to be eaten by the Minotaur.
Now the reason Athens has to do this is because of a war that had been fought between Crete
and Athens and the treaty that ended that war.
Minos, king of Crete, who can also be pronounced Minos, but I prefer to call him Minos.
Minos, king of Crete, had a son, Androgius, who had been visiting Aegis in Attica.
Androgius had died while he was in Attica.
Either he was killed by a great bull whom Aegis sent him out to fight, or Androgius was
killed by young Athenian men who were jealous of his athletic prowess.
Either version, the result is the same, Androgius is killed, and Minos declares war on Athens
to avenge his son's death.
The war ceased only when Athens agreed to let King Minos name whatever recompense he wanted,
whatever terms of a treaty he wanted.
And what he wanted was fodder for his monster, the Minotaur.
And so Minos imposed this tribute on Athens of seven youths and seven maidens every year
who will be fed to the Minotaur in Crete.
When Theseus learns of this dreadful tribute from his father Aegis, he volunteers to be
a member of the delegation that year to be one of the seven youths who will go to face
the Minotaur in Crete.
And of course Theseus is intending to kill the monster if he possibly can, and therefore
lift this tribute from Athens.
Theseus' adventures in Crete are the most famous part of his story.
His encounter with the Minotaur and the help that he gets from the Cretan princess Ariadne,
daughter of Minos, are out in a way the most famous elements of any story about Theseus.
And again, we're dealing with an element that comes up in many stories of the test and quest
pattern.
Ariadne, the princess, helps Theseus.
This is a very common element that the young man attempting to perform in all but impossible
feat is helped by a young woman who has fallen in love with him, usually a princess.
And Ariadne has in fact fallen in love with Theseus at first sight, and so she decides
to help him to overcome the Minotaur.
Ariadne does this by giving Theseus a ball of thread so that he can find his way back
out of the labyrinth in which the Minotaur is imprisoned.
The labyrinth was amazed so intricate that once you had gone into it, you could never
find your way back out again.
The Minotaur supposedly lives in the labyrinth.
The seven youths and seven maidens will be driven into the labyrinth.
They could not find their way out again.
The Minotaur would hunt them down and eat them.
Ariadne gives Theseus a ball of thread so that he can tie one end of it to the doorpost
and then retrace his steps, find his way out again.
This is often called the clue of Ariadne, and clue in English originally simply meant
a ball of yarn.
Our use of the word clue to mean the one element that leads you out of your perplexity to an
understanding comes from the story of Ariadne.
It's originally a metaphorical use of that term.
In return, Ariadne has to get something out of this as well.
In return, Theseus agrees that he will take Ariadne with him when he leaves Crete.
As well he might.
Minos is not going to be particularly pleased that his daughter has helped this Athenian
to kill the Minotaur and end Athen's tribute to Crete.
So Theseus agrees he'll take Ariadne with him.
With the help of Ariadne's thread, Theseus succeeds after he kills the Minotaur in the
labyrinth in finding his way back out again, and he and Ariadne indeed do then leave Crete.
They stop to spend the night on the nearby island of Naxos and supposedly sleep together,
spend the night together.
But in the next morning, when Theseus wakes up, he sets sail and leaves Ariadne behind
alone on the island of Naxos.
Now there are various different versions for why he did this, but the most common one,
the one that most authors seem to espouse, is that he simply flat out forgot her.
He got up in the morning, forgot about Ariadne entirely, and set sail without her.
So when Ariadne wakes up, she is abandoned all alone on an island, all by herself.
She, unusually for myth, she has a happy ending to her story.
The God Dionysus supposedly comes, finds Ariadne, rescues her, marries her, and turns her into
a goddess.
So the outcome for Ariadne is very good.
That is so unusual an ending, both in the idea that a woman would become a goddess,
and in the fact that this kind of story doesn't normally have a happy ending, that many scholars
think what's going on here, is that Ariadne originally was a goddess, perhaps even a Minoan
goddess.
Her name seems to imply that.
The name Ariadne means very holy.
So her name may indicate that she was originally a goddess.
If she was, if the story originally was that a Cretan goddess helped Theseus, then it would
make more sense that after she helped him Dionysus married her, it would be a god marrying
a goddess, rather than a god turning a human woman into a goddess.
But as the story developed for whatever reason, Ariadne was downgraded to being a human being,
and we get the story of Theseus leaving her behind on Naxos and Dionysus rescuing her.
Now this was not the only devastating episode of forgetfulness on Theseus' part.
Before he left Athens, he had promised his father Aegis that if he succeeded in killing
the Minotaur, Theseus said he would change the sails on his ship from black to white.
When the ship set sail every year for Crete, with the seven doomed boys and the seven doomed
girls aboard, it had black sails.
And when it came back, having left its human cargo in Crete, it still had black sails.
Theseus promised Aegis that if he was successful, if he was actually coming home in triumph
on the ship, he would change the sails to white.
He forgot to do so.
And Aegis, who had been standing either on the Acropolis of Athens or on Cape Sunion,
the southernmost tip of Attica, keeping watch every day for the returning ship, saw the
ship coming back, saw that the sails were still black, thought that his son Theseus
was dead, and leapt to his death, committed suicide because he thought Theseus was dead.
So Theseus then became king of Athens.
Aegis is dead, Theseus enters into kingship in his father's place.
Now it's at this point, after the loss of Ariadne and after Theseus becomes king, that
his story gains all sorts of different elements that become difficult to work out in exact
chronological order, difficult to know exactly how they relate to one another and when which
element happened.
We know that after the loss of Ariadne, Theseus married at least two more times, and before
he'd married two more times, he attempted a marriage that did not work.
Aegis had a dear friend, Perithus, and they agreed that the two of them should each marry
daughters of Zeus, a rather hubristic idea, but that's what they wanted to do.
Theseus decided that he wanted to marry Helen, she who would later be known as Helen of Troy.
Now at this point, Helen was only a child, some sources say about seven years old, some
say a little bit older, but she was already extraordinarily beautiful, and of course she
grows up to be the most beautiful woman who has ever lived.
So Theseus went to Sparta where Helen lived, kidnapped her, and brought her back to Athens
with the intention of keeping her until she grew up, or at least grew up to the age of
14 or so, until she was old enough to marry.
Perithus set his sights even higher, or it might be better to say set his sights even
lower, because Perithus decided that he wanted to marry none other than Persephone, wife of
Hades, and therefore queen of the underworld.
And so Theseus and Perithus journeyed to the underworld to try to kidnap Persephone.
They should have known it wouldn't work, and in fact it did not work.
When they got to the underworld, Hades invited them to sit down and rest on two stone chairs.
When they sat down, they were caught, they could not get up again, the chairs were magic,
and they were frozen in their place, stuck to the chairs in the underworld.
They remained there for several years until Heracles, who was in the underworld for reasons
of his own, which we'll discuss in a couple of lectures when we talk about Heracles, rescued
Theseus.
However, Heracles left Perithus there.
Perithus never comes out of the underworld again.
He's stuck in his stone chair forever.
Now when Theseus returned to Athens after however many years he spent stuck in the underworld,
he discovered that Helen's brothers had come and rescued her and taken her back to Sparta,
so Helen is not there waiting for him to marry.
At some point, either directly after this or a little bit later, Theseus also marries
an Amazon.
One of that race of legendary warrior women, whom as we'll see later on in the course,
heroes tend to encounter as a test of their true herohood, if I can make up a word, and
encounter with an Amazon is an essential part of several famous hero stories.
Theseus goes to the land of the Amazons and either seduces or flat out abducts their queen,
whose name is given variously as either Antiope or Hippolyta.
He brings her back to Athens with him as his wife, with the result that the Amazons stage
a rescue operation.
The Amazons supposedly invade Attica and besiege Athens to try to get their queen back.
Theseus and the Athenian men defeat the Amazons, but somewhere in this whole set of circumstances,
either in the battle or perhaps in childbirth, the Amazon queen Hippolyta dies and Sothesius
is left a widower.
So he marries an Amazon, he defeats the Amazons who try to get their queen back, but the
Amazon queen does in fact die and Sothesius is still left without a wife.
Now the marriage with Hippolyta does produce a son, a son named Hippolytus.
And the story of Hippolytus as sort of a side story to Theseus' own narrative, but a very
important one for our understanding both of Theseus and of other elements of his story.
Hippolytus is a difficulty for Theseus in Theseus' final marriage.
Last of all, Fidra, daughter of King Minos and Queen Pacifica of Crete and yes, the sister
of Ariadne.
Now it has always struck me as absolutely extraordinary that Minos would let his daughter
Fidra marry Theseus after Theseus had first killed the Minotaur and second abandoned Ariadne.
But there it is, for whatever reason, Minos lets Theseus marry Fidra.
And this marriage produces at least two sons, but ends unhappily.
Fidra is undoubtedly a great deal younger than Theseus.
By this time, Theseus must be fairly old.
Fidra is a young woman and Aphrodite infects her with passion for her stepson Hippolytus.
Theseus is son by the Amazon Queen Hippolyta.
When Hippolytus rebuffs Fidra, when he refuses to be seduced by her, according to the playwright
Euripides, this is not just because Hippolytus is disgusted by the idea of having sex with
his father's wife, but also because Hippolytus has sworn to be sexually chased, has sworn
never to follow the ways of Aphrodite.
In any case, when Hippolytus rebuffs Fidra, Fidra commits suicide and leaves a note saying
that Hippolytus had raped her.
Theseus believes this note, curses his son, and as a result, Hippolytus is dragged to
death behind his own horses.
Theseus only learns the truth that Fidra tried to seduce Hippolytus, not vice versa, after
his son is dead.
This again is a very common narrative element.
It shows up in the biblical story of Joseph and Potiphar's wife.
It shows up elsewhere in Greek myth, the idea of an older woman trying to seduce a sexually
chased young man and the disastrous consequences that accrue to the young man himself.
Now, as I've said already, these later adventures of Theseus and many others that I haven't had
time to discuss, his different marriages, his age at the time of his different marriages,
how long he's been in the underworld, all of those are very difficult to reconcile with
one another chronologically.
In fact, Theseus' whole life is difficult to reconcile with the rest of Greek myth chronologically.
This is a problem that is fairly common in studying classical myth when various different
strands of narrative are brought together in one more or less coherent myth.
There are frequently times when the chronologies just don't quite line up.
We'll see another example when we talk about the Trojan War in a few more lectures.
What's the problem with Theseus?
Well, according to most accounts, Minos lived some generations before Heracles, probably
three generations before Heracles.
And Heracles lived at least one generation before the Trojan War.
And yet, Theseus is involved with two daughters of Minos and is rescued by Heracles after
he has kidnapped Helen.
So Theseus' story pictures Minos and his family and Heracles as all alive at the same time.
Furthermore, Theseus is rescued by Heracles after he kidnaps Helen.
But it was the abduction of Helen after she was grown up and married to Minolaus.
It was her abduction by the Trojan Prince, Paris, that sparked off the Trojan War.
So if Helen is the cause of the Trojan War, and Heracles lives at least one generation
before the Trojan War, and Minos lives a few generations before Heracles, how can Theseus
be involved with all of these people?
The chronology is impossible.
The chronology simply won't work.
How can Heracles have rescued Theseus after Theseus kidnapped Helen?
How can Theseus live at the same time as both Minos and Helen, who are separated by a fairly
long stretch of time, according to the normal mythic chronology as it's worked out for
all of Greek mythology?
Well, the obvious answer is that it just simply doesn't work.
That the chronology is, as scholars tend to say, hopelessly confused.
That's kind of a set phrase for this kind of thing.
The chronology is hopelessly confused.
We can't make sense out of it.
The question I want to look at to end the lecture, though, is why is the chronology hopelessly
confused?
What is it about Theseus that accounts for this connection with Minos, with Heracles,
and with Helen, when the people who recounted these stories must have realized, as well
as we do, that there was a chronological problem?
The simple answer is that, as we've seen before, and we'll see again, anytime you attempt
to gather disparate strands of narrative, stories that have grown up about Theseus in
one place, stories that have grown up about him in another, anytime you try to gather
those and make them into one story, there are going to be some problems.
But perhaps more interestingly, I think this has to do, again, with Theseus' important
role as a founder figure for the Athenians, as the Athenians' main and primary hero.
He is important enough that his myth in Athens wants for him to be connected with just about
every other important episode of myth.
You want Theseus to interact with Heracles.
Heracles is a kind of justifier or a kind of validator for other heroes.
People who have read the Odyssey will remember Heracles' encounter with Odysseus in the Underworld,
where he greets Odysseus as, in some sense, a fellow, an equivalent of Heracles.
So the myth wants Theseus to interact directly with Heracles.
It also wants Theseus to be connected with the most important episode of myth, the Trojan
War.
And the connection with Minos and Crete is even more important than that.
And that's what we'll talk about in the next lecture.
Theseus' story has been worth going through in detail, I think, because it offers scope
for many different interpretations and many different readings.
And those, as well as the connection with Minos and Crete, we'll cover in the next
lecture.
