Lecture 15, from myth to history and back again.
Hello, and welcome back to lecture 15.
In our previous lecture, we looked at Theseus' story and ended by discussing some of the
reasons why the myth of Theseus connects him with Heracles and with the Trojan War through
Helen, despite the chronological impossibilities there.
In this lecture, we're going to concentrate on his connection with the Minotaur and King
Minos and through that story with Crete in general.
Now at first sight, the myth of the Minotaur in the Cretan labyrinth seems to be one of
the most purely imaginary and fantastic among Greek myths.
It seems impossible that such a story could have any connection with historical fact whatsoever.
The Minotaur to start with is a monster, half human and half animal, something that cannot
actually exist in nature.
This monster is conceived in a particularly improbable way, just to add to the fantasticness
of his story.
The Minotaur is the child of Pasiphae, Queen of Crete and wife of King Minos.
Minos had once promised the god Poseidon that he would sacrifice to Poseidon a particularly
beautiful bull that he had among his flocks.
Minos then went back on his word, decided to keep this particularly beautiful bull for
himself and sacrifice a lesser animal to Poseidon.
This of course angered Poseidon who enlisted Aphrodite's help and punished Minos by infecting
Queen Pasiphae with an irresistible passion for the bull.
And so Pasiphae desires the bull that should have been sacrificed to Poseidon.
She enlists the help of an artisan named Dedalus, supposedly the greatest artisan who ever
lived.
Dedalus builds for Pasiphae a wooden cow, a hollow wooden cow in which she can hide.
Pasiphae hides inside the cow, the bull is then brought to the cow, the bull mates with
what he thinks is a cow and thus Pasiphae conceives the Minotaur.
A completely bizarre story and of course one that is completely impossible as well.
It's to add to the oddity of the story of the Minotaur.
He's not only a monster, he is a man eating monster and of course this is on the face
of it unlikely even if we accept that there can be a creature that is half man and half
bull, why should it be carnivorous, bulls, cattle or not carnivorous animals.
But the Minotaur is and once he has been born it's because of his carnivorous and fearsome
nature that Minos instructs Dedalus, the same artisan who built the wooden cow, to
build the labyrinth to contain the Minotaur and of course as we talked about last time
the monster has to be fed and so we have the tribute from Athens of seven youths and seven
maidens annually to feed the Minotaur.
Now along with the monstrous nature of the Minotaur, the very fact that his story, the
story of Theseus' encounter with the Minotaur contains so many elements that are reminiscent
of folktale such as Theseus' reliance on Ariadne's help, that also makes it seem unlikely
that this story could be anything other than a traditional tale, a purely imaginary traditional
tale.
The monstrous nature of the Minotaur, the very obvious folktale elements in the story,
all of those make it seem unlikely that we could have any historical background at work
here at all, any historical kernel in the story.
Furthermore, the story of Theseus and the Minotaur offers a great deal of scope for differing
interpretations of myth in general and of the story of Theseus and the Minotaur in particular.
So it seems to work almost as a perfect example of how myth ought to function because it can
be interpreted by so many different theoretical schools among those that we've studied.
To take one example, Neoritualist theorists like to see this story as a paradigm for male
initiation ritual.
In many cultures, boys go through an initiation ritual to mark their transition from childhood
to adulthood as do girls go through a separate initiation ritual to mark their entrance into
adult womanhood.
And Neoritualists identify various elements in the story of Theseus that seem to parallel
with remarkable precision stages of a boy's initiation as we know them from societies in
which initiation rituals are still used.
First of all, Theseus arrives in Athens, as I mentioned in the last lecture, wearing women's
clothing at least according to one version of his story.
Theseus arrive at their initiation as less than males, whether they're dressed as females
or not.
Part of the point of the initiation is that when the boy arrives at initiation, he is
not yet fully male.
He has to become male through the initiation ritual.
Theseus journeys to Crete, where he'll encounter the Minotaur.
Male initiates are normally removed from their villages, from their towns, put in a different
place, isolated from their society by traveling to another area.
Theseus is doomed to be killed by the Minotaur, though he manages to kill it instead.
Initiates are often conceived of by their society as being in some sense dead while
they're in isolation, while they're going through their initiation ceremony, and to
be reborn as adults after the ceremony.
Also very frequently in many cultures, initiates have to encounter and overcome demons, or
are believed to be encountering and overcoming demons during the initiation ritual as Theseus
encounters and overcomes the Minotaur.
Theseus, of course, meets Ariadne, and at least in some sense marries her, at least
spends a single night with her.
One of the main points of initiation is to prepare boys for adult sexuality and by implication
for marriage.
And finally, Theseus returns home and becomes king after the death of his father.
When the initiates return from their initiation ceremony, they are then fully adult males
who can take their own role in society as fully adult males, just as Theseus assumes
the kingship of Athens when he returns from his encounter with the Minotaur.
Now, these parallels are indeed very striking, and it's certainly worth considering the
possibility that the Theseus myth does reflect initiation ritual.
Unfortunately, we do not have any records of this kind of initiation ritual in Athens
itself.
We know of it in other cultures, including some that still exist today, but we don't
have any evidence that this kind of initiation was ever done in Greek culture itself.
Unless, of course, we take the myth of Theseus as evidence for such a ritual, as I talked
about in one of the opening lectures, if we assume that all myth must reflect ritual,
then we can say Theseus' myth clearly reflects initiation ritual.
If we don't start with that assumption, then we may decide that the Theseus myth is not
itself enough to prove initiation ritual in ancient Greece.
But certainly the parallels are striking.
Another way of interpreting the myth of Theseus and his encounter with the Minotaur is to
look at psychological interpretations of it.
And in fact, this myth is so fruitful for psychological interpretations that it can
almost be seen as a test case for the idea that myth arises from the human psyche, or
a better way to put it might be that myth reflects realities of the individual human
psyche that each individual must deal with in his or her lifetime.
The Minotaur, imprisoned in the heart of the labyrinth, has been interpreted by many
theorists as representing the hidden inadmissible desires of the human subconscious.
Those things that all of us on some level desire or would like to do that we must keep
imprisoned, that we must hide away from ourselves, can be seen as represented by this savage
monster imprisoned in the labyrinth.
And if we take this interpretation of the story, then it's probably significant that
this monster was born from a particularly hideous kind of sexual transgression, that
it was Pacifica's desire for a relationship with the bull, that it was bestiality that
gave birth to this monster who can be read as representing all the suppressed and repressed
desires of the human psyche.
The labyrinth that keeps the Minotaur imprisoned was, as I already mentioned, constructed by
the greatest artisan who ever lived, and that can be interpreted as representing the way
culture constructs a means by which we can control our more animalistic desires.
If we see Daedalus as a representative of culture and the labyrinth as a representative
of what culture does for humans, then we can make that comparison that culture allows us
to control our more distressing, hidden animalistic desires as the labyrinth controls the Minotaur.
The labyrinth itself is susceptible to all kinds of interpretation.
Followers of Campbell tend to see it as a tortuous path to enlightenment, the path that
each human soul has to tread, whereby we go to the heart of our own labyrinth, slay our
own monsters, and then find our way back out again.
So the whole idea of the Minotaur in the labyrinth lends itself to various different
psychological interpretations.
I'm just scratching the surface here.
Another way to look at it is to remember that the encounter with the Minotaur leads to the
death of Theseus' father, Aegis, and Theseus' ability to assume the throne of Athens.
This can be seen as a variation on the Oedipal desire, the desire of the young male to supplant
his father to get rid of his father to take his father's place.
Later in Theseus' story, his destruction of his son Hippolytus can be seen as an inversion
of the standard Oedipal story, a story in which the mother, or at least stepmother, desires
the son, not vice versa, and in which the father, Theseus, kills the son, not vice versa.
So the story of Hippolytus can be seen as an inverted version of the Oedipus myth.
Now, given the fecundity of this myth for interpretation, given the fact that the story
of Theseus and the Minotaur lends itself very well and very fruitfully to all sorts of interpretations,
it comes as something of surprise to realize, as I've been hinting at so far in this lecture,
that archaeology does in fact give us good reason to suppose that there is actually some
remembered history hidden beneath the fantastic elements of this story.
As unlikely as that seems at first sight, this is one place in which what archaeology
has discovered and the story that is narrated by a myth most obviously coincide with one
another and come together in some very surprising ways.
And it's all the more surprising since this myth, as I said at the beginning of the lecture,
is one that no one would ever have suspected of having a kernel of historical truth behind
it.
You'll remember from the lecture in which I discussed Minoan and Mycenaean culture that
the prehistoric culture of Minoan Crete was discovered by Sir Arthur Evans, who excavated
a site called Knossos on Crete and discovered a huge, extraordinarily complex palace there
at Knossos.
When Sir Arthur Evans discovered the palace of Knossos, this was the first evidence anyone
had ever had that the society of King Minos, the society recounted in the myth of the Minotaur
and elsewhere, might actually have some basis in fact, that there had indeed been a large
complex and highly sophisticated society operating on Crete in the prehistory of Greece.
Now when Evans discovered the palace at Knossos, among the most remarkable discoveries he made
there were many extraordinarily elaborate and very beautiful frescoes.
The walls of the palace had been adorned with fresco paintings.
These of course had crumbled by the time Evans excavated them, but they have been meticulously
restored, put back together, rather like working a jigsaw puzzle.
Some of them are so damaged that it's hard to tell what they represented, but among one
of the best preserved and one of the most famous is a fresco that is often called the
Bull Leaping Fresco from the palace of Knossos.
It's now in the Archaeological Museum at Herakli on the capital of Crete.
This painting, the so-called Bull Leaping Fresco, features three apparently young human
beings and a bull.
The three humans are painted with different skin tones, two of them are white skinned,
one of them is red skinned.
In Minoan art, as in Egyptian art and as in the art of later classical Greece, generally
speaking light skinned figures are normally female, dark skinned figures are normally
male.
So we can assume that in the painting, the Bull Leaping Fresco, so-called from Knossos,
the two light skinned characters are meant to be female and the dark skinned one is meant
to be male.
What are these three humans and this one bull doing in the fresco?
Well, the bull is depicted with all four legs extended and what pretty clearly is meant
to represent either charging or running, galloping.
The three humans are all depicted as interacting with the bull in one way or another.
The first one to the left of the painting, a woman, white skinned young woman, is shown
dangling from the bull's horns.
She's holding the horns with her arms, sort of propping herself up on the horns.
Her feet are not touching the ground so she is in some sense dangling from or suspended
from the bull's horns.
The red skinned youth, whom we can assume to be male, is somersalting over the bull's
back.
He's painted with his head and arms down towards the bull's back and his feet extended upwards
so he seems to be performing a somersault over the back of the bull.
The third figure, also white skinned, therefore also female, is standing behind the bull with
her arms up raised rather like that and balanced apparently on the tip of her toes as though
she has just landed behind the bull coming out of a somersault.
So what is going on here?
Well, the most common interpretation of this scene is that it shows an athletic event.
Most books of art criticism that you'll read or art history or most books about Mino and
Crete that you'll read will tell you that this was an athletic contest.
It's called the Bull Leaping Contest and we're told that it's a demonstration of athletic
prowess.
Supposedly, what happened was that each athlete would literally grab the bull by the horns,
vault over its back, perform a neat somersault and land behind the bull with arms extended
and balanced on the tip of the toes.
And supposedly, the painting shows three different athletes in the act of performing
this athletic event.
The first one, again, suspended from the bull's horns, the second one in full somersault over
the bull's back, and the third one landing.
Well, maybe this is what's going on in the fresco.
Maybe it is, in fact, an athletic event.
But it's always seemed to me that if it is an athletic event, it is at the very least
an extraordinarily dangerous one.
The humans are painted as being really almost nude.
They're wearing loincloths, but not much more than loincloths, so they have no protection
at all.
They're small in relationship to the bull and the idea of seizing the horns of a charging
bull, performing a perfect somersault over its back and landing nicely on point on the
other side of the bull has always struck me as a little bit unlikely.
Perhaps some athletes could do it, but at the very least, this would be an extremely
dangerous form of athletic competition.
And as I have mentioned several times before, we have the same problem here that we have
in looking at the Minoan snake goddess or in trying to interpret archaeological evidence
in general.
We have no written context to tell us what this fresco refers to.
We assume it's an athletic contest, but it might be something else.
It has occurred to me.
It could be a form of punishment.
Perhaps people were pitted against this bull to punish them for misdeeds with the idea
that they would probably be killed by the encounter.
Or perhaps it is indicative of some kind of religious ritual.
In other words, perhaps it is purely symbolic and does not represent any action that any
genuine human beings ever really performed in connection with bulls on Minoan crete.
Now the suggestion that it's purely symbolic may seem a little bit odd at first sight.
We tend to assume when looking at archaeological remnants of ancient cultures that anything
that is depicted in the culture's art must somehow have really happened.
We tend to make that assumption, but I think it's a false one.
The mere fact that an activity is shown in artwork does not necessarily mean that it
ever actually happened in the culture.
There's another very famous Minoan fresco that shows a monkey picking saffron, picking
crocuses to harvest saffron.
I find it highly unlikely that the Minoans actually trained monkeys to pick crocus to
harvest saffron.
I think that's got to be a purely imaginary scene.
Let's take an example from our own culture.
At this time of year, I'm recording these lectures in early December, at this time of
year, our culture is permeated with pictures of Santa Claus being pulled in a sleigh by
his reindeer.
That picture of a human being with a group of reindeer being pulled in a sleigh is all
over the place this time of year.
We see it everywhere, and we all have some sense of what it means.
But that does not imply that in our culture, in actuality, there is really a human being
being pulled in a sleigh by reindeer.
We even though we have this story, we almost never actually acted out.
We never harness actual reindeer to a sleigh and have them pull Santa Claus around.
We recognize the referent of the image, but that doesn't mean that the image has any direct
corresponding real action.
And so I think it is at least worth considering the possibility that the bull leaping fresco
at Canasos could be purely symbolic, could refer to some meaningful narrative element
in Minoan culture that Minoans would recognize when they saw the symbol without our necessarily
having to assume that anyone ever really did perform this leap over the bull's back.
Whatever the reference of the scene, and I don't think we're ever going to know exactly
what it refers to, bulls and young men and women leaping over their backs or being tossed
by their horns, depending on how you interpret it, is an image that shows up over and over
again in Minoan art, not just in frescoes, but also in statuary.
So clearly it must have had some important meaning for Minoan culture.
Furthermore, the minotaur himself, the half bull, half human image, shows up on a couple
of Minoan seals, little objects that were used to make an impression in wax.
So we know that Minoan culture did at least sometimes represent a man and a bull combined
into one form.
Now what is the connection, if any, of the bull leaping fresco with the myth of the minotaur?
What is the connection of the palace of Canasos with the myth of the minotaur?
Well this is where I think the possibility of actual historical memory is absolutely fascinating
to consider.
What does the myth of the minotaur tell us?
Again, it recounts a dangerous encounter between young men and young women, the seven youths
and the seven maidens, in a labyrinth that is in a very elaborate maze-like structure
with a bull-like creature at the center of the labyrinth that kills the young people.
When Sir Arthur Evans set out to excavate on Crete, he cannot really have expected to
find the minotaur or any trace of the minotaur.
But what did he find?
Well, he found a palace that is so elaborate, calling it a labyrinth is perhaps not an exaggeration.
I myself became lost in the ruins of Canasos the first time I visited it and wandered around
in it.
The palace consists of various different passages filled with right angle turns so it's very
easy to lose your sense of direction, all sorts of small rooms coming off of these passages
and in its original form, apparently it stood at least three stories high.
It was absolutely enormous, very complicated, very difficult for someone from a less sophisticated
culture to find their way around in.
So Evans found a palace that it is hardly a stretch of the imagination to call a labyrinth.
And within that palace, he found a representation, a painting, of youths and maidens encountering
a bull in a manner that very likely would have been fatal for at least some of them.
Not encountering the minotaur, true, but encountering a bull in a manner that would have led to the
deaths of at least some of those youths and maidens.
Now in the intervening centuries between the waning of Minoan culture, which went into
its decline sometime in the 15th century B.C. and the writing down of myths about Theseus,
I think it's not at all beyond the realm of possibility.
That is, these stories were told over and over and over again, the bull-leaping games
or bull-leaping ceremonies or bull-leaping punishment or whatever they were of Minoan
Crete transmogrified into the idea of a monster at the heart of the labyrinth that ate youths
and maidens.
That's the kind of change that a story can go through over generations as it's recounted,
where the kernel of truth, something happened in the middle of that palace in Crete that
was dangerous to young people, remains but changed into a mythic form, changed into a
monster that eats the young people.
So this very, very strange myth, this myth that is one of the oddest of all Greek myths,
seems to have perhaps a kernel of remembered history at its core.
Then the idea that Athens paid tribute to Crete could have some basis, in fact, could
also reflect remembered history.
Again to recap just a little bit from an earlier lecture, Minoan culture was the first great
prehistoric culture to exist in the area that we would later call Greece.
Mycenaean culture was the second great culture.
The two overlapped, Mycenaean culture began to develop while Minoan culture was at its
high point.
As Mycenaean culture began about 2000 B.C. and waned in 1100, Minoan culture waned
in the 15th century, there are several hundred years of overlap there.
At some point the Mycenaeans gained the ascendancy.
At some point Mycenaean culture took over Minoan culture and probably even began to
govern the Minoans.
We know this in part because we know that the Minoans at first did not speak Mycenaean
Greek and later began to speak Mycenaean Greek.
We know that from their use of linear B from the tablets which have been deciphered both
in Minoan palaces on Crete and in Mycenaean sites on the mainland.
Now one culture almost never adopts another culture's language unless there has been some
kind of conquest.
The peoples of South America only began speaking Spanish after the Spanish conquest for instance.
Although the fact that the Minoans began to use Mycenaean Greek at a particular point
in their history indicates a conquest by the Mycenaeans.
However, before that conquest there must have been a time when Minoan culture was still
predominant and Mycenaean culture was simply beginning to develop.
At that time it is quite likely at least that the Minoan overlords, the Minoans who controlled
trade throughout their end of the Mediterranean may have imposed some sort of tribute on the
developing Mycenaean cities of Greece.
And so you see where I'm going with this, the idea that at some point Athens had to
pay a tribute to Crete, that at some point Athens had to send precious cargo to Crete
each year because Crete had dominance over Athens, may very well reflect an actual folk
memory of the situation when Minoan culture was dominant and Mycenaean culture was not
yet the main leader of the area.
Now again, I think it's highly unlikely that the Mycenaeans ever had to actually send
youths and maidens to take part in the bull leaping, whatever it was.
But that's how myth works.
You would remember sending a tribute of whatever it was, grain, olive oil, whatever.
And that would change into a more memorable and a more horrible tribute through the passage
of time.
So all of these elements, the tribute, the dangerousness, the strangeness of the culture
in Crete, the monstrous nature of the Minotaur, all of those can be seen as reflecting a dim
memory of the interactions between Minoan and Mycenaean culture.
Now to say that the myth of the Minotaur may reflect dimly remembered history is not by
any means to invalidate other interpretations of that myth.
I'm not trying to be euhemerous here.
I'm not trying to say that the myth of the Minotaur is only misremembered history about
Minoan Crete and its interaction with Mycenaean Greece.
The myth developed over the centuries between the time of those two cultures and the time
when it was written down in the form in which we now have it.
The myth developed and changed and took on characteristics that it now has.
It may well have developed as it did in part because of the connection with male initiation
rights or because of the psychological imperatives that work in the human psyche or for many
other reasons.
So merely to say that there is some remembered history in this myth does not in and of itself
invalidate any other way of interpreting the myth.
The various different interpretations I think should always work together and be considered
together.
But I have always found it fascinating from the first time I visited Knossos in my early
20s, I found it fascinating to consider that that extraordinarily bizarre story of monsters
and princesses and magic and all the rest of it may reflect actual prehistorical fact
strikes me as fascinating and well worth bearing in mind.
Also the ruins of Knossos and their possible connection with the myth of the Minotaur I
think can serve to remind us that other very strange Greek myths.
The story of Perseus and the monster Medusa who had snakes for hair and whose gaze turned
into stone for instance is one that springs to mind.
It's possible that these other very strange myths might also have some concealed kernel
of history hidden in them in a way that would be impossible for us to imagine unless and
until archeology finds it for us.
No one before Sir Arthur Evans would ever have imagined that the Minotaur could reflect
any historical actuality at all and yet clearly he does.
Other Greek myths as well may have some historical connection that we cannot yet see.
So in this lecture we finished our examination of the myth of Theseus by looking at some
possible interpretations of his encounter with the Minotaur and discussing the possible
connection with Minoan and Mycenaean culture.
In our next myth we'll turn to an examination of the greatest Greek hero of all the very
famous Heracles.
