Lecture 16 The Greatest Hero of All
Hello and welcome back to lecture 16.
In the previous two lectures we looked at Theseus, the primary hero of Athenian myth,
and talked about some of the elements of his story and their significance.
In this lecture we're going to turn to looking at the greatest Greek hero of all, Heracles.
Now Heracles, who may be more familiar in the Latin form of his name Hercules, is not
just the greatest hero within Greek myth itself, he's also I think it's fair to say the most
famous hero of classical myth on into the modern day.
He still shows up in things such as the recent Disney movie, there's a television series
on currently about Hercules, so he's a hero who has continued to be a figure in popular
imagination up to our own day.
He was the son of Zeus and a mortal woman named Alcmini, and unlike many heroes such
as Theseus, who are associated primarily with one particular city, as Theseus is with Athens,
Heracles is often called a Pan-Hellenic hero, which simply means that he's a hero claimed
by all of Greece.
He's not associated primarily with one particular city, rather he's worshiped throughout Greece
by most, if not all, Greek people.
He's mentioned as the great Pan-Hellenic hero, Heracles is mentioned all over the place
in Greek literature, references to him show up in epic, in tragedy, in history, and in
most other genres of Greek and Roman literature.
None of these references tell his complete story.
Often an author will simply allude to him, will use him as a point of comparison for
someone or something else, because Heracles is so well known he can be referred to in
that very elusive sense without any explanation of what exactly it is that the author is referring
to.
Fortunately for us, Apollodorus in the library of Greek mythology gives a fairly full account
of Heracles' life, which allows us to understand these elusive references to him and other
authors.
And Apollodorus, by the way, also gives us an account of Theseus' life, which is where
we get a good deal of our information about Theseus.
Now like many heroes, Heracles has a conception and a babyhood that are fraught with difficulties
or at least with unusual elements.
As I already said, his father is Zeus and his mother is the human woman, Alcmini.
Heracles is conceived when Zeus tricks Alcmini into thinking that he is actually her husband,
Amphitrion.
Amphitrion was away at war and Zeus appeared to Alcmini disguised as Amphitrion.
Remember a god can appear in any guys he chooses.
So Alcmini went to bed with Zeus thinking that her husband was home unexpectedly from
the war.
The next day, the real Amphitrion came home and there was a rather surprising scene in
which Amphitrion couldn't understand why Alcmini was not happier and more surprised to see
him.
And Alcmini couldn't understand why Amphitrion insisted that he hadn't been home for ages,
but eventually they figured out that it must have been a god who had visited Alcmini the
day before.
So Alcmini conceived Heracles by Zeus thinking that it was her husband Amphitrion and she
conceived Heracles twin Iphacles the next night by Amphitrion.
So Heracles has a twin brother who is actually only his half brother.
They're conceived on successive nights.
Iphacles is a perfectly normal everyday human being.
He's not exceptionally brave, exceptionally strong or in any other way marked out for unusual
status as Heracles is.
This story very clearly recalls Theseus' dual parentage by Aegius and Poseidon.
And I think it's instructive to look at the difference.
As I talked about last time, Theseus has to be both a legitimate king of Athens and the
son of a god.
And so since he needs to fulfill both of those functions, he's given two separate fathers
and the decision is never made which one is really his father.
Heracles is not the king of any particular city.
He's not directly associated with any particular city.
So there isn't the same need to have him the son of an actual legitimate human father.
Therefore the human father's role in his conception is displaced under the brother Iphacles and
Heracles is unquestionably and without doubt the son of Zeus.
Now as I mentioned early on in the course, Hera always hated Zeus's sons by other females
particularly by human females and she had a particular detestation for Heracles.
This hatred of Heracles on the part of Hera reflects the fact that Heracles is destined
to be the greatest hero ever.
Therefore he incurs the most hatred and jealousy from Zeus's wife Hera.
She sabotages him even from before his birth.
She's out to make trouble for him and make life difficult for him from the very beginning
from before the day of his birth.
When Heracles was about to be born Zeus declared or Zeus decreed that on this particular day
there would be born a descendant of Perseus the great hero Perseus who Zeus said would
rule over the city Mycenae.
Now Hera knew that Zeus meant Heracles.
Heracles was supposed to be born that particular day but Zeus did not actually say Heracles.
He simply said a descendant of Perseus.
So Hera persuaded the goddess of childbirth who was after all Hera's daughter to keep
alchemy in labor longer than she should have been and to hasten the birth of a cousin of
Heracles a man named Eurystheus also a descendant of Perseus.
Thus Eurystheus is born on the day when Heracles should have been born and Zeus's decree that
on this day shall be born a descendant of Perseus who will rule over Mycenae gets displaced
onto Eurystheus though Zeus intended it for Heracles.
So that's the first time that Hera steps in and sabotages Heracles.
Now interestingly enough as people often notice when they've read a good bit of Greek literature
Heracles' name seems to have some connection with the name Hera.
The first two syllables are exactly the same.
The clays element is similar to the word or the same word actually as kleos which means
glory.
So Heracles' name seems in some way to have something to do with glory and with Hera.
Some scholars have tried to say it means the glory of Hera but that seems to make no sense
whatsoever since Hera hates him and persecutes him.
I think a better suggestion is to read Heracles' name as meaning glorious through Hera.
Heracles achieves his glory because of all the hardships that Hera forces him into because
of the actions he has to take to overcome those hardships.
Or in a sense he receives glory through Hera or is glorious through Hera.
Even as a baby Heracles showed great strength and courage.
His first real noteworthy deed was when Hera sent two snakes to kill him in his crib and
the baby Heracles instead of being frightened strangled the snakes with his bare hands.
Iphicles is often shown in artistic representations of this.
Iphicles is cowering off in one side of the crib looking like a normal baby and little
Heracles is sitting bold upright strangling the snakes.
So from babyhood on Heracles was clearly very unusual and not just the unusually courageous
but unusually strong as well.
When he reached maturity Heracles was characterized not only by exceptional strength and courage
but also by exceptional or excessive appetites and powers in other regards as well.
He's characterized by extremes of sexual appetite, of hunger and thirst and of rage.
His first adventure as a young man involves his encounter with 50 daughters of a king
named Thespios.
Heracles is 18 years old at the time.
He spends the night with King Thespios and supposedly has sex with all 50 of Thespios's
daughters.
According to some authors one daughter per night for 50 continuous nights but according
to most authors all 50 on the same night.
So Heracles clearly has both exceptional sexual desire and exceptional sexual abilities
or prowess.
His appetite for food and drink is no less voracious.
There are various stories particularly by comic authors that refer to Heracles as a
kind of prototypical glutton and drunkard.
Someone who eats and drinks way way way too much very excessively.
On a less comic level Heracles is also noted for excessive passions including the passion
of rage.
There are various times when he gives way to excessive rage even to the extent of madness.
The madness is usually most likely sent by Hera.
And the most famous such episode of madness Heracles kills his own children by his first
wife Magara and perhaps kills the wife as well.
Authorities differ on that.
And so Heracles is susceptible to extreme rage in which he does things that normally
he would not do.
It's because of the killing of these children that he undertakes his famous 12 labors.
After Heracles kills his children he goes to the oracle at Delphi to ask the Pythia
what he should do to cleanse himself of this terrible crime.
How he can expiate the guilt that he's incurred for killing his children.
The Pythia tells him that he must serve his cousin Eurystheus, that cousin who was born
on the day Heracles should have been born as a slave in effect for 12 years and must
perform whatever labors Eurystheus orders him to perform during that time.
The Pythia also promises Heracles that if he successfully accomplishes the labors that
Eurystheus sets him, his reward will be immortality, a very, very unusual aspect of Heracles story
that we'll come back to in a few minutes.
Now the 12 labors Heracles performs are clear examples of the test and quest type of hero
tale, the type of tale we talked about in the first lecture on Theseus.
Just as Theseus performs six labors, Heracles performs 12.
In many ways, by the way, many scholars think that Theseus is almost a kind of echo of or
modeled on Heracles, that Theseus is to Athens as Heracles is to Greece in general.
And so if Heracles has 12 labors, Theseus has got to have at least six.
That sort of parallelism seems to be very clearly at work in the Theseus story.
Heracles undertakes 12 labors that are characterized by an increasing degree of difficulty as the
labors proceed and by increasing distances that Heracles must travel to perform them.
Each one of the labors he undertakes would have been impossible for a lesser man.
Many of them would have been fatal for a lesser man.
Heracles manages to successfully accomplish them all.
And the labors fall into three clearly recognizable groups.
The first six take place in the Peloponnesus, the main area of Greece, the central area
of Greece, and involve animals.
The second group, labors seven through nine, take place a little bit further away, still
in the Greek-speaking area of the world, but further away from central Greece in the first
six.
The final three labors, labors 10 through 12, take place in the far west and seem to
have to do with issues of mortality and immortality.
The first six, the Peloponnesus labors, involve animals.
With the exception of labor number two, the Hydra, these animals are not mythical or imaginary
monsters.
They're regular everyday animals, but each of them has some extraordinary attribute
or ability that makes them exceptionally difficult to overcome or exceptionally dangerous.
To run through them very quickly, the first labor involves killing the Neemian lion.
This lion is invulnerable to wounds that would pierce it.
It cannot be pierced by arrow, spear, sword, or any other sharp object.
Heracles clubs it to death and then uses its own claws to skin it.
And after he has skinned the Neemian lion, he takes the lion's skin as his cloak, and
this becomes his most recognizable attribute in art.
Heracles normally carries his club and wears his lion's skin cloak, and the cloak is usually
shown with Heracles' face looking out from between the lion's jaws, so the lion's head
becomes the hood of his cloak.
The second labor involves killing the Lernaean Hydra.
The Hydra was a snake with nine heads.
One head was immortal, which makes it very difficult to kill the Hydra.
To make it even more difficult, whenever Heracles cut off one of the Hydra's heads, two more
would grow in its place, so that the more he tried to kill this monster, the more powerful
the monster became.
Finally he enlisted the help of his nephew Eolaus, Ithacles' son.
When Heracles cut off the head of one of the Hydra's heads, his nephew would cauterize
the neck to keep the heads from growing back.
And when Heracles cut off the immortal head, what he did with it was take it and bury it
under a boulder, so he overcame the Hydra.
The third labor involves the Carinian hind, or deer, a deer with golden antlers sacred
to Artemis.
The only danger there is that Artemis might be angered by Heracles injuring her deer,
so instead he captures it and takes it back to his cousin Eurystheus alive.
He also, in labor four, captures a very dangerous boar, the Aramanthian boar, and takes it back
to Eurystheus.
There are some wonderful examples of artwork in which Eurystheus is hiding inside a huge
storage jar to try to avoid the Aramanthian boar that Heracles is bringing back to him
at Eurystheus' command.
Labor number five, my own personal favorite, because I rode horses a lot as a child and
have cleaned many a stable myself, labor number five is the labor of the Augean stables.
Stables which had never been cleaned in all the years they had existed, and in order to
clean them, Heracles diverted to rivers, which he made flow through the stables and
wash them out.
Labor number six, the last of the Peloponnesian labors, is the Stemphalian birds.
These birds had feathers, which were arrow sharp, and which they could in effect fire
from their wings.
Heracles kills all of them, either by shooting them with his bow and arrow, or by using a
slingshot.
The next group of three labors, the next group of three labors, as I said, takes place a
little bit further afield and becomes a little bit stranger or more dangerous progressively
as we go on.
The seventh labor had to do with catching the Cretan bull.
This may very well be the same bull that fathered the Minotaur.
We're not sure about that, but some authors say it is.
Heracles caught this bull and brought it back home to Eurystheus.
The eighth labor, the second labor in this second group, involved the mares of Diomedes.
Diomedes was a king of Thrace, an area north of Greece, and had mares who ate human flesh,
very, very dangerous horses.
Heracles has to tame these mares, and as a part of doing so, he feeds Diomedes, their
murderous master, to them to give Diomedes, I suppose, a taste of his own medicine.
The most interesting, in many ways, of this second group of labors is the labor that's
usually called the girdle of Hippolyta.
I tend to call it the belt of Hippolyta because girdle has such a different meaning in modern
English that we're talking about a belt, not about a girdle in the modern sense.
Hippolyta was an Amazon queen, perhaps the very same Hippolyta whom Theseus married, and
Heracles had to go and get her belt, her ornate sash, away from her and bring that back to
Eurystheus.
Obviously, an Amazon queen is not going to hand her belt over to anyone who asks for
it, so the implication is that Heracles had to fight her, overcome her, and forcibly take
the belt away from her.
Now his final three labors, out of the canonical famous twelve labors, all take Heracles to
the very edges of the world, specifically to the far west, and pit him against emblems
of mortality and immortality.
The order of the last two labors is controversial.
The one that I've listed as next to last is sometimes given as the last one in vice versa,
but I list them in the order that I think is most logical, makes the most sense.
The far west, by the way, is itself an area associated with death and immortality.
According to the far west, in Greek myth, tends to indicate in some way approaching
the land of the dead or leaving the land of the living, so the very location of these
last three labors, in part, indicates that they're concerned with mortality and immortality.
In the first of these three labors, the connection is perhaps not so obvious.
This one, labor number ten, involves the cattle of Geraion.
Geraion is a monster who lives in the far west triple-bodied.
He's one monster, but he has three bodies.
Heracles has to fight him, defeat him, and steal his cattle, and, of course, drive them
back home to Eurystheus.
The eleventh labor, called the Apples of the Hesperides, takes Heracles even further afield.
The Hesperides are three goddesses, daughters of night, who live on an island in the far
west.
Their name, Hesperides, simply means daughters of the west, actually, and they have a tree
guarded by a dragon.
On the tree grow golden apples.
Many authors seem to indicate that these golden apples are themselves, in some way, food of
immortality, that if you ate these apples, you would gain immortality.
Heracles has to not only get past the Hesperides, but past the dragon to retrieve these apples.
He does so with the help of Atlas.
Atlas Prometheus' brother is a titan who was condemned to hold the sky upon his shoulders.
Heracles supposedly made a deal with Atlas that he, Heracles, would hold the sky for
a period while Atlas went to get the apples.
Atlas did this, came back to Heracles with the three golden apples, and in effect said,
but thank you very much, I have no intention of taking the sky back, you can keep it.
Thereupon Heracles said, sadly, well Atlas, you've got the better of me, but please, my
shoulders are really sore.
Would you take the sky back just for a minute while I fold up my lion skin cape and make
a pad for my shoulders?
Atlas did take the sky back, Heracles said, well, thank you very much, picked up the apples
and went on his merry way, so Atlas is still holding the sky.
The final labor is the labor of Cerberus, the three-headed dog of the underworld.
His name ought to be pronounced Kerberus, by the way, but it's become so famous in English
as Cerberus that that's how I pronounce it.
Heracles descended to Tartarus to fetch this three-headed guard dog of the underworld,
and this is the clearest example of Heracles being pitted against the forces of death,
to be able to go into the underworld, steal the guard dog who is there to keep souls from
getting out and people from getting in, and bring the dog back with him is pretty clearly
emblematic of a conquest of death.
And of course, he takes Cerberus back with him to Eurystheus, who has no idea what to
do with the dog, lets him go, and Cerberus finds his way back to Tartarus where he belongs.
And it's during this episode, of course, that Heracles frees Theseus from the underworld.
Now along with these 12 canonical labors so-called, Heracles has all sorts of other adventures
which are often called the par erga or side works in Greece, in Greek.
Many times when he's on his way to perform a labor, he turns aside and has another adventure
while he's on his way to the labor.
And throughout all of these, there's some notable characteristics of Heracles that
are worth bringing out here.
First of all, unlike most other heroes that we encounter in Greek myth, Heracles is neither
primarily a warrior nor primarily a king.
It's clear, both from his labors and from his par erga, that his primary role, his main
reason for existence, is to be a fighter of animals and of mythical monsters.
That seems to be what he is there for.
Unlike Achilles, who is a great warrior or king such as Oedipus, Theseus, Agamemnon,
and others, Heracles exists to fight animals.
And one interpretation of this, there are probably many possible ones.
But one primary interpretation of this is that Heracles represents the spread of Greek
culture, that as Greek civilization came into contact with other civilizations throughout
the ancient world, and as Greek civilization spread through colonies that were planted
in other places.
So Heracles is imagined as traveling in his labors ever further afield, ever further away
from Greece, and during these travels, killing monsters and overcoming wild animals as he
goes.
Again, a comparison with Theseus is helpful.
Remember how I talked about Theseus's killing of the monsters and brigands on his way to
Athens as representing freeing Attica of dangers for travelers and so forth.
Similarly, Heracles encounters with animals and monsters can be read as representing the
humanizing, so to speak, of unknown lands.
The Greek assumption was that their civilization was superior, that when they took Greek civilization
to other lands, they were somehow improving, civilizing, humanizing those other lands.
And Heracles may represent that in his role as a Panhellenic hero.
Perhaps the most notable aspect of Heracles is that he is one of the very few humans to
successfully achieve immortality and become a god.
And he does become a real genuine god, not just a minor god, but a real god.
He joins the Olympians on Olympus.
He marries Hebe, daughter of Zeus, and Hera.
How does this come about?
Well, his road to immortality is caused not by exceptional goodness, despite what modern
reworkers of his story often try to imply, but rather by exceptional suffering and exceptional
wrongdoing.
His death is caused immediately by his wife, Dayanera.
He marries her after the death of his first wife, Magara.
He marries Dayanera, but his marriage to her is beset by difficulties from the very beginning.
When Heracles first tries to marry Dayanera or wants to marry her, he has to wrestle a
river god in order to win her hand, and this river god has the head of a bull.
So the river god whom Heracles asks to wrestle is himself a part animal monster.
After Heracles is married Dayanera and is taking her home with him, they have to cross
another river, which is guarded by a centaur that is a creature that's a horse in its body
and a man from the waist up where the horse would have its neck and head.
This centaur, Nessos, attempts to rape Dayanera, and Heracles in vengeance kills Nessos, shoots
him with an arrow.
He shoots the centaur with an arrow that was dipped in the Hydra's venom, which makes
it irrevocably poisonous.
Now as Nessos is dying, the centaur persuades Dayanera that she should catch and save some
of his blood, and if Heracles ever loses interest in Dayanera, Nessos tells her that his blood
will act as a love charm.
Dayanera, for whatever reason, believes this.
There's no good reason to think that Nessos would be friendlily inclined towards Dayanera
and Heracles, but Dayanera does believe him.
She keeps his blood, and years later when Heracles does in fact lose interest in Dayanera
and wants to marry another woman, Dayanera gives Heracles a robe smeared with Nessos's
blood, with the centaur's blood.
Heracles puts the robe on, and it begins to burn and eat away his flesh.
It does not kill him, but it begins to devour his flesh.
The centaur's blood sounds almost like some kind of acid, hideously painful and hideously
destructive.
In agony, Heracles has a funeral pyre built.
He mounts the funeral pyre and voluntarily emulates himself, burns himself to death to
escape from the agony of the robe that Dayanera has given him.
And this is the unusual element here.
Only his body dies, his suke, his psyche, his soul, his better part, however you want
to put it, becomes a God, goes to Mount Olympus, and as I already mentioned, marries Hebe.
Now one thing that's going on here very briefly is we've got the fullest statement of an idea
that has been hinted at before, that passing through fire is somehow a necessary part of
becoming immortal for a mortal human being.
Remember when Demeter tried to immortalize Dimofo on, she put the baby in the fireplace.
When Dionysus is born out of Zeus's thigh, he gets into Zeus's thigh in the first place
because his mother, Semile, has been incinerated.
In both of those myths, there seems to be an implication that passing through fire is
a necessary first step.
It may not be sufficient in itself, but it's a necessary first step to achieving immortality.
Here with Heracles, he achieves immortality by burning his mortal body intentionally.
Now so many different stories cluster around Heracles.
I've really only looked at a very, very few of them, that it can be extremely difficult
to construct a unified, coherent picture of this hero.
To come up with a description of the essence of Heracles is not an easy thing to do.
I think the best way to analyze him may be to identify a whole series of polar oppositions
that seem to underlie the myth of Heracles.
There are many different ways in which he is, in himself, a contradictory character,
in which he portrays two contradictory characteristics.
To begin with, he is both admirable and horrifying, both powerful and powerless.
The hero who overcomes monsters, marks out the civilized world, is also the madman who
kills his own children.
So he's both very admirable and very horrifying.
The greatest of Zeus' human sons, nobody disputes that Heracles is the greatest human
son Zeus ever conceived, is also someone who twice serves as a slave to Eurystheus and
to a queen named Omphale.
So he's both the most powerful of humans and one of the most powerless.
Another contradiction, he is supremely ill-fated and, at the same time, supremely fortunate.
He's persecuted by Hera, as we saw, from before his birth and throughout his life.
And he dies shamefully.
Being killed by your wife would be considered a very shameful death for a Greek hero.
He dies shamefully and in great agony.
If you just look at that, persecuted by Hera from before birth and throughout his life,
finally killed by his wife and dying in great agony, you could say this is the most ill-fated
unlucky man who ever lived.
But this all too human, all too ill-fated hero also is the one human who achieves immortality
and becomes a god.
So there, he's the most fortunate imaginable man.
And I think it's interesting that he is offered sacrifice in Greek culture, Heracles
is sacrificed to both as a hero and as a god.
The ceremonies of sacrifice were different for heroes and for gods.
Heracles continues to receive both kinds of sacrifice, which I think indicates a recognition
that when he becomes a god, he does not lose his hero status.
He is both, both the unfortunate hero and the fortunate god.
And of course, these two sides of him are summed up in the fact that Hera allows him
to marry her own daughter Hebe.
Another contradiction, he both resists death and intentionally embraces it.
The last three labors are all, as I talked about in some sense, conquests of death.
And another story, he wrestles and defeats death himself.
When death comes to get a woman who is volunteered to die in place of her husband, Heracles
meets death at her bedroom door, wrestles him and sends him packing.
So Heracles has these stories in which he overcomes death.
And yet at the end of his life, he voluntarily embraces death.
Another contradiction, he's both a serious, even tragic figure, as we've been talking
about, but he's also a comic figure of excess, the glutton, the drunkard, the man with the
voracious sexual appetite.
He's both masculine and feminine.
He is the super macho masculine hero throughout most of his stories, but when he's a slave
to Queen Omphale, he dresses in women's clothes and does women's work, including spinning
and weaving.
Now, syncretism, again, that means gathering together of various different narrative traditions
around one hero may account for some of these differences, but I don't think it's sufficient
to explain all of them.
I think theoretical interpretations are more satisfactory here.
For example, two very quick suggestions.
Heracles can be read as a kind of everyman figure who clearly displays a Jungian shadow
side.
We can see in him both our best potential and our worst potential.
Or perhaps even more interestingly, he can be seen as embodying and thus mediating between
nature and culture.
His brutish, excessive, violent side can be seen as representing nature.
His civilizing side, the side in which he overcomes monsters and eventually overcomes
even death itself, can be seen as representing culture.
And if we read him that way, then this greatest Greek hero mediates that opposition which
lies behind so much Greek thought between nature and culture.
So in this lecture, we've looked all too briefly at the greatest Greek hero, Heracles.
In the next lecture, we'll turn to look at the most famous episode of Greek myth, the
Trojan War.
