Hello, and welcome back to lecture 17.
In the previous lecture, we looked at Heracles, the most famous hero of Greek myth.
In this lecture, we're going to turn to the Trojan War, the most famous episode of Greek
myth.
The Trojan War is still the episode of classical myth that most people know most about.
Even people who know almost nothing about classical myth at all have probably heard
of the Trojan War, probably are at least vaguely familiar with the idea of the Trojan
Horse, and maybe even know the names of some of the characters of this myth, such as Helen,
Achilles, Hector, and maybe others as well.
This fame of the Trojan War results from the fact that it was considered an especially
important event by the Greeks and Romans themselves, and therefore played an especially important
role in classical literature.
The Greeks of the classical age, and following them the Romans, saw the Trojan War as the
episode that marked the end of the heroic age and the beginning of purely human history.
To recap, Hesiod's depiction of things again, the Trojan War is the time at which the age
of heroes or the race of heroes ends and the iron race begins.
And other authors, aside from Hesiod and classical Greek thought in general, as far
as we can tell, agreed with this.
The Trojan War marks the end of the time in which heroes existed and performed their
adventures.
Heroic myth actually ends about a generation after the Trojan War.
There's a slow petering out of mythic stories.
There are some stories, some myths about the sons of Trojan War heroes, but none so far
as I know about their grandchildren or great-grandchildren.
So after the Trojan War and the generation immediately following, after that, normal,
everyday, regular human humans appear on the scene and normal, everyday, regular human
history takes over from myth.
Now, the Greeks themselves would not have expressed this as a difference between myth
and history or a dividing line between myth and history.
Those are modern concepts that I'm using to describe what's going on.
But the Greeks themselves did identify a change, a difference, and they did see the
Trojan War as the point at which the heroes disappear and the kind of actions, the kind
of interactions with the gods, for instance, that the heroes have end with or shortly after
the Trojan War.
Furthermore, the heroes of the Trojan War were not only seen as the last of the great
race of heroes.
They were often very frequently claimed as ancestors by great families in the classical
age.
To be able to trace your descent back to a hero of the Trojan War was rather like an
American being able to say that an ancestor came over on the Mayflower.
It gave you a certain cachet, and so the heroes of the Trojan War were identified as ancestors
of people living in modern day, by that I mean 5th century BC, Greece.
So the Trojan War, thus, is what's often called a liminal episode, a threshold episode,
an episode that looks in two directions at once.
It looks back to myth and the great age of heroes, but it also looks forward into human
society since those heroes are considered ancestors of great human families.
Just as the heroes perhaps mediate between gods and humans, between the categories immortal
and mortal, as I suggested before, so too perhaps the Trojan War can be seen as mediating
between myth and history, or to put it in more correct ancient Greek terms, between
the age of heroes and the Iron Age, the Iron Race.
So it's a liminal or mediating episode in many regards.
And it's probably because of this important liminal nature of the Trojan War that it became
the most fruitful episode of all Greek mythology for literature.
By that I mean the episode of Greek mythology which appears in the most literature that
we have existing today, and as far as we can tell from titles of lost works, it was also
the most common episode to appear in literature that no longer exists from this time period.
Now the most obvious example of the Trojan War in literature is, of course, the two Greek
epics, the Iliad and the Odyssey, both of which deal with episodes either during or after
the Trojan War.
Similarly, the great Roman epic, Virgil's Aeneid, deals with events that happened after
the Trojan War.
But it's not just an epic that the Trojan War is crucially important.
Many of the most famous Greek tragedies as well, the tragedies that were written in
the 5th century BC by Escalus, Sophocles and Euripides, also deal with either the Trojan
War or its immediate aftermath or the events immediately leading up to it.
There are 32 surviving Greek tragedies.
Of those, nine deal with Trojan War subjects, so that's just over a fourth.
And that's a remarkably high percentage to deal with one main mythic episode when you
consider all the things that happen in the totality of classical myth.
So the Trojan War is exceptionally well represented in literature, which means that it continued
to be in some regards the primary classical myth for later Western culture as well.
Because where do we get what we know about classical myth, we get it from literature.
So if the Trojan War is especially well represented in literature, we are naturally going to know
more about it than we know about many other episodes of classical myth.
But despite, or I suppose perhaps because of, the importance of this myth for Greek culture,
there is no major surviving ancient work of literature that tells the entire story
of the Trojan War.
We don't have a great epic describing what happened in the war from beginning to end.
Rather the Homeric epics deal with only small portions of the overall Trojan War story.
The Iliad focuses on events that happened during the last year of the war.
The Odyssey deals with Odysseus' further adventures after the war.
There were other Greek epic poems that filled out the rest of the story of the Trojan War,
but those no longer exist.
The Iliad, the Roman epic, recounts the wanderings of the Trojan prince Ilias after the defeat
of Troy and describes his eventual arrival in Italy where he became ancestor of the
Romans.
And for trying to reconstruct the Trojan War myth, the Iliad is particularly valuable to
us because it includes the fullest description of the sack of Troy of what happened on the
fateful night when the Greeks came out of the Trojan horse and destroyed the city of
Troy.
The tragedies tell us even less about the war overall, give us even less of an overall
picture of the war than do the epics.
The tragedies tend to focus on specific incidents of one or two days frequently or specific
individuals or on the effects of the war on noncombatant groups.
So all of these forms of literature assume in their audience a very full knowledge of
the story of the Trojan War so that they can hone in on fairly small episodes and develop
those at great length.
Fortunately for us, as is often the case, Apollodorus gives us a good summary of the
overall story which allows us to reconstruct the background against which to read the epics,
the tragedies and other such works.
But many of the details that we know about the Trojan War are gleaned not from Apollodorus's
summary but from the other surviving works of literature which means there must be many
more details, many other episodes that at one point had been very fully filled out which
we no longer have access to.
Now the basic story of the Trojan War, what happened, when, where and why, is basically
quite simple.
It's the many allied stories, the many other myths that get connected to it, pulled into
it so to speak that make it quite complex.
The basic story of the Trojan War is more or less as follows.
The most beautiful woman in the world, Helen, daughter of Zeus and wife of the Greek king
Menelaus, was abducted by the Trojan prince, Paris.
He ran away with Helen and took her back to Troy with him.
Under the command of Menelaus' elder brother Agamemnon, the Greeks mustered an army to
go to Troy and fight for the return of Helen.
This war between the Greeks and the Trojans, which we call the Trojan War, lasted for ten
years.
For most of those ten years, the fighting was fairly evenly balanced and each side had
its foremost great warrior.
Achilles was the great warrior of the Greeks, Hector was the great warrior of the Trojans.
As the war lasted for ten years, the fighting was fairly evenly balanced, but eventually
the great Trojan warrior Hector was killed by Achilles, and Achilles was himself in
turn killed by Paris, the same Paris who had abducted Helen and started the whole thing
going.
Finally, after ten years of fighting that was getting them basically nowhere, the Greeks
resorted to trickery to overcome the Trojans.
They used the famous ruse of the Trojan horse, which was invented by the hero Odysseus who
is the cleverest of the Greek heroes.
Hiding their warriors in the Trojan horse, the Greeks gained access to the city and when
night fell they sacked the city by night.
The traditional date for these events, the traditional date for the destruction of Troy
was 1184 B.C.
That was the year that the classical Greeks themselves identified as the year that Troy
fell, although of course they did not call it 1184 B.C.
They used their own chronological system, but that's the year that was the traditional
date of the fall of Troy, and that is in itself an interesting fact because remember what
we've talked about with Mycenaean culture.
If Mycenaean culture is definitely in its waning period, in its declining period by
1100 B.C., a date of the fall of Troy of 1184 fits pretty well.
That's the last great adventure of the heroic age.
This again gives support to the idea that the heroic age in some sense represents in
myth the actualities of Mycenaean culture, and the Trojan war is both the last great
act of Mycenaean culture and the last great episode of the heroic age in myth.
Just as the heroes Theseus, Heracles and others attracted many elaborate stories to themselves
and thereby became extremely complicated to reconstruct chronologies for or to summarize
briefly.
So also this basic story of the Trojan war attracted many related stories and elaborations
over the centuries.
One such connected story has to do with the birth of Achilles and its being in effect
the cause of the war, the first and foremost cause of the war in the first place.
The ultimate cause of the war was a prophecy about Achilles, a prophecy that was given
before Achilles was even conceived.
Achilles' mother was Thetis, a sea goddess, and Thetis was desired both by Zeus and by
other gods until they learned of a prophecy concerning Thetis, a prophecy that said she
would bear a son who would be greater than his father.
Very similar to the story about Metis that we talked about in Theogony, that she would
have a son who would overthrow his father.
This kind of repeating of the same basic narrative element in different myths is called doubling
or these repetitions can be called doublets.
So in this regard, Thetis is a doublet of Metis.
There's a prophecy that Thetis is going to have a son who will be greater than his father.
This means that none of the gods want to risk mating with her, desirable though she may
be.
None of the gods want a son who will overthrow them when he comes to maturity.
Thetis decides that the only safe thing to do, the only way to handle the time bomb that
Thetis represents is to marry her off to a human being.
Because human beings, oddly enough, like for their sons to be better than they are.
So a human father is not going to be threatened by the idea that his son will be greater
than he.
So this makes sense from Zeus' point of view and the human being he picks for the purpose
is a man named Peleus.
However, Thetis is less than pleased with the idea that she will be married to a human
being.
Remember from the Homeric hymn to Aphrodite, we talked about how that was seen as degrading
to a goddess.
Bearing a child to a human being, sexual relations with a human being were seen as degrading.
So to try to placate Thetis, Zeus hosted a great magnificent wedding feast for her
and invited all of the gods and goddesses to come to the wedding of Peleus and Thetis.
Only one goddess was left out.
That was the goddess Eris, the goddess who personifies strife, discord, quarrel-someness.
This is an area where an allegorical interpretation of the myth almost demands to be given.
If you're hosting a marriage feast for someone who doesn't particularly want to get married
and you're trying to make everyone as happy as possible and trying to make sure that things
go smoothly, the last thing in the world you want at that marriage feast is strife, discord,
quarrel-someness, trouble.
And so the exclusion of Eris can be read allegorically as trying to keep discord out of the picture,
which of course doesn't work.
Eris is offended at not being invited and so she makes trouble by tossing down onto the
banquet table.
When all the goddesses and gods are seated there, Eris tosses down onto the table a golden
apple inscribed in Greek, te calliste, which in Greek means for the fairest female.
Greek is a language with gender, so the idea that this is for a female is right there in
the word itself.
For the fairest, says the apple, Hera, Athena and Aphrodite each say, ah, a gift for me.
How nice.
And reach out to pick the apple up.
So each one of those three goddesses assumes an apple identified for the most beautiful,
for the fairest must belong to her.
Now Zeus is not going to want to judge between those three particular goddesses.
Think about the three they are, Hera is his wife with whom he has a rather troubled relationship
at the best of times, Athena is his favorite daughter born from his own brow, and Aphrodite
is Aphrodite, who is known for making trouble for Zeus whenever she can.
So rather than having to decide which one of these three goddesses is the most beautiful,
he does what the gods so frequently do in myth.
He pushes a difficult task off onto a human being and picks the Trojan prince, Paris,
to judge among the three goddesses.
The judgment of Paris provides the immediate cause for the war because each goddess offers
Paris a bribe if he will pick her.
They are not content to simply stand back and let Paris look at them and decide who is
most beautiful.
They try to bribe him.
Hera offers Paris sovereignty over many cities, political power if he will choose her.
Athena offers him great prowess in battle.
She will make him the greatest warrior who has ever lived if he chooses her.
Aphrodite offers him the most beautiful woman in the world as his wife if he will choose
her.
And in a stunning reversal of the values that Greek culture would have considered important
for a young man, Paris goes for sexual pleasure over political power or power in battle and
awards the apple to Aphrodite as the most beautiful among the goddesses, therefore guaranteeing
himself the most beautiful woman in the world as his wife.
But the most beautiful woman in the world is Helen.
And Helen is already married.
This is why Paris goes to Sparta where Helen and Menelaus live and either seduces or flat
out kidnaps Helen, different sources disagree on whether she was a willing participant or
not, takes her back to Troy with him as his wife.
And this of course leads to Menelaus' determination to get Helen back and to the Trojan War itself.
Now this so-called judgment of Paris is not directly mentioned in either the Iliad or
the Odyssey.
When scholars disagree on whether Homer was aware of this story or not, I personally think
that he was.
There are several hints in the Iliad that I think indicate that Homer did know about
the judgment of Paris, but it's not absolutely certain.
Some scholars think he did not.
And that's an interesting reminder, I think, that myth develops.
Myth is not static, as I talked about in the very first lecture.
The version that we happen to have of a myth is not necessarily the only version in which
that myth ever existed or even the most important version.
Myth develops over centuries.
It grows over centuries.
It's quite possible that when the Iliad and the Odyssey were written down, the story of
the judgment of Paris had not yet developed, but that later on, as the story of the Trojan
War continued to be told, this story was added to it as an explanation of why Paris went
to fetch Helen in the first place.
One very notable point about this addition of the judgment of Paris story to the basic
Trojan War narrative is that it involves a chronological inconsistency that I have to
admit I had been teaching myth for some years before I ever noticed, and I didn't actually
notice it.
A student raised his hand in class one day and asked me about this chronological inconsistency
and floored me completely because I had no answer.
But here it is, here's what my student thought of that had never occurred to me.
Achilles was the most important Greek warrior in the Trojan War.
Was old enough not only to fight in the war, but old enough that he had a grown son who
fought in the war as well, near the end of the war, a young man named Neoptolamus.
But the apple of discord, which sparked the Trojan War, was thrown under the banquet table
at the marriage feast of Achilles' parents.
So there's a gap of about 20 or 25 years that doesn't fit.
If Achilles fathered his son at the earliest possible age, let's say Achilles was 14 when
he fathered Neoptolamus, we still come out to about 20 or 25 years bare minimum missing
in the chronology of the story.
Now once a student had asked me about this, I tried to figure out what was going on and
I found all sorts of ingenious explanations because this has occurred to other people
throughout the centuries.
And some people have tried to say things like, well, the gods live outside human time.
So Hera, Athena, and Aphrodite smoldered and stewed over which was the most beautiful
for 20 or 30 years before Zeus got around to having the judgment of Paris.
I think that's a mistaken approach.
I think, again, we simply have to say as we did with Theseus, what we've got here is
a chronological inconsistency that simply isn't going to work, that there isn't any
way to get rid of this chronological inconsistency.
All we can do is note it, look at it, and think about what it tells us about the way
myth works, that the gathering together of various different stories is sometimes going
to entail problems like this, and that's simply part of what we're dealing with when
we deal with myth.
Now the events leading up to the war are also very closely connected with the whole story
of the family of Agamemnon and Menelaus.
So another area of myth that has been more or less pulled into the Trojan War story or
has developed along with the Trojan War story is the whole story of Agamemnon's family,
which we'll talk about in more detail in the next lecture.
The entire past and future of Agamemnon and Menelaus' family is bound up with this war.
The most obvious connection, of course, is that Helen is Menelaus' wife and her half-sister
Clytemnestra is Agamemnon's wife.
So the abduction of Helen is an affront against the family of Agamemnon and Menelaus.
And Helen is abducted since Agamemnon is the elder brother.
Responsibility falls on him to lead the expedition to Troy to get Helen back.
This kind of offense against Zenea, against the guest-host relationship, and what Paris
has done is about as bad an offense against the guest-host relationship as you can possibly
imagine, one is not supposed to run off with one's host's wife.
This offense against Zenea is seen as an offense not against Menelaus as an individual,
so much as against the whole family and the honor of the whole family of Menelaus and
Agamemnon.
Agamemnon is the elder, so he is in charge of leading the expedition to Troy to retrieve
Helen.
When Agamemnon's fleet gathers to sail, they gather at a port called Owlis on the eastern
coast of Greece to get ready to sail over to Troy, which is located in modern-day Turkey.
When the fleet gathers to sail, the winds blow against them for an entire month, and
they cannot leave port.
Agamemnon, as the commander-in-chief, asks his seer, his prophet, Calcas, to tell him
what's wrong, to tell him why the winds won't blow.
And Calcas tells Agamemnon that Artemis is angry, and that Artemis demands a sacrifice
from Agamemnon in order for the winds to blow and the fleet to sail to Troy.
The sacrifice Artemis demands is Agamemnon's eldest daughter, Iphigenia.
So Agamemnon must sacrifice his own child, as though she were an animal, to the goddess
Artemis to get a wind for Troy.
Agamemnon does this.
He makes the decision to kill his own child, sacrifices Iphigenia to Artemis, and the winds
blow so that Agamemnon can, in fact, lead his army to Troy.
Now this is yet another detail, the sacrifice of Iphigenia, that Homer does not mention.
And in this case, it seems pretty clear that at the time the Iliad and the Odyssey were
written down, the story of Iphigenia's sacrifice had not yet developed.
The question of the judgment of Paris is just that, a question.
There's some people who think that it is alluded to in Homer.
There seems to be no illusion whatsoever to any sacrifice of Iphigenia in Homer.
Here we pretty definitely have a later strand of narrative, and we'll see in the next lecture
some of the reasons why that strand of narrative might have developed as it did.
But looking at the overall picture of the Trojan War with the fully developed narrative
that we've been doing, the Greeks expedition to Troy thus begins with a terrible act of
impiety.
Slaughtering a girl as though she were an animal, human sacrifice is a dreadful and
horrifying act, even when it's directly ordered by a goddess as it is by Artemis.
And because the Greeks begin their expedition with this act of impiety, it comes as no
surprise that they also act badly during the sack of Troy at the end of the war.
In fact, the events that occur at the end of the Trojan War, what the Greeks do while
they're sacking the city of Troy, impede the Greeks' attempts to return home.
They commit enough outrages during the sack of Troy that their own attempts to sail back
home again are hampered as revenge brought by the gods against them.
The return to Greece is neither easy nor simple because of this.
The Greeks commit many outrages against the Trojans during the sack of Troy, and all of
these outrages incur the gods' anger, just to mention the three most important ones.
There are many things that the Greeks do, but first of all, King Priam, the king of
the Trojans, an aged and venerable man, is killed at his household altar by Achilles'
son, Neoptalamus.
Priam is holding onto his altar, which ought to make him inviolable, ought to put him under
the gods' protection.
Neoptalamus kills him there at the altar in front of Priam's wife, Hecobus, so that she
sees him killed.
Perhaps even more horrifying, Priam's daughter Cassandra goes to a temple of Athena for refuge
and is embracing the statue of Athena within the temple.
Now, it's important to understand that in Greek culture, when someone is inside a temple
of a god and touching the statue, that person is considered directly under the gods' protection.
That is so strong a belief that there's an account, and this happened in historical time.
This is a real account, or at least we think it is, of a group of people who had retreated
inside a temple in Athens to protect themselves from their enemies.
When they were asked to come out for negotiations, they tied a thread to the statue of the god
and came out holding onto it so that they would still, in a sense, be touching the statue.
They thought that would protect them.
In fact, it didn't.
Their enemies killed them, but their enemies were then under a curse for having killed people
who were under the protection of the goddess because they were holding onto a thread attached
to her statue.
So when Cassandra is actually in Athena's temple, actually with her arms around Athena's
statue, she is directly under protection of Athena.
So when a Greek warrior, Ajax, comes into the temple, drags Cassandra away from Athena's
statue and rapes her in the temple, he has committed about as horrible an outrage in
every regard as one can possibly imagine.
And the fact that it is Athena's temple and Athena is one of the three virgin goddesses
just makes it even worse.
Finally, before they left Troy, the Greeks sacrificed Priam's young daughter, Polyxana,
to the ghost of Achilles.
So their expedition both begins and ends with the sacrifice of an innocent girl.
I think fascinating that Greek literature gives such a horrifying and in many ways realistic
picture of warrior sacking a vulnerable enemy city, gives such a horrifying picture of what
the Greeks themselves did during the Trojan War.
This is not prettied up in any way at all.
Now because of the God's anger, the surviving Greeks suffer many hardships on their way
home.
Agamemnon arrives home to be killed by his wife and lover.
Odysseus spends 10 years wandering, so added to the 10 years of the Trojan War, Odysseus
is away from home for a total of 20 years.
Menelaus and Helen are blown off course on their way back home to Greece and spend seven
years in Egypt.
There are also stories about the surviving Trojans.
The most important of these is Aeneas, the son of Aphrodite and Ancyces, as you'll remember,
and also a cousin of Hector.
The Iliad tells us that Aeneas was destined to survive the Trojan War and found another
city elsewhere.
Roman tradition took that hint in the Iliad and developed it into the idea that Aeneas
made his way to Italy and became the ancestor of the Romans.
Now in all of these connected stories, among other things that we can see, one element
that I think comes out quite clearly is how very complex the interaction is between the
God's commands and individual responsibility.
Over and over again in all of these stories I've been sketching out having to do with
the Trojan War, we see the idea that a God may command something, but that in no way
absolves the individual for responsibility for any actions the individual takes under
the God's command.
The war was inevitable.
With while it was caused by the actions of several individuals, especially Paris, all
of those actions were sanctioned by the gods and thus the individuals could claim necessity.
Paris did not just go off and abduct Helen because he felt like it, Paris went off and
abducted Helen because Aphrodite had told him that Helen was his rightful wife.
So Paris could say, but Aphrodite gave her to me, and yet that in no way absolves Paris
from the guilt that accrues to him for violating the guest-host relationship, for stealing
his host's wife, and that in no way lets his society off the hook.
His whole society suffers terrible repercussions because of Paris's misdeed, despite the fact
that Aphrodite told Paris to do it.
Agamemnon sacrifices his daughter Iphigenia.
That is a terrible transgression.
It's the worst thing a father could possibly do, but he was directly commanded to do it.
Artemis said, for the wind to blow, that's what you must do.
Again, the fact that this transgression was ordered by a goddess does not absolve Agamemnon
from guilt, as we'll see in the next lecture.
The goddesses or gods may tell humans they must do something, but if the action that
they're commanded to do is impious or wrong or a transgression, those humans still suffer
the normal consequences for their actions.
Add to this the concept of fate, that these individuals may be fated to perform the actions
they perform, and we get an extremely complex, many-sided picture indeed.
And again, one in which individual motivations are much less important than individual actions.
We talked about before.
So in this lecture, we've looked at the Trojan War and how it's linked with various other
episodes of myth concerning specific kingdoms and families.
In the next lecture, we'll look in detail at one such family, the so-called House of
Atreus, the family to which Agamemnon and Menelaus belong.
