Lecture 18 The Terrible House of Atreus
Hello and welcome to lecture 18.
In the previous lecture on the Trojan War, we noted how closely interwoven with the
Trojan War story are the myths of the House of Atreus, the family of Agamemnon and Menelaus.
And it's to that family that we're going to turn in this lecture to concentrate on the
story of the House of Atreus.
Now of all the unhappy families who dot the annals of classical myth, and there are many
of them, the House of Atreus is perhaps the worst.
I like to call it the archetypal dysfunctional family, as in this family we have multi-generational
stories of murder, incest, adultery and cannibalism repeated over and over again.
The family labors under a hereditary curse that repeats itself, works itself out again
and is re-established generation after generation.
The concept of a hereditary curse is one that's foreign to our culture.
Very basically the idea is that moral guilt, no less in financial debts, are heritable,
can be inherited.
So just as we think if someone dies with a great deal of debt, of financial debt, that
person's heirs are obligated to pay off the debt.
So the culture reflected in this myth thinks that if someone dies with a great deal of
moral guilt, his heirs will inherit that guilt just as they will inherit his monetary debts.
The sins of the fathers are passed on to their children whether they like it or not.
In the case of the House of Atreus, the hereditary curse manifests itself through and is caused
by inappropriate and excessive intergenerational violence.
In this family, parents kill children and eventually children kill parents.
The curse also exhibits a strong connection with inappropriate eating and inappropriate
sexuality and we'll look at all of those manifestations of the curse, violence, eating
and sexuality throughout the lecture.
The founder of this family was Tantalus, the same Tantalus who we discussed before, the
one who killed his son Pylops, cut him up and fed him to the gods.
So that's the first example of intergenerational violence of a father killing his child, also
the first example of an attempt at inappropriate eating.
It was Tantalus's actions that began the curse on his family and as I mentioned before, Tantalus
was Naiobi's brother.
So right there you see from the very beginning, this is a family that has difficulty in understanding
or abiding by its appropriate position with respect to the gods.
Tantalus tries to trick the gods into eating Pylops's flesh, Naiobi thinks that she is
more worthy of worship than Leto because she has more children, brother and sister both
mistake their own position with respect to the gods.
Now there is a parallel version of Tantalus's story which is much less horrific, rather
than killing Pylops and trying to feed him to the gods, this other version says that
Tantalus tried to steal nectar and ambrosia from the gods, thus in effect to steal immortality
because supposedly if one could drink nectar and eat ambrosia, one would become immortal.
You'll remember in the Homeric hymn to Demeter, Demeter anoints the baby Demophon with ambrosia
before she puts him in the fire and in fact the words nectar and ambrosia both have roots
that seem to have to do with immortality, Nectar seems to mean something along the lines
of not killing and ambrosia is etymologically related to the word immortal even though it
doesn't much look like it.
So both of those substances carry in their very names the idea that they conceal the
essence of immortality.
Well in either case whether we go with the more common and more hair-raising story that
Tantalus killed Pylops and fed him to the gods or if we go with the idea that Tantalus
tried to steal immortality by stealing nectar and ambrosia, in either case Tantalus' transgression
has to do with inappropriate eating, either trying to get the gods to eat Pylops or himself
trying to eat food that belongs to the gods and so his punishment in Tartarus where he
is tormented by eternal hunger and thirst is very appropriate to his transgression.
Pylops, as I mentioned before, was resurrected by the gods but he too incurred a curse upon
himself and upon his descendants.
Now Pylops is an anomaly in a couple of ways in this family.
First off, his wrong actions, his violent actions are not directed against a member
of his own family but rather against his future father-in-law and that father-in-law's
charioteer, a slave named Myrtilus.
Secondly, Pylops does not himself seem to suffer any of the ill effects of the family
curse once that is he's been resurrected.
I suppose being killed by your father could be considered suffering an ill effect but
once Pylops is resurrected he does not later on suffer from the family curse so he's a
little bit anomalous in the overall picture of the family.
But he does, as I said, incur a curse on himself and more importantly on his descendants through
his actions when he wants to marry a woman named Hippodimea, the princess of Pisa.
Hippodimea's father had decreed that in order to marry her a suitor had to defeat him, her
father, in a chariot race.
If the suitor failed to defeat the father in a chariot race the suitor would be killed.
So again this is a fairly common folktale element, it shows up in several other Greek
myths of a task or a feat that has to be achieved in order to marry a young woman and failure
in the feat equates to death.
Pylops wanted to marry Hippodimea but he did not want to die so he decided to win her
hand by trickery, by cheating, rather than taking his chances in the chariot race.
He bribed the charioteer Myrtilus to remove the lynchpins from the king's chariot.
The lynchpins are the ones that hold the wheels onto its axle and to replace them with wax.
This meant of course as soon as the chariot got under way and the wheel heated at all
the wax would melt, the wheel would come off the axle and as it did indeed happen the king
would be killed, thrown out of the chariot and killed.
Now Myrtilus agreed to this on the assumption that Pylops would not only take Myrtilus with
him after the king was dead but also would reward Myrtilus and in fact when the three
Pylops, Hippodimea and Myrtilus fled after the death of Hippodimea's father Myrtilus
assumed that his reward was to be Hippodimea herself.
So when they stopped for the first night Myrtilus tried to have sex with Hippodimea, Pylops
who had not thought that that would be Myrtilus' reward at all and you notice that what Hippodimea
thought doesn't even seem to come up in the story but Pylops who had not thought that
Myrtilus should have access to Hippodimea killed Myrtilus by throwing him over a cliff.
So that's Pylops' act of violence, those two actually, first killing Hippodimea's father
and then killing Myrtilus.
As Myrtilus fell to his death he screamed out a curse against Pylops and all of Pylops's
descendants forever.
So this means that by the time Pylops' children are born they're already suffering under the
weight of a double curse.
They have inherited the familial guilt incurred by their grandfather Tantalus and they are
also directly cursed as Pylops' children by Myrtilus.
Now Pylops has several children but for our purposes the most important are the two brothers
Atreus and Thiestes.
The story of the interactions between these two brothers is extraordinarily complicated
but the basic outline is as follows.
First the brothers quarreled over kingship of the city of Mycenae.
Mycenae was at this point without a king and its people had received an oracle telling
them that they should ask a son of Pylops to be their king, that the family of Pylops
should become the royal family of Mycenae.
Atreus and Thiestes disagree over which of them ought to be the king, which one ought
to be invited to be king of Mycenae.
At Thiestes' suggestion the two brothers agree that the kingship will belong to whichever
one of them has possession of the fleece of a golden lamb.
Now this is not the famous golden fleece that Jason seeks with the Argo.
This is another golden fleece from another lamb.
As it happened, Atreus had such a fleece and therefore agreed to Thiestes' suggestion.
But what Thiestes knew and Atreus did not was that Thiestes had seduced Atreus' wife
Aerope and Aerope therefore gave Thiestes the fleece.
So Thiestes suggests that this should be the deciding point because he knows he can get
his hands on it.
Aerope gives him the fleece, Thiestes says all right then I am king of Mycenae.
Thiestes asks the gods for an omen to indicate whether or not they approve of Thiestes becoming
king and the gods send one of the clearest omens they send anywhere in Greek mythology.
They make the sun set in the east which is a pretty clear sign of displeasure.
Therefore Atreus becomes king and banishes Thiestes.
All might be well at that point except that Atreus apparently brooded on the question
of how Thiestes had got his hands on that golden fleece to begin with and eventually
it dawned on Atreus that Thiestes and Aerope had probably been lovers, as in fact they
had been.
And so Atreus decides to get vengeance on his brother Thiestes for the seduction of
his Atreus' wife.
Atreus summons Thiestes back to Mycenae and tells him to bring his small sons with him.
Thiestes has either two or three sons at this point.
Atreus does this on the pretense of a reconciliation.
He says to Thiestes, let's let bygones be bygones, come back home and bring your sons with you
and we'll have a great feast to celebrate our reconciliation.
When Thiestes and the boys get to Mycenae, Atreus unbeknownst to Thiestes takes Thiestes'
children, Atreus' own nephews, kills them, cuts them up, cooks them, and serves them
to their father Thiestes at the celebratory banquet.
So Thiestes eats the flesh of his own children without knowing what it is that he's doing.
And after he has eaten, Atreus has a platter with the boys' hands and feet brought into
him, lifts the lid of the platter and says to Thiestes, do you recognize what kind of
animal you have eaten?
Thiestes goes back into banishment and obviously curses Atreus and Atreus' descendants.
So Atreus has incurred a curse on himself through his actions.
He's also directly cursed by his brother Thiestes.
Atreus' and Thiestes' deeds reiterate the pattern established by Tantalus and add to
it the element of sexual misconduct as well.
So once again, we have a man killing male children of his bloodline, though in this
case it's Atreus killing his nephews, not his own sons.
But we have an elder generation male killing males of the next generation and doing so
in order to force an unwitting victim into cannibalism.
The gods, in the case of Tantalus killing Pelops, Thiestes, the boy's own father, in
the case of Atreus killing Thiestes' children.
We also have a new thread in the pattern, the adultery of Thiestes and Arepe, which
sets up the idea of sexual misconduct in this family as well, which will continue into
the next generation, as we'll see in a few minutes.
So Atreus and Thiestes have brought together several lines of hideousness.
The cannibalism is now not just cannibalism, but cannibalism of a father against his children,
the murder is reiterated, and the idea of adultery and incestuous adultery at that is
added to the picture.
That's not the only episode of incest in this remarkably unpleasant family.
On the advice of an oracle, Thiestes decides to father a son to take vengeance against
his brother Atreus for what Atreus did to Thiestes' earlier sons.
Thiestes needs a son to be his avenger.
On the advice of an oracle, he begets this son with his own daughter, Pelopia, named
after her grandfather Pelops.
Now versions differ on whether Thiestes intentionally commits incest with Pelopia or not.
Some versions say that the oracle tells him, father a son on your own daughter, and he
does so.
Other versions say that the oracle tells him to go by night to a certain fountain, find
a girl who will be there, and rape her basically, that he does so and finds out lonely later
that it was his own daughter, Pelopia.
In either case, however, he begets a son, this son whose name will be Agistos, is going
to be crucial in the further playing out of the family curse.
So by the time we get to this generation, the generation of Agistos and also of Atreus'
son Agamemnon and Menelaus, we have all the most hideous elements imaginable at play,
murder, rape, incest, adultery, and cannibalism all coming together in this one family.
This means that Atreus' sons, Agamemnon and Menelaus, and for that matter their cousin
Agistos, are dealing with a triple-bodied curse, if not by this time quadruple-bodied,
but certainly a triple-generational curse.
They are affected and cursed by the misdeeds of their great-grandfather Tantalus, their
grandfather Pelops, and their father Atreus.
So they are, without question, doomed to reiterate and re-enact the same pattern of the curse
in their own generation.
Interestingly, Menelaus seems largely to escape this fate, perhaps because he's the younger
brother, perhaps because he is married to Helen, a daughter of Zeus, and as such has
some exceptional status that's hinted at in the Odyssey when Menelaus is told by a prophet
that he and Helen will go to the islands of the blessed rather than going to the underworld
like most dead people do.
But Agamemnon suffers the full brunt of this disastrous curse in his own life, and at this
point we can see Agamemnon's sacrifice of Iphigenia in its full context.
I said in the last lecture that the sacrifice of Iphigenia seems to be unknown to Homer,
but it doesn't seem to be part of the story of the Trojan War as Homer knows it.
It's a later development.
Now that we've seen the pattern established in the family of Agamemnon, the family of
Atreus, Pelops, and Tantalus, we can see why such a story almost inevitably had to develop
around Agamemnon.
Homer may not have known it, the whole story of the house of Atreus, the cursed house of
Atreus, may not have developed by the time of Homer.
But as that story developed, it is almost inevitable that Agamemnon, too, is going to
have to kill one of his children and do so in a terribly distressing way.
And so he does.
The sacrifice of Iphigenia by her father Agamemnon reenacts, restates, and remotivates the family
curse.
That's one of the aspects of this curse.
The reenactment in each generation remotivates the curse.
So it becomes stronger and stronger down the generations.
Now this idea that the sacrifice of Iphigenia is a reenactment of his family curse adds
a greater sense of inevitability to the sacrifice.
Agamemnon is not only acting under the direct command of Artemis when he chooses to sacrifice
his child, but he is also doomed to do so by his own family history.
And yet at the same time, the very fact of this family curse, it seems to me, makes Agamemnon's
action seem even worse.
If ever there was anyone who ought to know what a dreadful thing it is to kill your own
child, and if ever there was anyone who ought to be able to see how doing so brings nothing
but ill effects for your entire family, that someone ought to be Agamemnon.
Of all the men in the world who ought to find some way not to kill his child, you would
think that Agamemnon would have the list.
Here again, we're dealing with the very complex interrelated questions of fate and individual
responsibility.
Agamemnon is a member of a cursed family, and that seems to imply that at least the
eldest son in each generation of this family reenacts the curse whether he wants to or
not.
Agamemnon is also, as are all characters in Greek mythology, undoubtedly given a fate
of his own, and one could say that he is fated to kill his daughter, and yet that does not
in any way negate his individual responsibility and the after effects, the consequences that
he suffers for killing Iphigenia are terrible indeed.
We'll get back to those consequences in just a moment, but there's a little bit more that
I want to say about the sacrifice of Iphigenia herself.
This story, the sacrifice of Iphigenia, does more than simply reiterate the father kills
child motif.
That parallelism with Tantalus killing Pelops and with Atreus killing his nephews is very
clearly there, but there's a further parallelism that isn't so immediately obvious.
The killing of Iphigenia also obliquely raises the related motif of empires feasting, of
inappropriate eating.
Because Iphigenia is not just killed, Iphigenia is sacrificed, and she is sacrificed specifically
in place of an animal.
There are some versions of her myth which make it a little bit more bearable, in which
at the very last moment Artemis substitutes Adir for Iphigenia on the altar, spirits Iphigenia
away to another country where she makes her a priestess of Artemis, so in those versions
the actual sacrificial knife falls on the throat of Adir, not on the throat of Iphigenia,
but in the version that I tend to follow, the version recounted by the playwright Escalus
in his great trilogy, the Orestia, Iphigenia herself is killed, and she is killed as a
sacrifice, i.e. she is killed in place of a sacrificial animal.
Now remember from the discussion of the Prometheus myth in Theogony, way back at the beginning
of the course, we talked about how a sacrificial animal is almost always, almost invariably
eaten, that is the inevitable aftermath of sacrifice.
You sacrifice the animal, burn the bones to the gods to allow them to enjoy the savor
of smoke rising up from the burning bones, but the human worshipers eat the sacrificial
animal.
Now I'm not trying to suggest that in any version of this myth Agamemnon and his followers
sit down and feast on Iphigenia's dead body, they don't, nobody ever says that, it's never
spelled out, but I think implicit right there in the very fact of sacrifice, there is at
least the suggestion of a meal to follow, because that is the inevitable, or not quite
inevitable, but normal consequence of a sacrifice.
There was a form of sacrifice done by very wealthy sacrifices in which the entire animal
was burned on the altar for the god, but only the very wealthy could afford to do that,
and it was normally done only in circumstances of either extreme need or extreme thanksgiving.
It was by the way called a holocaust, that word simply means burning the whole thing,
and it's only in this dreadful 20th century of ours that holocaust has come to have another
and even more horrible meaning.
But normally a sacrificial animal was eaten after the sacrifice, and so the very fact
that Iphigenia is sacrificed sets up almost expectation or the remembrance or the hint
of a feast to follow.
If Iphigenia were a member of any other family than the family of which she is a member,
I might not try to press that idea, but given the family she belongs to, given the eating
of Thaesti's children, given the attempt to serve Pilops to the gods, and the fact that
actually Demeter did eat a little bit of Pilops, then in this family the sacrifice of a daughter,
the offering of a daughter to the gods on an altar does hint at the empires' feasting
that could follow.
So Iphigenia's sacrifice thus mirrors the slaughter of Pilops in two ways.
Each of these can be seen, well, the first most obvious way it mirrors it is, again,
the father killing the child.
But each of these killings can be seen as a particularly horrific inversion of proper
sacrifice and an affront to the gods.
In the case of Pilops, the inversion of the sacrifice is the offering of Pilops rather
than an animal to the gods for them to eat.
In the case of Iphigenia, it's not quite as dreadful, it's simply the offering of Iphigenia
to the gods in the place of an animal without the direct eating.
But in both cases, there's the idea of perverted sacrifice and a direct affront to the gods.
The fact that the sacrifice of Iphigenia is directly ordered by one of the gods, again,
doesn't in any way lessen the horror of it.
Another point to make about the Agamemnon-Mineleus generation is that the secondary motif of
adultery, incestuous adultery, that we saw in the affair between Thaestes and Aerope,
is reiterated in this generation as well.
While Agamemnon is off at war, Clytemnestra becomes the lover of Agistos.
Remember Agistos?
The child born to Thaestes and Thaestes' daughter, Pelopia, to be an Avenger of Thaestes' slaughtered
sons.
Agistos is grown by this time, and he becomes the lover of Clytemnestra, specifically to
try to gain control of Mycenae, specifically to try to take back the kingship of Mycenae
for Thaestes' line.
Remember Atreus and Thaestes quarreled over who should rule Mycenae.
Atreus got the rulership of Mycenae.
It has been inherited by Agamemnon, but Agistos sees Atreus as a usurper, thinks his father
Thaestes should have been ruler all along, and if that were true, then Agistos is the
rightful ruler of Mycenae.
So in Agamemnon's absence, Agistos establishes himself in Mycenae through becoming the lover
of Clytemnestra, Agamemnon's wife.
When Agamemnon returns home from the Trojan War, Clytemnestra and Agistos together kill
him.
So now the theme of murder in this family has moved into a new residence or a new manifestation.
Now we have a wife killing her husband, a cousin killing his cousin, rather than a father
killing children.
That's not the end of it.
Four years later, Agamemnon's son, Orestes, who has grown up in exile, Clytemnestra had
sent him away to grow up elsewhere, Orestes comes back home, and with the help of his
remaining sister, Electra, who has been there all the time, poor thing, Orestes avenges the
death of his father Agamemnon by killing his mother, Clytemnestra, and her lover, Agistos.
And so by the time we get to the generation of Iphigenia, Electra, and Orestes, I've lost
count of how many manifestations of murder, slaughter, cannibalism, incest, adultery, and
so on we have.
Orestes, Electra, and Iphigenia are laboring under an absolutely crushing familial burden
of inherited guilt and an inherited curse.
Now this multi-generational story of murder, cannibalism, incest, and adultery pretty clearly
addresses many deep-seated anxieties and fears that run throughout Greek literature.
First of all, the fear of intergenerational violence comes up frequently in Greek myth.
We saw this in Theogony, the fear that the anxiety that fathers, if they become overly
powerful, will kill or subdue their children.
Remember Uranus not letting his children be born, Cronus swallowing his children.
That seems to reflect on the level of the gods, the same kind of anxiety we see with
Tantalus and Atreus and Agamemnon, an overly powerful father may kill or otherwise subdue
his children or at least not allow them to take their proper place in society.
Elsewhere in Greek myth, most notably in the myth of Oedipus, we see a reflection of the
fear that sons may become overly powerful and kill their fathers, so the fear of intergenerational
violence between males in particular works in both directions.
Why is that?
Well, we are dealing with an extremely patriarchal society in which a great deal of power is
extended in the father.
The father of an extended family in a patriarchal society is a very powerful man indeed.
And any such society has somehow to find a middle ground to find a balance between these
two extremes of abuse of power.
The very powerful father could in fact not allow his children to reach their proper role
in society.
On the other hand, the son could become overly eager to take the place of his father and
could be violent against his father.
The fear of intergenerational violence in either direction is one thing that a patriarchal
society has to figure some way to balance, some way to thread its way between.
The myth of the House of Atreus also speaks very clearly to Greek society's anxiety about
women's trustworthiness, loyalty, and sexuality, particularly about the sexual fidelity of
wives.
Clytemnestra and Aerape both ruin their husbands through their infidelities.
Aerape's affair with Fiestes leads to Atreus' loss of the kingship.
He does get it back, but it leads to his loss of the kingship in the first place.
More clearly, Clytemnestra's infidelity with Agisthos causes Agamemnon's death.
In each case, I think it's significant that the woman's lover is a close male relative
of her husband.
In at least classical Athenian society, as I talked about before, married women were
kept largely sequestered.
That means, among other things, that their access to potential lovers was strictly limited.
But a man could not keep his wife away from every single male in his family.
If you are anxious about the fidelity of your wife, and Greek culture was very anxious about
wives' fidelity, then close male relatives are the most obvious source of threat.
Brothers, cousins, uncles, all of those are the most obvious source of threat for infidelity
of a man's wife.
You might compare here, Fidris, lust for her stepson, Hippolytus, that we talked about
when we were discussing Thesias.
That I think is another manifestation of the same anxiety.
Why is it that Greek society was so anxious about women's fidelity, particularly about
wives' fidelity?
I think, again, this has to do with the patriarchal nature of the society.
Very, very briefly, in a strictly patriarchal society where it is crucially important for
a man to leave sons behind him, a wife's absolute fidelity also becomes crucially important.
Greek men were not required to remain faithful to their wives.
That was neither expected or assumed in marriage.
Because a Greek man could be unfaithful, to put it in our terminology, it wouldn't even
have been put that way in this society.
A Greek man could have sexual relationships outside of marriage, and that would in no
way call into question the purity of his own bloodline.
If Atreus has 15 affairs with 15 other women, that does not call into question the legitimacy
of Agamemnon and Menelaus.
But if Arapi has an affair with someone else, that does call into question the legitimacy
of any children she may bear.
So given that knowing the sons he was bringing up in his household were his own sons was
crucially important for a Greek man, the fidelity of the wife becomes equally crucially important.
Since there's no way in a culture before the times of blood typing and DNA testing, there's
no way to find out who's the father of a particular child.
The only way to assume that a man is the father is to make sure that his wife is absolutely
utterly faithful.
And therefore, anxiety, strong anxiety about women's fidelity and about women's sexuality,
which is assumed to be very, very strong and very ungoverned, this anxiety runs throughout
Greek myth.
Now these themes, the fear of intergenerational violence and the anxiety about female fidelity
and female sexuality, make the house of Atreus myth particularly resonant in Greek culture.
It addresses some of the most deep-seated anxieties that Greek culture seems to reflect.
And it also makes it particularly suited to the genre of tragedy, which among other things
looks at those anxieties.
All three of the great Greek tragedians wrote plays on aspects of the myth of the house
of Atreus.
And what we will do in the next lecture is to look at the most important treatment and
tragedy of the myth of the house of Atreus, namely the great trilogy, the Oristaya by
the Tragedian Escalus.
