Lecture 19, Blood Vengeance, Justice and the Furies
Hello and welcome back to lecture 19.
In the previous lecture we examined the myth of the House of Atreus and talked a bit about
how that myth reflects some of the deep-seated anxieties of Greek culture, particularly about
intergenerational violence and about the control of female sexuality.
In this lecture we're going to look at the use the playwright Escalus, made of the myth
of the House of Atreus, in his trilogy of tragedies called the Aurestia.
I want to start with a very brief description of how the genre of tragedy operated in Athens,
what was different about theater in Athens from our modern-day conception of theater.
Tragedy developed as an Athenian art form in the 5th century BC, and playwrights entered
tragedies into competition at the annual festivals held in honor of Dionysus.
Three tragedians each would enter a group of three interrelated plays called Trilogy
into the competition.
So rather than entering just one play, each dramatist entered three plays.
These three tragedies were followed by a very brief comic play called a Seder play, after
the mythical followers of Dionysus, the Saters.
The group of three interrelated tragedies is called a Trilogy.
Sometimes as is the case in the Aurestia, the trilogy tells one unified story.
Other times the three plays are linked thematically rather than being episodes in one overall
story.
Now, Escalus's Aurestia, which was performed in 458 BC, just two years before Escalus's
death, is our only surviving trilogy.
It's the only example we have from ancient Greek tragedy of three plays written to be
performed together as a unified whole.
And even it lacks its Seder play, so it's not entirely complete.
A sideline here, people often think that Sophocles' three plays about Oedipus and his family were
a trilogy as well, and they're often miscalled the Theban trilogy, Oedipus the King, Antigone
and Oedipus at Colonus.
But actually those three plays were written at three widely different times, Antigone
first, Oedipus the King some 15 to 20 years later, and Oedipus at Colonus at the very
end of Sophocles' life, again over 20 years after Oedipus the King.
So those are not a trilogy in the sense that I'm using the term here.
Now the other important thing to realize about tragedy is that the subject matter of Greek
tragedy was always drawn from myth or very, very rarely from recent history.
In other words, the tragedians did not invent or make up their stories.
They used traditional myth to write the plays that they presented in the Festival of Dionysus.
Their originality, their creativity lay in the use they made of the myths, the way they
slanted the stories, the points they brought out by stressing them, the points they overlooked
in the traditional story, rather than in what we would think of as creativity, creating
a new story.
We can safely assume therefore that the audience of a tragedy knew the basic outlines of the
story before coming to the theater.
As so in the Orestia, for instance, Escalus does not give any kind of background exposition
of the whole story of the House of Atreus as I did yesterday.
He assumes his audience already knows that.
He can refer to the slaughter of children by Atreus or by Tantalus and know that his
audience knows what he's talking about.
The playwright could and did add or subtract certain details of the story to serve his
dramatic needs.
Since tragedy was performed at a festival in honor of Dionysus, it was a public occasion
and it was a time when a large proportion of the Athenian citizen body would be gathered
together, the Tragedians very frequently used their plays to discuss or foreground important
social issues of their own day.
So let's turn now to looking at the particular uses that Escalus made of the myth of the House
of Atreus in his trilogy, the Orestia.
This trilogy consists of three plays, three tragedies.
The first one is Agamemnon, the second is called Libation Bearers, Women Carrying Libations
and the third one is called Humanities.
Now in this trilogy, Escalus uses the story of the House of Atreus to explore issues of
justice, revenge and personal individual responsibility.
He highlights these issues throughout the trilogy.
At the same time, he reshapes the traditional myth, as we'll see, to provide an etiology
for the Athenian court system, very interesting use to make of this story, of this particularly
hideous dysfunctional family.
As a means of looking at personal responsibility and issues of justice, one of the main themes
Escalus highlights in his treatment of the myth is the idea of human beings caught between
irreconcilable moral duties.
He hammers this idea home again and again in all three plays.
In Agamemnon, this theme is expressed through the characters of both Agamemnon and Clytemnester.
We see both of them caught between two opposing and irreconcilable duties.
In Libation Bearers, the second play of the trilogy, Escalus looks at Orestes, same facing
of this same kind of dilemma, being caught between two moral duties that are in direct
conflict with one another.
In the third play, Humanities, the irreconcilable duties of the earlier plays are finally mediated
by Athena through the setting up of a court system, the first court in Athens.
Now in the first play of the trilogy, Agamemnon is a man faced with an absolutely insoluble
moral dilemma.
We talked in the last two lectures, in fact, about Agamemnon's sacrifice of his daughter
Iphigenia.
As Escalus presents the story, Agamemnon is really on the horns of an absolutely unbearable
dilemma.
He must lead his army to Troy, and Escalus leaves us in no doubt that that is an imperative
duty for Agamemnon to do.
Escalus says in the play, has the chorus of the play say, that Zeus the Great Guest
God, Zeus the God who stands behind Zenea, the guest host relationship, ordered the fleet
to go to Troy.
So Agamemnon is, in effect, under direct orders from Zeus to lead his fleet to Troy.
But when the wind will not blow and they can't sail, he's told that in order to lead his
fleet to Troy, he must kill his own daughter.
And as a father, he is under an absolute moral obligation, obviously, not to kill his
own child.
So Agamemnon is caught in about the most horrific dilemma that one can well imagine.
On the one hand, his duty as a king and the leader of his people and the eldest male of
his family to avenge the wrong that Paris has done to them through abducting Helen.
On the other hand, his duty as a father not to slaughter his child.
And Escalus hones the painfulness of Agamemnon's dilemma by making it quite clear in his version
that Artemis's anger, Artemis's requiring of the sacrifice of Iphigenia, is due to no
wrongdoing on Agamemnon's part whatsoever.
In some versions of the story, particularly in versions given by the playwright Euripides,
Artemis is angry at Agamemnon because Agamemnon shot a deer that was sacred to Artemis.
Now demanding the life of a human girl and recompense for a deer is still very harsh.
But in that version, Agamemnon has directly angered Artemis.
Escalus makes it quite clear that this is not the case.
In Escalus's version, the prophet Calcas, when he tells Agamemnon that Agamemnon must
sacrifice his daughter, says that Artemis is angry because of an omen the army has seen
at Aulis, at the port where they're waiting to sail.
Two eagles have killed and eaten a pregnant rabbit, have eaten a rabbit and her unborn
young.
This, says Calcas, is why Artemis is angry.
This is why Artemis demands the sacrifice of Iphigenia because two eagles killed a rabbit.
Now what seems to be going on here is that Artemis is angry at what the omen signifies.
The omen signifies the sack of Troy.
The rabbit with its unborn young signifies the walled city of Troy with the innocent
women and children inside it.
And as we talked about before, the Greeks go way overboard during the sack of Troy.
They commit all sorts of outrages.
They do things that they should never have done.
In other words, Escalus, I think, makes it pretty clear that Artemis is angry not at
anything Agamemnon has done, rather she is angry at what Agamemnon will do.
She is punishing him for actions that he has not yet taken.
This makes Agamemnon in the moment when he has to decide whether to become a deserter
and disband the army or whether to kill his daughter.
In that moment, he is a completely innocent man caught between two choices, neither one
of which he has caused.
He did not abduct Helen.
He did not kill this rabbit who's an omen for Troy.
And yet he has to choose one course or the other.
So Agamemnon is forced into an agonizing choice, makes what seems to him the choice
to take the lesser of two evils, sacrifices Iphigenia, and the army goes to Troy.
And of course, he does then commit the outrages that Artemis is angry about in prospect.
Now Agamemnon's innocence obviously doesn't spare him from the consequences of his actions
any more than does his membership in a cursed family let him off the hook for his actions.
He suffers because he is killed Iphigenia, despite the fact that he is forced into a
position where any course he takes will be wrong.
Clytemnestra, though less obviously, can also be seen in the play Agamemnon as caught between
two irreconcilable moral duties.
As a wife, she should remain loyal to her husband as we've discussed before, but as
a mother, she feels a duty to avenge her dead daughter.
And so when Agamemnon returns home, Clytemnestra murders him to take vengeance for the murder
of Iphigenia.
And in Escalus' version, that is Clytemnestra's main motivation.
Again, other authors slant the story differently.
But Escalus makes it quite clear that Clytemnestra murders Agamemnon to avenge her daughter Iphigenia.
These earlier examples set up Orestes' dilemma, and the trilogy is after all called the Orestia.
He is the main focal point of it.
It's the trilogy about Orestes.
He has an absolute duty to avenge his father's death.
A son whose father has been murdered must kill the murderer.
That's an absolute given of this culture that the myth reflects.
But a son has no less absolute a duty not to kill either of his parents, not to harm
his mother.
So there Orestes is, caught between two duties that are irreconcilable if ever two duties
were.
He must avenge his father.
He must not kill his mother, but his mother is the person who killed his father.
So by the time we get into the second play, Libation Bearers, Orestes' dilemma is set
up by the foreshadowing of Agamemnon and Clytemnestra, just as the familial curse is set up generation
through generation.
And in the second play, Libation Bearers, we learn that Orestes, recognizing the very
difficult position he's in, has traveled to Delphi to ask Apollo what he should do.
And Apollo has told him that avenging his father takes precedence over protecting his
mother, that therefore he must kill his mother to take vengeance for his father.
And so in Libation Bearers, this is what Orestes does.
He accepts the word of the God Apollo, returns home to Mycenae, and with the help of his
sister, Electra, kills Clytemnestra and her lover against those.
Now almost immediately after Orestes commits these murders, the Furies, those spirits who
take vengeance on those who have harmed Ken, and particularly vengeance on children who
have harmed their parents, the Furies begin to pursue Orestes.
So like his father Agamemnon before him, Orestes has his dilemma played out on the divine level
as well as in his own mind.
Apollo directly orders him to kill Clytemnestra, just as Zeus had directly ordered Agamemnon
to go to Troy.
But the Furies see this as a forbidden action and punish it, despite the fact that it was
ordered by Apollo.
So Orestes is caught not just between two irreconcilable moral duties, but between two conflicting
deities or groups of deities as well.
Now, Escalus' treatment of Orestes is an excellent example of how an individual author can shape
the traditional myth to serve the points that he wants to emphasize.
In Homer's Odyssey, characters talk about Orestes killing the murderer of his father,
killing Agasthus and his mother Clytemnestra over and over and over again.
Characters discuss that in the Odyssey.
And in the Odyssey, it seems to be utterly unproblematic.
Every time it's brought up, it's used as an example of a good son doing what he ought to do.
Particularly, it's offered as an example for Odysseus' son Telemachus of how a good son
takes care of his father's honor in the father's absence.
Homer, in other words, doesn't seem to have seen any problem whatsoever in what Orestes did.
The picture of a man caught between two mutually exclusive absolutes is Escalus' own interpretation
of the myth.
The idea that Orestes absolutely must avenge his father but can only do so by killing his
mother and that this is a conflict is Escalus' interpretation of the story.
And Escalus helps establish this dilemma by changing one crucial detail.
In the Odyssey, we're told that Agasthus killed Agamemnon and Clytemnestra was his accomplice
and helped him.
But in Escalus' version, Clytemnestra is the one who strikes the blow.
And it's a very distressing blow that she strikes indeed.
She kills Agamemnon when he's in his bath, naked, vulnerable.
That's when she kills him.
And Agasthus is only an accomplice who comes in after the fact and tries to claim some
of the credit.
So Escalus focuses in on Orestes as someone caught between two irreconcilable duties by
making Clytemnestra the actual killer of Agamemnon.
The final play of the Orestia, the Humanities, provides a reconciliation for Orestes' torment
and for the wider issues that Escalus is addressing here of the contradictions that are inherent
in a system of blood vengeance.
Let's look first at what happens in the play and then I'll talk about some of the implications
of it.
In the Humanities, Orestes appears as a defendant on a murder charge in a trial held in Athens.
The Humanities is actually the first courtroom drama.
In it, in effect, Apollo acts as defense lawyer, the furies are the prosecution, Orestes is
the defendant, Athena is the judge, and Athena appoints a jury of Athenian citizens.
The text does not tell us exactly how many were in the jury, probably 12, perhaps 13,
perhaps more than that, but clearly the jury of whatever number is appointed by Athena.
And the jurors vote in a way that leads to Orestes acquittal.
Now here, the text is maddeningly ambiguous.
There are two separate interpretations of how it is that the jurors voted.
The first interpretation is that the jurors' votes are tied.
If there's 12 jurors, they vote six to acquit, six to convict, and Athena then casts a vote
which breaks the tie and acquits Orestes.
The other interpretation is that the jurors' votes are actually split, seven to convict,
and six to acquit, and that Athena casts a vote that makes the tie.
But either way, you interpret it.
Athena casts a deciding vote, and incidentally, Escalus here provides an etiology for a reality
of Athenian law, in an Athenian law case, when the votes were evenly tied in a murder
case, the defendant was acquitted.
If half the jurors voted to acquit, half to convict, and the votes were evenly tied, the
defendant was acquitted.
And this can be seen as indicating that Athena is there in the background casting a deciding
vote for the defendant, as she did for Orestes.
With Orestes acquittal in Humanities, not only are all the issues of the trilogy laid
to rest, but also the curse on the house of Atreus is lifted.
Orestes leaves, after a speech of great thanksgiving, he leaves and walks out of myth into history.
What I mean by that is he leaves to lead a completely normal human life.
He marries his cousin, who is the daughter of Menelaus and Helen, and they have children,
but those children have absolutely no stories connected with them.
The family fades into obscurity.
So as I said in the last couple of lectures, the Trojan War is the dividing line, according
to Greek myth, between the age of heroes and what Hesiod calls the Iron Age, our own time,
but it's really in the generation right after the Trojan War that the mythic world actually
ends and the world of normal human experience begins.
And we can, if we like, see the acquittal of Orestes as the precise moment at which that
transition happens.
Now in Escalus' hands, the myth of the house of Atreus becomes a means not just to examine
individual responsibility, as I've been talking about so far, but also to look at systems
of justice and why it is that a court system is better, works better, than a system of
individual justice.
In the Homeric poems, in the Iliad and the Odyssey, and supposedly, or at least presumably,
in Archaic Greek society as well, justice was an individual matter.
Families took justice into their own hands.
If I killed my neighbor, the neighbor's family would kill me.
Then my family would kill the neighbors and so on and so on.
It's an open-ended system, but it works pretty well as long as people don't mind it being
an open-ended system and as long as murderer and victim are not members of the same family.
But this system of private blood vengeance breaks down in Orestes.
It's a system that cannot accommodate someone for whom both the murderer and the murder
victim are members of his family.
Escalus hones in on that to show the difficulties of a system of private vengeance, because
this is the one time when it simply cannot work.
Orestes' dilemma is insoluble under the traditional system of individual justice, the system that
is reflected in all the myths that we know of, all the myths of Greek culture assume
individual blood vengeance.
Escalus, however, takes one of those myths and uses it to examine the value of a court
system, which is a really extraordinarily brilliant thing to do with such a myth.
Orestes' dilemma can only be solved through the invention of a system of public justice,
a new system of justice in which the duty of exacting vengeance is taken away from the
individual's family members and handed over to society at large.
In other words, it can only be solved by the inauguration of a court system, and that's
what Escalus shows us in the third play of the trilogy, In Humanities.
Now why were these issues so crucial in Escalus' mind?
Why was he concerned with talking about the Athenian court system in this particular
trilogy, in this particular time, remember the trilogy was performed in 458 B.C.?
Well in the Orestes, we have an all too rare opportunity to set a literary work, and in
this case a literary work using a traditional myth, directly into its political context,
because we happen to know about certain political events in Athens of this time period, and
we can see what political event it was to which Escalus was directly responding in the
Orestes, and in other words the Orestes is tied into a particular political development
of Escalus' own day.
A little bit of background information here, in the 5th century B.C. Athens definitely did
have a system of trial by jury, and that system of trial by jury, which is reflected in the
humanities and given an etiology in the humanities, had been in place probably since the early
6th century B.C., for about one and a half centuries at the time when Escalus wrote.
Now Escalus backdates the development of the court system to the end of the mythic age.
He backdates it to the time right after the Trojan War, and yet he and his audience must
have known perfectly well that their court system had only been developed a few generations
before them.
In other words, what Escalus is doing here is making what I call a consciously literary
use of myth.
He's using the myth of the House of Atreus in a way that he and his audience must have
known the traditional myth did not really support.
Everyone knew their Homer, everyone knew that in Homer individual blood vengeance is the
way justice operates.
The Athenians must have had at least some vague sense of when their court system developed.
They may have known precisely how many years previously, but they certainly knew it did
not date back to the time of the Trojan War, and yet Escalus makes it date back to the
time of the Trojan War or right after the Trojan War and has the court system inaugurated
by no less a figure than Athena herself, the patron goddess of Athens.
Why is he doing this?
Well, in humanities, one clue as to why he's doing this is the location of Orestes trial.
Escalus situates the court that tries Orestes on a hill called the Areopagus.
That means the hill of Aries.
It's a hill that's still very visible in Athens.
You can climb up it and get wonderful views of the Acropolis from it.
It's also, of course, the hill on which St. Paul supposedly preached his first speech
to the Athenians.
But more importantly, for our purposes, it was actually the hill on which a particular
council, a particular government body, met in Athens from well before the 5th century
into the 5th century BC.
This council often called the Areopagus Council or just the Areopagus for short, named after
the hill on which they met.
Before the 5th century BC had a great many very important powers.
It was one of the foremost governing bodies in Athens during the 6th century BC.
Have the power to pass laws had a great deal of control over Athenian society.
But in 462 BC, just four years before the Orestes was performed, the powers of the Areopagus
Council were severely limited.
This was one of the major political reforms in Athens of the 5th century, which led to
or helped pave the way for the flowering of democracy under Pericles.
Among the powers that were left to the Areopagus, or I shouldn't say among, the only powers
that were left to the Areopagus after the reforms of 462 BC were that it could try cases
of homicide, arson, and malicious wounding, what we would call assault.
So a body, a council, a government entity that had up to this time had very widespread
powers, had been one of the major government entities in Athens, is suddenly reduced to
being basically a homicide court.
And what does Escalus do in the Orestes?
He talks to us about the importance of a homicide court.
Escalus is pretty clearly in the Orestes responding to these reforms of 462 BC, but as is so frequent
the case in discussing classical literature, modern scholars disagree on exactly what his
response is.
Some of us think that Escalus is chiding the reformers, that Escalus is a traditionalist
who is telling the reformers that they have done a dreadful thing by restricting the powers
of so ancient and venerable an institution and thereby showing disrespect to it.
Others among us think that Escalus is trying to remind the members of the Areopagus Council,
who are not at all happy to have their powers restricted, that they still have a very, very
important role to play.
That he's saying, but look, look how important homicide trials are.
They can be seen as one of the qualifying elements of civilization, one of the things
that makes us who we are as a people.
So either way you read it, however, pretty clearly, humanities is written in response
to the reforms of 462 BC.
Now all of these issues I've been talking about, having to do with individual responsibility,
justice and so forth, are far from the only topics Escalus brings up in the Orestes.
It's one of the most amazingly dense and rich works of ancient literature.
Among the other issues it addresses, the Orestes has a great deal to say about gender conflict
and gender issues.
Throughout the trilogy, the conflict is largely cast in terms of shifting power between the
sexes.
Just to give one example, Clytemnester is often referred to as a woman like a man in Agamemnon.
She's called a woman with a man's mind, a woman who thinks like a man, but her motivation
for killing Agamemnon, as we saw, is maternal love.
So she's like a man, but she also still has feminine characteristics.
In humanities, the conflict between the Furies and Apollo is very definitely cast as a conflict
between older female goddesses and a younger male Olympian god.
The same conflict we saw all the way back in Hesiod and have talked about a bit since
then.
The Furies not only embody the principle of blood vengeance, they also represent wildness,
ferocity, irrationality, connection with the earth, all of those things.
Apollo embodies the rationality, at least rationality, as his patriarchal society sees
it, in his claim that the life of a woman should always count less than the life of
a man.
And that's one of his main claims for why Orestes should be acquitted.
The gender issues come to a head in Apollo's famous argument about the mechanics of conception.
The crowning point of Apollo's speech for the defense is his claim that the Furies have
no jurisdiction here because Orestes did not, in fact, kill a blood relative because,
says Apollo, the mother is not a blood relative of her own child.
In other words, he tries to get Orestes off on a technicality.
Apollo says that when a woman is pregnant with a child, what she is actually doing is
acting as a host, nourishing the child of a guest friend.
In other words, he puts pregnancy in the context of Xenia.
Now, bizarre as this sounds to us and infuriating as many of my female students find it, this
was a current scientific theory during Escalus' day.
The idea was that what happened in conception was that the male provided a fully formed
tiny little embryo and that the woman was analogous to soil, just as in plants, a seed
falls into the soil and develops, is nourished by the soil, so supposedly an animal and human
reproduction, the male plants the seed and the female soil, then nourishes it.
It's not as bizarre an idea as it may sound, particularly in a culture that considers fathers
much more important socially than mothers, because in conception, in animal or human
conception, the contribution of the male is visible, the ovum, the female contribution
is invisible, couldn't be seen until the invention of the microscope, and arguing by analogy
from plant reproduction is not as far-fetched as it might sound.
On the other hand, this is completely counterintuitive.
Anyone who has ever witnessed a birth or seen a mother cradling a newborn baby in her arms
would find it awfully hard to say there's no blood relationship between those two, and
that is the primary blood relationship of the human family.
And it's worth noting that Apollo's argument at best persuades only half the jury.
It does not by any means persuade all of them.
Athena is the perfect solver of this dilemma.
She is female, but many of her characteristics and outlook are noticeably male in her role
in Athens as a goddess of justice, of just war, of wisdom, all of those are male attributes.
So she is really the one and only figure in Greek myth who could mediate between the
furies and Apollo, between female and male, and work out a compromise by which both sides
can at least be more or less satisfied.
Now the Aurestia is unquestionably one of the greatest works of world literature.
But where does the myth end and Escalus' genius begin?
This trilogy is a perfect example of the difficulties we encounter when we try to access classical
myth through literature.
It's, I think, safe to say that Escalus invented the trial scene, that no other version of
the myth said Orestes was actually put on trial in Athens in front of a jury.
Escalus invented that, but the basic situation, which allows him to invent that, is there
in the myth, built into the story already.
Where does the myth end and Escalus begin?
The gender issues are perhaps even more entangled.
Escalus gives his characters the words they say, so Apollo's argument about conception
is Escalus' own idea, Escalus' own contribution.
But as we've already seen, the gender issues, the conflict of older female gods, younger
male gods, all of those things are there throughout Greek myth, from Hesiodon.
So this problem that I've talked about a bit before of disentangling the myth from the
author who tells us the myth becomes all the more complicated, the greater the author
we're dealing with.
It's complicated enough in the Aurestia, and the next lecture we'll turn to looking
at what many people consider the greatest Greek tragedy of all, Oedipus the King, and
at how Sophocles manipulated that myth.
