On November 7, 1919, Albert Einstein became a household name seemingly overnight when
data collected during a solar eclipse matched the predictions of his theory of general relativity.
The stars in the sky, those eternal points of light, they had moved precisely how he
said they would, and it changed physics forever.
Einstein's crowning achievement came after years of false starts and failures, but he
had started with the same methods that he used to reach his other great breakthroughs,
dreaming up elegant thought experiments based around a few simple assumptions, uniting
ancient mathematical methods with cutting-edge science.
This approach cut to the core of who Einstein had been since childhood.
At 12 years old, he had a taste of this creative problem-solving.
His uncle showed him a 4,000-year-old formula, and by using intuition and visual logic, Einstein
found his own proof of the theorem.
What he didn't know at the time was that this ancient math formula and the methods
that he used to make his argument would later lead him to shake the very foundations of
what mankind thought it knew about the universe.
This magazine from 1949 has an essay that Einstein wrote when he was 67.
He'd had a momentous life.
He talks about his great discoveries, but he actually starts with memories from childhood.
And the things that stuck with him tell us something fundamental about how Einstein saw
the world as an adult and the methods that he used to reach his great breakthroughs.
One of these moments came when he was 12, and his uncle Jacob showed him the Pythagorean
theorem for the first time.
You might remember this from school.
If you take a right triangle and label the two smaller sides A and B, and the bigger
side C, then this equation says that the sum of the squares of the two smaller lengths
we can draw actual squares to visualize that is equal to the square of the larger length.
In other words, A squared plus B squared equals C squared.
This is a bedrock formula for nearly all of math.
It's named for Pythagoras of Samos, an ancient Greek mathematician, but it was discovered
separately by a number of different cultures throughout history, and it was known for at
least a thousand years before Pythagoras.
These days we still use it all the time because it's such a fundamental way to calculate distance.
The same basic formula even works for three dimensions, and one of Einstein's great theories
is mathematically represented by a modified four-dimensional version of this formula.
Once Einstein learned this formula from his uncle, he wanted to show that it was true.
In his essay, he writes that, after much effort, I succeeded in proving this theorem on the
basis of the similarity of triangles.
Einstein never publicly described this proof himself, but he supposedly showed it to one
of his assistants years later, and the story made its way into this book from 1991.
So let's imagine what this would look like to a 12-year-old Einstein.
Einstein always had a knack for describing things visually, and this early example is
no different.
The goal here would be to show that the two smaller squares somehow fit together and take
up the same amount of area as the larger square.
There's a sense of proportionality to this figure.
Different parts look like scaled up or down versions of other parts.
And that ends up being the key to the whole thing.
Einstein found two different types of proportionality that he was able to bring together into his
final explanation.
Here's the first.
Instead of trying to fit these little squares inside of the biggest square, why don't we
just cut them?
If I cut them all in half, then I get three triangles.
Since I just halved everything, finding a way to fit the two smaller triangles inside
the big one would be equivalent to our original problem.
If I wanted to, I could even cut them in half again.
Now each triangle is a quarter of the original size.
But since everything is still proportional, I can still get back to my original squares
just by multiplying everything by four.
By this logic, I could cut the squares into any shape I want, as long as it's still
a scaled copy of the same shape in each square.
If I wanted to, I could cut them into rubber duckies.
I wouldn't necessarily know what fraction of the entire square my ducky is, but I could
say that I'm multiplying everything by some number D for ducky.
Again, if I can show that the two smaller duckies fit inside the bigger ducky, then
I'd be good to go.
But cutting the squares into duckies, it doesn't actually make our job any easier.
So Einstein also recognized a second type of proportionality in this figure.
He drew a single line down the middle of the triangle.
Now he has two new smaller triangles that are themselves, each proportional to the original.
We know for sure that they're proportional, because first of all, all three of them have
90 degree angles.
We can also see that the triangle on the left shares one of its angles with the original
big triangle, and the triangle on the right shares one of its angles with the big triangle
too.
In each case, we have two pairs of congruent angles.
So we know that the third angle also has to be congruent, because the sum of the angles
inside of a triangle is always 180 degrees.
If all three of these triangles are proportional, well, going back to the first idea, that would
mean that I'm allowed to cut them into my squares.
Once again, I don't necessarily know what fraction of the entire square they are.
That would be different depending on the exact shape of my right triangle.
But I could say that I multiply by a number T for triangle in the same way that I multiplied
by D for my rubber ducky shape.
So now, all I would have to do would be to show that the area of the two small triangles
adds up to the area of the big triangle.
And of course we know that's true, because that's where we started.
So since T times a squared plus T times b squared equals T times c squared, it's also
true that a squared plus b squared equals c squared.
This must have been an exciting thing for 12 year old Einstein.
By just scaling something proportionally, and then cutting the shapes up and putting
the pieces together again like a puzzle, he's shown with certainty that this thing is true.
What he was going to learn just a little later was that he was actually using a loose version
of something called the axiomatic method, which is thousands of years old.
The idea is that we start with a few basic concepts that we accept to be true, called
axioms or postulates, and then we build on top of them brick by logical brick.
We have these basic, basic axioms.
And if you believe these basic axioms by pure logic, you can construct these amazing facts
that you're like, really, that's true, and you're like, here's why.
Here's the completely rigorous sequence of logical steps that will convince you that
this fact is true.
In Einstein's case, he wrote that it seemed to me evident that the relations of the sides
of the right-angled triangles would have to be completely determined by one of the acute
angles.
Something which did not in similar fashion seem to be evident appeared to me to be in
need of any proof at all.
It sounds like he accepted some of what he just described about proportionality as being
true without proof and then built his argument from there.
Soon, Einstein was given a book of Euclidean geometry.
Seeing page after page of this axiomatic method in action was such a revelation that
he called the book holy when he remembered it years later.
This idea of using the axiomatic method to discover new knowledge and the sense of trying
to get to the most fundamental understanding of things were like guiding lights for Einstein
for many years to come.
Einstein always had a talent for math and science, but when he was young, following
his curiosity, took priority over pleasing his teachers.
He'd push back against his teachers at his regimented German high school and by college,
he would often skip math class altogether.
To pass his college math tests, he'd copy notes from his friend Marcel Grossman.
One of his professors at the time, Hermann Mankowski, later remembered that Einstein
was like a lazy dog in his class.
After Einstein learned calculus as a teenager, I get the sense that he kind of said what
I hear a lot of other students say, which is, when am I ever going to use this math
again in my life?
As far as those classes that Einstein didn't think were worth his time, differential equations,
geometry of numbers, and others, he was at least partly right.
In just a few years, Einstein would completely change the world without really using that
math that he was supposed to have learned in college.
But before long, he once again crossed paths with both Mankowski and Grossman and finally
come to appreciate the power of this advanced math that he had previously ignored.
Much later, Einstein wrote that, it was not clear to me as a student that a more profound
knowledge of the basic principles of physics was tied up with the most intricate mathematical
methods.
By the time Einstein graduated college in August of 1900, he was ranked fourth out of
a class of five people.
After college, Einstein struggled.
He spent a couple of years failing to get a job and also failing to write a science
paper good enough to earn him his PhD.
But in 1902, Grossman got his dad to call in a favor and help Einstein get a job as
a clerk at the lowest level of the Swiss Patent Office.
The job was boring and the hours made it so that Einstein couldn't get to the library
before it closed to do research.
But by 1905, practically out of nowhere, Einstein published four groundbreaking papers, including
one that's considered the origin of quantum physics and another on what's now known
as special relativity.
These papers, taken together, form the basis of modern physics and 1905 has come to be
known as Einstein's Miracle Year.
But these were not like typical physics papers.
For starters, Einstein didn't base his arguments on any experiments or even really cite much
of anybody else's work.
And not only that, the math didn't really go above a high school level.
Instead, he relied on the approach that he was so excited to discover back when he was
12, the axiomatic method.
In his paper on special relativity, after pointing out a puzzling contradiction in the
current science of electromagnetism, he makes his argument for a solution.
First, he proposes two ideas that he says he's going to accept as postulates or axioms.
From there, he writes a logical argument that leads to a radical rethinking of concepts
like time and distance, upending what had been accepted as fundamental laws of physics
since the time of Isaac Newton.
His first axiom was that the same physical laws apply to any frame of reference, including
the laws of optics and electricity.
In other words, there's no experiment that you could do that would let you make a distinction
between being at rest and being in perfectly uniform motion.
If you're flying in an airplane with the window shades down, pretend that we can't
hear the engine, then there's literally no difference between your state of motion when
the plane is flying and a different state of motion, for example, when the plane is
sitting on the tarmac.
By this logic, there's no such thing as absolute rest.
All we can do is talk about different objects moving relative to different reference points.
His second axiom seems like it contradicts the first.
It says that the speed of light in a vacuum is the same for all frames of reference.
In other words, no matter how fast you're moving, it'll always look like a light beam
is traveling at the exact same speed.
Building on these two axioms, he goes through a thought experiment involving a series of
logical steps for measuring time and distance.
By the end, he's made the case for some pretty wild things.
He says that when you travel close to the speed of light, your length contracts in the
direction of your motion and time moves more slowly as measured by an outside observer.
Not only that, but the apparent fact of two events happening simultaneously is not absolute
and instead depends on the state of motion of the observer.
This leads to all kinds of surprising results and apparent paradoxes.
The YouTube channel Floathead Physics has made a whole series of great videos explaining
some of these results of special relativity.
Surprising things like what's known as the Twin's Paradox.
I'll put a link in the description to a few of my favorites.
It's fair to say that the ideas in these papers were completely revolutionary.
Even though there were other people thinking about this stuff, nobody else was radical
enough to take them all the way to their logical conclusions and throw out so much of what
they thought they knew about the universe in the process.
For example, Arie Poincaré, one of the titans of late 19th century math and physics, questioned
the absolute nature of time and made important steps towards special relativity before Einstein
did.
But even by the time of his death in 1912, he still hadn't come around to Einstein's
full theory of special relativity, insisting instead that absolute rest and absolute simultaneity
did exist relative to an undetectable cosmic substance known as the aether.
After Einstein published these papers, his life didn't change much.
It still took him three more years to get a university job, but gradually, some influential
thinkers picked up on his work and started building on his theories.
One person who took special relativity and ran with it was none other than Einstein's
old math teacher, Hermann Minkowski.
Minkowski found a way to connect Einstein's ideas to formal mathematics through the concept
of a four-dimensional spacetime.
So what's a distance?
A distance is a sum of squares.
Because of the Pythagorean theorem, a distance is a sum of squares.
So let's say we have three variables, x, y, and z.
And what we're used to is, if I have some point out here, I can express it in some number
of x's, some number of y's, and some number of z's.
And that'll find me this point in space.
If we square those three values, add them together, and then take the square root of
the sum, then we'd be using the Pythagorean theorem to find the distance from the starting
point.
And then Minkowski comes along and says, OK, but here's a way to make spacetime work.
When you add that extra dimension of time, you sum the squares of the space dimensions
and you subtract a square of the time dimension to measure distance.
It makes special relativity into a geometric space.
Minkowski's new system allowed him to mathematically model the predictions of special relativity,
where the behavior of light forms the boundary for the possible motion of all other objects
in the universe.
Since what we're describing as distance now includes the measurement of time, this value
is often referred to as a spacetime interval.
The geometry that special relativity predicts is the geometry that's of the cone where
the distances are all zero.
Let's make an analogy to three dimensions so we can see why this forms a cone.
The Pythagorean theorem tells us that x squared plus y squared plus z squared equals the distance
squared.
But what happens if we describe light's behavior by making the z dimension negative and the
distance equal to zero?
Well, now we can move things around to get x squared plus y squared equals z squared.
We can think of this as all the points on x and y that are a distance z from the origin.
In other words, it's the points on a circle.
So when z gets bigger, the circle gets bigger, and when it gets smaller, the circle gets
smaller.
What we end up with is a cone where the edges make a 45 degree angle with the z axis.
So Einstein's special relativity, again, we start with the axiom that the speed of light
is constant, and we derive all these crazy things about time and distance and so on.
When Minkowski says, you can realize those things by placing them in this geometry where
you get to subtract one of the squares when you're computing distances.
This formula gives a geometric interpretation of what's known as Lorenz transformations,
the equations that allow you to calculate the changes to time and distance that occur
for an object moving close to the speed of light.
The motion of a photon of light always has a space-time interval equal to zero, while
any other object moving below the speed of light has a non-zero space-time interval,
which all inertial observers will measure as being the same value.
It's this one cone, and he's saying the whole world lives in this cone, space-time.
Einstein initially did not like this idea.
He called it superfluous erudition, and said that since the mathematicians have grabbed
hold of the relativity theory, I no longer understand it myself.
Einstein thought this fancy new math obscured the beautiful physics.
But Minkowski's explanation of the four-dimensional cone wasn't just fancy math for the sake
of being complicated.
It actually unlocked new conclusions from special relativity that weren't apparent
in Einstein's original version.
In the end, the idea of space-time has become so closely associated with special relativity
that people mistakenly assume that it came from Einstein himself.
Einstein would eventually realize just how much he needed this fancy math to keep developing
his relativity theories, because special relativity had a fundamental limitation.
It only described completely uniform motion, so Einstein still needed a way to talk about
things like acceleration and rotation.
Not only that, but there was an even bigger problem with Newton's laws of gravity.
You have two objects with two masses, there's a universal gravitational constant, and they
pull each other.
The force that one exerts on the other is inverse distance squared, this is the inverse
square law.
But then special theory of relativity says distance is not absolute.
Oh crap, we have a huge problem.
How do we do gravity if distance is in the eye of the beholder?
Because distance is measured by time, and there's this duality between time and distance.
And so can it be that the force acting on this thing depends on where you're standing
and looking at them?
So this is the sort of thing that Einstein's special theory breaks.
It breaks gravity.
This was when Einstein came upon what he later called the happiest thought of his life.
He imagined a painter falling from the side of a building.
While the man is in free fall, if we ignore the air blowing past him, his experience would
be completely identical to a man floating in a rocket ship in outer space with zero
gravity.
Einstein grabbed onto this idea.
What if acceleration and gravity were in some fundamental way the same thing, two sides
of the same coin?
With that idea in place, Einstein once again set out to construct an argument, brick by
logical brick, that led him to some surprising results.
And then he's able to extrapolate from that, this beautiful theory of general relativity.
And it predicts that light will be bent around a star, except you can't ever look at the
sun to see that happening unless the sun is blocked out by something so that you can
see the stars behind it.
So we wait for the eclipse.
Einstein put out a call to astronomers that they should use a solar eclipse as a chance
to record whether the apparent position of stars is changed when their light rays pass
near the sun to get to us.
But in the meantime, Einstein still needed to come up with a formal system for doing
calculations under his new conception of the universe.
The equations should predict exactly how much the light rays would bend, and they should
also explain why Mercury's orbit deviates ever so slightly from its expected elliptical
path.
To get there, he needed a type of mathematics that could deal precisely with quantities
that changed in complicated ways.
Traditional calculus can do this when we're looking at motion within a flat grid, what
we call Euclidean geometry, but describing the complexities of the universe was going
to take something more powerful and more flexible.
So he called up his old friend Marcel Grossman again.
By now, Grossman had become an expert in exactly the kind of sophisticated non-Euclidean geometry
that Einstein needed for his work.
He thought that Einstein might be able to realize his theory with the help of ideas
developed by mathematician Bernhard Riemann half a century earlier.
Let's do a little crash course in Riemannian geometry.
The fundamental question is what is distance?
And the right way to think about distance, and this is what Riemann understood, is imagine
like a Pringles chip and a tiny little ant on that Pringles chip.
And that ant wants to go somewhere, but of course it can't jump across the Pringles chip.
It has to go down into the chip and then up to the other side or maybe down this way and
up and around, however the ant has to get there, it's going to get there.
And the amount of steps that it takes is the distance.
If she smells something over there, she's not going to go like this because the shortest
path that turns out is like that.
And so that's exactly what Riemann was envisioning.
And what he said is at every single point in your space, let's think of surfaces, okay,
so we have this Pringles chip.
At every point in the Pringles chip, there's a set of tangent vectors, directions in which
you can go.
Okay, so that gives you a set of possible directions.
And then a geodesic, a shortest path, so you can sort of count the number of steps that
the ant took to get from here to here.
And then you can think about all possible paths the ant could have taken.
And the geodesic is the path that minimizes the total number of steps.
Riemann's mathematics makes this correct infinitesimally.
Riemann had devised a system where not only could the distance be measured differently
at every point, but the math can account for as many different variables as you need.
And he realized that once he started using these algebraic methods for writing what it
means to be a three-dimensional manifold, well, you have x1, x2, x3.
He's like, wait a second, x4, x5, x17.
Nothing is stopping me from doing this in general dimension.
And this really blew people's mind.
They're like, what do you mean 17 dimension?
And he's like, no, don't worry about it.
It's just algebra.
I can make a 17-tuple of numbers, right?
We have temperature, pressure, wind speed, whatever.
We have all kinds of different ways of describing the situation at a point.
Well, I shouldn't things be multi-dimensional beyond three dimensions.
Einstein and Grossman worked to bring these concepts together with Mankowski's four-dimensional
cone method, where the square of the time dimension was subtracted.
That is what general relativity is.
It's this way of measuring distances where instead of summing squares, you sum three
of the squares and subtract the fourth square.
But you do this differently at every point, depending on the mass.
Einstein dove into this formal mathematical approach that he had previously turned up
his nose to.
He was finally starting to appreciate the power that this kind of math had to discover
new insights about the universe.
He wrote to a colleague, I have gained enormous respect for mathematics, whose more subtle
parts I considered until now in my ignorance as pure luxury.
But Einstein wasn't completely converted over to this fancy math just yet.
In his multi-year quest for the equations of general relativity, he also tried strategies
based around his intuitions for the laws of physics.
He hoped that he could still use the kind of simple axiomatic thinking that had worked
so well for him in the past.
At one point in 1912, Einstein and Grossman had arrived at some formulas that turned out
to be very close to what would ultimately be Einstein's final version of general relativity.
But Einstein threw it out.
He was having trouble understanding how to make the formulas co-variant.
In other words, since relativity implies that there's no one definitive frame of reference,
any relativity formula has to give the same result no matter what frame of reference or
coordinate system you use.
Unfortunately the math behind this gets quite complicated, and apparently it was even too
complicated for Einstein himself at the time.
So Einstein threw out the fancy Riemannian math.
He hoped that he could still use his uncanny intuition for the physical laws of the universe
to work out his theory of general relativity.
Soon he had a new set of formulas which he published as what he called an outline paper.
The formulas in this paper have since been described as having no clear geometric meaning.
It seemed almost like Einstein had tried to just throw something together after getting
too frustrated with the difficult math.
After publishing this paper, he struggled for close to three years to refine the formulas
and get them to work, but eventually he found a clear-cut mistake.
As soon as he saw it, he dug out his old notebooks where he was using the Riemannian approach
and got back to work with those.
By now, the clock was ticking.
An influential mathematician in Göttingen named David Hilbert was working to develop
his own gravitational field equations based on Einstein's theories.
Einstein and Hilbert were kindred spirits.
Hilbert had published a book with a new set of geometric axioms that fixed some of the
flaws in Euclid's work, and he and Einstein had a mutual respect for each other's intellectual
independence and shared pacifism during the height of World War I.
But Einstein didn't want to be beaten to the punch with his own theory just yet.
The race to finish his general relativity formulas was the most intense four weeks of
his life.
Finally, he knew he had it when his equations predicted Mercury's strange orbit perfectly.
Exhausted and in constant stomach pain, he delivered his finished theory across four
presentations in November of 1915.
Hilbert submitted his paper at virtually the same time, but later added a correction that
brought his work in line with Einstein's, and he graciously deferred credit to Einstein
for both the original theory and for being the first to arrive at the correct mathematics.
The next great test of Einstein's theory would be to find out whether his predictions
about what would happen to the stars during a solar eclipse would come true.
His final equations predicted that the displacement would be twice as large as the prediction
that comes from Newton's equations if light is assumed to be made of particles with mass.
Einstein's general relativity paper managed to make its way across the English Channel
during the height of World War I to a British astronomer named Sir Arthur Eddington.
Eddington was a fellow pacifist and hoped that science could be used to bridge the divisions
of the Great War if a British team were to validate a German theory.
Eddington assembled two teams to photograph an eclipse that was coming on May 29, 1919.
By then, the war had finally ended, and one team headed to Sobral, Brazil, while Eddington
traveled with the other team to the island of Príncipe off the western coast of Africa.
Both teams managed to take photographs of the moment, but it took several months of
analysis back in England before Eddington was ready to announce his results.
Einstein waited nervously in Berlin to hear the news.
By September, word had come through that the data was looking good, but it wasn't until
a public presentation at the London Astronomical Society on November 6th that the world would
find out.
The next day, the Times of London printed the triumphant headline,
Revolution in Science, New Theory of the Universe, Newtonian Ideas Overthrown.
And like that, Einstein was famous.
The reason it was so wild is Einstein moves the heavens.
He's fighting the gods just like the Greeks are fighting the gods.
For a world still processing the trauma from one of the deadliest wars in human history,
the idea of a German Jew and a British Quaker working together to advance humanity's shared
understanding of the universe was a much needed moment of triumph.
Relativity became a symbol of this new modern world, and Einstein was that world's first
celebrity scientist.
More predictions of general relativity have since been verified, including some that Einstein
initially didn't even believe himself, such as the existence of black holes.
Not only that, the equations of general relativity are crucial for modern technology like GPS,
because the clocks aboard the satellites can't synchronize with the Earth without it.
For Einstein, his almost childlike intuition that there's an underlying structure to the
entire universe, and his lifelong reliance on axiomatic arguments needed to team up with
some of the most cutting edge abstract math available in order to get to his new comprehensive
understanding of the universe.
I want to come back to Riemann for a second.
Do you think he would have been surprised to find out that this math that he made was
what Einstein needed for general relativity?
Yes, I think that would be very much a surprise to Riemann.
I'm curious if you have a different reaction, but to me, I just kind of feel this sense
of like amazement that there was this math that Riemann made for math's sake, and it
ended up being the exact thing that Einstein needed to like figure out the secrets of the
universe basically.
This happens all the time.
This is why we exist.
This is I think why I have a job.
Because humanity has realized that you leave the mathematicians alone, they'll come up
with some cockamamie 17 dimensional curved space theory that nobody will give a damn
about for 60 years until someone comes along and says, wait a second, this is exactly the
mathematics I need to do general relativity.
It's amazing.
It's amazing.
It's amazing that the world is so well governed by mathematical laws, or approximated, shall
we say.
Not governed by, but approximated by mathematical laws.
Years later, Einstein received a fan letter from a young student.
She wrote that she was worried about her math class.
I have to work longer in it than most of my friends.
I worry, perhaps too much.
A few days later, Einstein sent her a gracious reply.
He wrote, do not worry about your problems with mathematics, because I can assure you
that mine are still greater.
