One of the most important concepts in the study of linear equations is the slope of
a line because the slope shows up in so many ways in math and science.
My goal in this lesson is to introduce you to the concept of slope and discuss a number
of ideas related to slope.
So let's start our conversation about slope with a discussion of how the word is used
in everyday language.
So you should ask yourself, when have you ever heard the word slope used in the usual
English language?
Well, you may have heard people refer to a ski slope, for example.
Well what does that normally refer to?
Is it the lodge where everyone goes?
Is it the ski that they put on their foot?
Of course not.
It usually refers to the natural incline of the side of the hill or mountain on which
people are skiing.
And that certainly gives us a visual idea of what is going on in algebra as well.
The side of the hill or mountain can be thought of as a straight line, although that's a bit
of a stretch of course with the natural terrain of the hill.
But if you think about it as a straight line, you start to get the feeling for the concept
of slope.
Well, how else have you ever heard slope used in everyday language?
Well, you may have seen road signs on highways near hill sides or mountain sides warning
drivers that the upcoming road is very steep or slanted.
Some people will refer to the slope or grade of that road to describe the steepness of
that portion of road.
And it's that steepness that we want to think about today when we think about the mathematical
use of the word slope.
And so let me give you a working definition for slope and then we'll go from there.
I'm going to use the following definition as we start our conversation in thinking about
lines and drawing lines in the following way.
The slope of a given straight line is its rate of change which is defined as follows.
The slope is the vertical change of the line divided by the horizontal change of the line.
Some people like to say that that's the rise over the run where the rise refers to the
amount of vertical change and the run refers to the amount of horizontal change.
So it's very important to remember slope is all about the change in the y direction over
the change in the x direction.
Remember that slope is going to be a ratio or a fraction, change in y over change in
x.
Now this quantity which we're calling slope measures then how steep or how flat a straight
line is because it's measuring how fast the vertical amount is changing as the horizontal
amount changes.
So a steep hillside will have a large slope because the vertical or y values are changing
very quickly as the horizontal changes just a little bit while a road that's relatively
flat will have a small slope because the vertical distance is small while the horizontal change
is quite large.
Well I've talked enough at this point in vague terms I'd like us to look at some mathematical
examples to try to solidify this concept.
Let's start by finding the slope of the following line.
Notice that I've labeled two specific points which lie on the line.
If you look at the image you'll see that they are at the coordinates 0, 1 and 1, 3.
We talked about the Cartesian plane a few lessons ago and that's exactly where these
points lie and now we've connected the points with a line.
What I'd like to do now is use those two points to determine the slope of that given line.
Now we need to go back to the formula that I mentioned to you a few minutes ago to calculate
that slope.
The slope is going to be the change in y divided by the change in x or rise over run.
Well how do we calculate the values in this fraction once we are given those two points?
Well I would suggest that we look at the same graph now with just two extra little line segments
drawn in.
I'm going to take the two points that I already highlighted and from the lower left hand point
I'm going to draw a little horizontal segment and then from that higher point I'm going
to drop a vertical segment so that those two segments along with the line that we were
given in the first place make up a right triangle.
Now the links of the two segments that we've drawn in are exactly the rise and the run.
So if you take the length of the vertical segment that we drew in to create our right
triangle we will have the rise and if you take the length of the horizontal segment
you'll have the run.
In this case the vertical segment is exactly two units long and the horizontal segment
is exactly one unit long.
Simply look at the units on the axes of our graph in order to see this and therefore the
slope of this particular line is exactly two divided by one which is two.
Now let me point out something very quickly.
It's very tempting to say that the slope is one divided by two instead of two divided
by one.
That's a common mistake that you don't want to make.
When you're writing down the slope it's always the change in the vertical direction or the
change in y divided by the change in x.
So be very careful that you always write the numerator as the change in y and the denominator
as the change in x.
So the slope of that line was two but you might be saying gosh I'd really benefit from having
a formula.
Could you give me a general formula that would help me to know what the slope is no matter
what points you gave me and I think that's a good idea.
So let's say the following as our formula for slope.
If you're given any two points in the Cartesian plane and their coordinates are x1, y1 that's
the first point and x2, y2 for the second point then we're going to say that the slope
of the line connecting those two points is given by the rule y2 minus y1 divided by x2
minus x1.
So I see it's the change in the y's or the difference in the y's divided by the change
in the x's.
Now let me make one other comment very quickly before we move on to another quick example.
When you write down y2 minus y1 over x2 minus x1 you must use the coordinates in the same
order.
Here's what I mean.
If you're going to choose y2 minus y1 for the numerator then you've chosen the y coordinate
of the point x2 comma y2 as the first piece in the numerator.
When you do that you must choose the x pieces in the denominator then in the same order.
So the slope is y2 minus y1 over x2 minus x1.
Just switch them and do the following y2 minus y1 over x1 minus x2.
You will have crossed up your information you'll get the wrong slope.
Now let's use this formula to go back to the example I did a moment ago and just make sure
that we get the same slope between the two points 0 comma 1 and 1 comma 3.
Using the formula that I gave you slope equals y2 minus y1 over x2 minus x1 we would have
3 minus 1 on top those are the two y values being subtracted from one another divided
by 1 minus 0 those are the two x values being subtracted from one another.
The numerator 3 minus 1 is 2 the denominator 1 minus 0 is 1 2 divided 1 2 divided by 1
is 2 and that's what we got earlier so that checks the work that we did a moment ago.
Now some of you might be asking and it would be a good question if you were asking it what
if we had used different points on the line that we started with I mean what's so special
about 0 comma 1 and 1 comma 3.
If we used two different points would we still get a slope of 2 on that line well we hope
we do right the slope ought to be 2 no matter what two points we choose and so I'm going
to suggest that we look at two very different points on the line and we see if we get the
same slope.
So look back at your image now and you should see that 2 comma 5 is a point on the same
line and negative 4 comma negative 7 is also a point on that line.
Now we should be able to use those coordinates in order to calculate the same slope so let's
do so.
Let's use our formula change in y over change in x or y2 minus y1 over x2 minus x1 and let's
see if we get the same answer well the numerator is going to be the change in the y so that's
going to be 5 minus the negative 7 the denominator is going to be 2 minus negative 4 notice that
I started with the 5 on the top which was the y coordinate in the point 2 comma 5 I
started then in the denominator with the 2 which was the x coordinate for the 5.
So I have 5 minus negative 7 divided by 2 minus negative 4 remember 5 minus negative 7 is the
same as 5 plus 7 and 2 minus negative 4 is 2 plus 4 so I have 12 on top I have 6 on the
bottom that fraction looks very different but when you reduce it you just get 2 and
we get the same slope which is fabulous.
You can probably see why all those lessons we did earlier on with adding and subtracting
negative and positive signed integers really really paid off notice how those calculations
of slope just a bit of arithmetic turned out to have a lot of trickiness to them with all
those minus and plus signs don't worry about those things just make sure you're very very
careful as you do your arithmetic in calculating slope.
Alright let's try a second example now with a totally different line I want us to find
the slope of the following line I want you to notice that I've labeled 2 points again
on the line it's very important that we find at least 2 points in order to find the slope
the 2 points I've labeled now are minus 1 comma 7 and 2 comma negative 8 so one of the
points is in quadrant 2 and the other point is down in quadrant 4.
We can use those 2 points to find the slope of this new line so let's do it together the
slope is the rise over the run or the change in y over the change in x and in this case
using the 2 points that I've given you we would have the following numerator would be
negative 8 minus 7 and the denominator would be 2 minus negative 1 alright we can now simplify
that fraction a bit the numerator becomes negative 15 and the denominator is actually
2 plus 1 if you think about it for a moment 2 plus 1 is 3 so I have negative 15 divided
by 3 and remember when you have a negative on top and a positive on the bottom the division
is going to be a negative for the answer and so I'm going to get negative 5 15 over 3 is
5 so the slope of my line here is negative 5 now here's a comment I want you to think
about we'll talk about it a little bit in just a minute notice that in the first example
I had a positive slope it was 2 and now in this example I have a negative slope which
is negative 5 is it alright to have a negative slope I mean was that a legal thing to have
happened or should we have been thinking critically there maybe we would have caught a mistake
well the answer is that we took both of those slopes exactly correctly so don't fret you
actually got the right answers in both of those cases but I want you to think about why one
of the slopes was positive and one of the slopes was negative so here's what's happening
if your line is increasing or if your line is going up as you look at it from left to
right then your slope is going to be positive that was the case in our first example the
line was going up like this as you read it from left to right it was going up your slope
then will be positive if your line on the other hand is decreasing so it's going down
as you read it from left to right then your slope is going to be negative and in the example
that we just completed that's exactly what happened the line was going down like this
as you see it reading from left to right it went down and that slope is going to be negative
it was it was negative 5 there's a second comment we need to make with regard to slope
the slope is trying to tell us something about the steepness of the line and so it's important
not only to think about the sign whether it's positive or negative it's also important to
think about the size of the slope as well notice that in the case of the slope of negative
five the line was actually more steep than the case where the slope was positive two
so I'm sorry for the pun here but what is the point of what I'm trying to say well the
point is as we deal with points and lines if your line is very very steep so it's actually
trying to go vertical if you will then you're going to have a larger slope now it might be
something positive and large like plus 100 or if it's trying to be steep but it's going
negative then you might have a negative 100 for the slope if your line is more flat so
it's trying to get more horizontal then you're going to have a very small slope and by having
a small slope I mean it's going to be close to zero so in fact a line that just looks
maybe like this would have a slope maybe of just one half or one tenth in the process so
we have the idea now of steepness for example a line of slope 20 might be very very steep
in this direction but the line of slope one tenth which is only point one might be very
very flat so you have to balance out now the issues of the size of the slope and the sign
of the slope positive or negative and those two very different things are going to tell
you two very different things about the lines that you're studying okay so let's look at
some more examples then let's go back to just finding the slope between two points let's
take the points negative 2 comma 8 and 6 comma 7 now what's the difference between this example
and previous examples well I'm not showing you any graph all I've done is given you two
points in the Cartesian plane well do we need the line then the answer is absolutely not
once you have those two points you can calculate the slope to your heart's content because all
you need is the formula y2 minus y1 over x2 minus x1 now of course once we calculate that
slope it'll tell us the slope of the line that would go through those two points but
I don't need the line in order to calculate that slope so let's use our formula y2 minus
y1 over x2 minus x1 in this case that would give us the following the slope would be 8
minus 7 divided by negative 2 minus 6 well 8 minus 7 that's just 1 and negative 2 minus
6 is negative 8 and so I have just negative 1 8 as my slope now before we go anywhere
we should really ask ourselves what does negative 1 8 as a slope tell me about the line that
would connect these two points okay the slope is negative and that means that the line is
going to go down somehow as I look at it from left to right but all the negative tells me
is that it goes down it doesn't tell me whether it's steep or whether it's relatively flat
but now I have to think about the size of that slope and the size was 1 8 if I take
the absolute value of negative 1 8 I get 1 8 1 8 is pretty small it's only 0.125 if you
do its decimal equivalent and that means the up because it's small that the line is going
to be relatively flat so it's going to go down but it's going to be relatively flat
in the process and if you were to plot those two points and then look at the line in the
Cartesian plane that's exactly what you'd see now before we move to the next example
I'd like to think about the following some of you might be saying what if I use the points
in the opposite order you know I keep telling you which point to use first and which point
to use second in the equation for slope what if I actually used the 6 comma 7 point first
and the negative 2 comma 8 point second well let's try it let's use the same formula but
use the 6 comma 7 information first well in that case the slope would be 7 minus 8 divided by
6 minus negative 2 okay what do we get then 7 minus 8 that's negative 1
6 minus negative 2 is the same as 6 plus 2 which is 8 so I have negative 1 over 8
and that's the same answer we had as before so what's the point the point is the order in which
you use the points in the slope form does not matter all that matters is that you divide the
y information by the x information and once you've done that you're good to go okay let's
find the slope of another line and I've chosen some points kind of carefully this time to see
what happens let's find the slope between the points 4 comma 6 and negative 7 comma 6 again
I don't need the graph of the line to calculate the slope I really just need the two points so
let's just go after the slope using the coordinates that were given to us the slope is going to be
the rise over the run the change in the y's over the change in the x's so I'm going to have the
following the numerator will be 6 minus 6 did you notice that both of the y coordinates were
actually the same they're both 6 the denominator is going to be 4 minus negative 7 okay what does
the numerator become then well it becomes 0 and the denominator becomes 4 plus 7 which is 11
now what is 0 divided by 11 this often gives students trouble well 0 divided by 11 is exactly
0 when you have a 0 in the numerator of a fraction and the denominator is not 0 then that whole
fraction is 0 a 0 in the numerator of a fraction is not a problem in a fraction so keep that in mind
0 divided by 11 0 divided by 19 0 divided by 3 they would all be 0 now that's a pretty small
slope what kind of line has a slope of 0 well if you plot those two points that I gave you in the
Cartesian plane and you connect the dots you'll see exactly the kind of line you'll get you'll get a
horizontal line in fact we can say the following every horizontal line has slope 0 to use a fancy
mathematical term this is a characterization of horizontal lines okay what do I mean by that
what I mean is this every horizontal line has slope 0 and every line with slope 0 is horizontal
so if you ever have a line that has slope 0 and you haven't graphed it yet
you immediately know that it has to be flat completely flat it has to be a horizontal line
well I'd like to look at one more example along these lines related to slope and here it is look
at the following graphic I've drawn the line and I've labeled two points and the two points in this
case have coordinates three comma one and three comma eight let's see what happens when I calculate
the slope of that line so here we go the slope between those two points is going to be eight
minus one so that's the difference between the two y coordinates divided by three minus three
that's the difference in the x coordinates okay what does that give me when I simplify for just a
second well it gives me seven on top eight minus one is pretty easy to calculate and it gives me
zero on the bottom now this is very very different from the fraction that we were looking at just a
few minutes ago notice now that the zero is in the denominator rather than in the numerator so
what is seven divided by zero well to use a big math term we say that that slope is
undefined or we say that you can never divide by zero division by zero is undefined and therefore
we have a problem because this line doesn't seem to have a slope all the other lines we've looked
at in this lesson had a slope two or negative five or negative one eighth in this case seven
over zero is undefined it is not a real number and so we're going to say that this vertical line
has undefined slope now you might say to me well maybe we just made a mistake or maybe we could
use two different points on the line other than the two points that were there and we'd get a
different slope and everything would be fine well here's the problem for any two points you pick on
that line the x coordinates are both going to be three whether it's three comma zero or three comma
one or three comma eight or three comma negative sixteen and that means that in the denominator
of your slope you're always going to have in this example three minus three you're not going to be
able to get around that and because of that you're going to get zero in the denominator and that's
going to be undefined so our slope for a vertical line is always going to be undefined we'll say
we simply cannot find the slope of a vertical line and that's sort of the opposite of the slope of a
horizontal line which is always just zero as we close out today's lesson i'd like to spend a
few more minutes talking about these fractions where zeros show up either in the numerator
or in the denominator believe it or not as someone who's taught college level students for a long
long time this seems to be an issue even for college students when zeros show up either in the
numerator or in the denominator of a fraction so let me talk about that again just for a moment
by giving you a quick example i said earlier that something like zero over seven is equal to zero
let me give you a quick analogy to why that's true let's say you had zero pizzas just bear with me
for a second and you had seven people that you wanted to divide zero pizzas up with well how
much pizza would each of those seven people get well you have no pizza so the answer is
each person would get zero pieces of pizza that's why zero over seven is zero but let's take the
picture and flip it what if you had the fraction seven divided by zero i said a moment ago that
that was a problem think about the thing i was saying about pizzas one more time now you have
seven pizzas and you want to divide them amongst zero people how much pizza would each person get
well this makes no sense you have no people to give the pizzas out to so seven over zero
makes no sense at all seven pizzas zero people how much does each person get it doesn't make sense
so keep in mind zero over seven equals zero seven over zero is undefined well we've seen today this
very important concept related to lines which we call slope we've calculated slopes for a number of
lines we've talked about how their signs plus or minus tell us something about which direction the
lines are going in and we've talked about how the size of the slope tells us something about their
steepness or their flatness lastly we saw two very special types of lines horizontal lines
and vertical lines in the coming lessons we'll talk more about how slope plays a key role
in the algebra related to straight lines next time we'll use what we've learned about slope
to begin graphing certain linear equations which are in what is sometimes called the slope intercept
form i'll see you then
