Music
Mathematical facts and equations can be represented in a wide variety of ways.
You might use a picture or a graph, for example, to describe a mathematical relationship.
Or you might write down a table of facts or values to demonstrate the relationship to someone.
Or you could give the algebraic relationship with an equation between the variables in question.
All of these approaches are valid and it's very important that we have the ability to use all of them
and to understand how to interpret what each of these representations tells us.
You never know what kind of information you'll be handed when starting a problem.
So being able to work from a graph or from a table or from an equation will be very important.
In previous lessons, we spent a good bit of time going between equations of lines and graphs of lines.
I'd like to focus on some different material now as we go into this lesson.
In particular, I want us to consider how to use tables of data to represent linear equations.
And I'd like to see how to go from tables to either equations or to graphs of linear equations.
This is very important as we move into trying to understand real-world examples that involve linear equations.
So let's start by talking about how a linear equation can be summarized with a table of values.
Let's determine whether the following table of data describes a linear equation or some other type of equation.
You never know when the data is handed to you whether it's linear or not.
So let's march through trying to understand whether the data is linear.
Here's our table. The x value 0 has a corresponding y value of 5, so 0,5 is one of the points of data.
x is 1, y is 8, when x is 2, y is 11, when x is 3, y is 14, when x is 4, y is 17, and when x is 5, y is 20.
So that's our table of data, and now I want to know are those points basically on a line,
or do those points satisfy a linear equation or a linear relationship?
Well, notice that the amount of change of the y values in the table is constant.
It's the same throughout the table.
That is, as each x value increases by 1, as you read down the list,
the y values increase exactly by plus 3.
So I should be clear here, when I say the y values increase by plus 3,
I mean we add 3 to each y value to get to the next y value.
So since we add the same amount to the y values every time the x value grows by 1 unit,
we know that this table represents a linear equation.
So let me just make sure that I'm understood here.
When I say we add 3 each time, I mean the following.
To go from the 11 to the 14, I've added 3.
To go from the 14 to the 17, I've also added 3.
And to go from the 17 to the 20, for example, I've added 3.
Now, we assume that the same pattern will hold if the x values get larger,
like if you looked at x equals 7, or x equals 8, or x equals 9, or even x equals 100.
And we also make the same assumption if the x's get smaller,
like if we had x equals negative 1, or negative 2, or negative 3.
But this is a drawback for using a table to describe an equation.
Why is that?
Because you can't write down all the information about the equation in one table.
So when you're handed a table, you have to make certain assumptions
about what's going to happen to the data which is outside of the table.
So that's one comment to make about this table.
The second comment to make about the table is this.
That common amount that we're adding to each y value, plus 3,
which is giving us the next y value, that's actually the slope of the line in this example.
So the slope of the line really is 3.
Well, what would we have done if the x values had not just grown by 1?
We actually kind of had it easy on ourselves since the x values just went 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Well, that would definitely complicate matters if the x values grew in a less nice pattern,
but we can handle that later.
In fact, we'll talk about it in a later example in this lesson.
Let me also point out that we can actually write down the equation of the line
that gives this table of data.
How? Well, the slope of the line is 3, as we've already said.
Notice also that the y-intercept was given to us.
The first point in the table is 0 for x and y is 5, 0, 5.
That's the y-intercept.
If the slope is 3 and the y-intercept is 5,
then the slope-intercept form of the equation of this line is y equals 3x plus 5.
And from the table of data, we've now figured out the equation of this line.
Now you might say to me, I'm not sure you got that right.
Well, let's try plugging in one more point in the table to see if it actually works.
The equation is y equals 3x plus 5.
Let's use the point 4 comma 17 and see if that point really is on the line y equals 3x plus 5.
Well, x is 4, so 3 times x plus 5 would be 3 times 4 plus 5, which is 12 plus 5, which is 17.
And that's the y value.
So indeed, those pieces of data from the table actually do all live on the line y equals 3x plus 5.
Okay, so let's look at another example where data comes into play, where we have a table of data
and we're trying to figure out, does that table of data represent a linear equation
or maybe some other kind of equation?
So here's the table of data that we now have.
When x is 0, y is 1. When x is 1, y is 6. When x is 2, y is 11.
When x is 4, y is 21. And when x is 7, y is 36.
A nice set of data.
Now when you look at those pieces of data for just a second and I ask you, do those represent a linear equation?
My guess is that many of you would first say, no way.
And the reason you would say that is because the y values are not increasing by the same amount.
I see the 1 and then the 6 and that needed a 5 to make the increase.
And then 11 minus 6 is also 5, so I needed a 5 to add to make that increase.
But then when I look at the next piece of data in the table, I see that I've grown from 11 to 21 in the y.
21 minus 11 is 10. That's not 5.
And if I look at the next piece of data, it's even worse.
36 minus 21 is 15.
So it looks like the y values are growing kind of sporadically and therefore I don't have a linear equation.
I can understand you saying that, but I want to slow you down before you make that your final answer.
Notice that the x values are also not growing at the same amount.
Do you see how they go 0, 1, 2, 4, 7?
They're not growing like the previous example that just grew one at a time in the x's.
That's a very important key in this example.
So let's now go back to the table for a moment and look more carefully at the data that's been given to us.
First we see that when the x value goes from 0 to 1, the y value goes from 1 to 6.
That's a change of 5 in the y value, right? 6 minus 1 is 5.
The same is true when the x goes from 1 to 2.
So if the table is representing a linear equation, it must be the case that an increase of 1 in the x value corresponds to an increase of 5 in the y value.
By the way, think about how that goes towards rise over run.
Now, let's see what happens when x changes from 2 to 4.
Well, when x goes from 2 to 3, the y value would have to grow by 5.
And then when it went from 3 to 4, it would have to grow by 5 again.
So when x goes from 2 to 4, the y value needs to grow by 10 or 5 plus 5.
Is that what happens? Yes, that's exactly what happens.
When x is 2, y is 11.
And when x is 4, y is 21.
And 21 minus 11 is 10.
So in fact, we're still on track for this table to represent a linear equation.
Let's look at the last pair of points then.
x equals 4, y equals 21, and x equals 7, y equals 36 to see if this same relationship holds.
Now, in the case when x is 4 and we move from 4 to 7, the difference in the x values is 3.
7 minus 4 is 3.
So the growth in the y values then would need to be 5 plus 5 plus 5.
Why? Because we want to go from x equals 4 to x equals 5 and then to x equals 6 and then to x equals 7.
So I actually need to make sort of three jumps.
And each of those needs to grow by 5.
And 5 plus 5 plus 5 is the same as 3 times 5, which is 15.
Is the change in the y is equal to 15 at that point?
Well, when x is 7, y is 36.
When x is 4, y is 21.
36 minus 21 is 15.
And that was exactly what we needed the jump to be from 21 up to 36.
And therefore, guess what?
This table really does represent a linear equation.
And it turns out that the linear equation is y equals 5x plus 1.
Well, we know this is true because the slope of the line is 5.
That's what all those calculations we just did told us.
Every time we moved 1 over in the x direction, we had to go up 5.
And the y-intercept is clearly 0, 1 from the table that was given to us.
And therefore, the y-intercept value, b, if you will, is 1.
So my equation must be 5x plus 1.
Well, let's look at another example of this type just for a moment.
Another table of information, table of data.
And let's see if this table represents a linear equation.
Here's the table.
We're going to have 0 for x and 1 for y.
That's going to be one point.
Then we'll have 1 for x and 2 for y.
And then the next point will be 2, 5.
The next point will be 3, 10.
And the last point will be 4, 17.
In other words, when x is 4, y is 17.
Now, for this table to represent a linear equation,
I know that the slope between any two points we choose must be the same amount.
In other words, if all of these points live on one line,
then no matter which two points I choose on the line,
the slope between those two points must be the same.
This is true of all linear equations.
So here's what I'm going to do.
I'm going to take my table of values,
and I'm just going to start picking a couple of points,
and I'm going to ask, what's the slope between those two points?
And if this table represents a linear equation,
then all of those slopes will be the same.
So let's start with the slope between the points 0, 1, and 1, 2.
Those were the two pieces of data at the beginning of the table.
The slope in that case is going to be y2 minus y1 over x2 minus x1,
or 2 minus 1 over 1 minus 0.
2 minus 1 is 1, 1 minus 0 is 1.
That's 1 over 1.
And therefore, my slope is just 1.
And that means the slope between any other two points that I pick from my table
must also be 1 if this table represents a linear equation.
So let's pick the next pair of points.
How about when x is 1, y is 2, and when x is 2, y is 5?
We could choose lots of pairs.
We could choose when x is 2, y is 5, and x is 4, y is 17.
But I'm just going to use 1, 2, and 2, 5 for this example.
Well, what's the slope between 1, 2, and 2, 5?
Well, I go back to my slope formula for m, y2 minus y1 over x2 minus x1.
And in that case, my slope is 5 minus 2, that's the difference in the y's,
divided by 2 minus 1, that's the difference in the x's.
5 minus 2 is 3, 2 minus 1 is 1, 3 divided by 1 is 3.
And now, if you remember what we just did a few moments ago with this example,
we have a problem.
Notice that the slope between 0, 1, and 1, 2 was exactly 1.
Remember we did that calculation a few moments ago.
But the slope between 1, 2, and 2, 5 is 3, and that's different from 1.
What does that mean?
It means that the table that we were given in this example is not representing a linear equation.
Think about it, from 0 to 1, the slope might be 1 like this,
but then from 1 up to 2 for x, the slope is getting higher.
So the graph must be going like this, and then it must be going something like this.
And that definitely can't be the slope of a straight line,
can't be the graph of a straight line.
It feels like it's curving somewhere in between.
Let me share a few thoughts here about this example, though, before we move on to other things.
First off, it turns out that the points that I gave you in this table all satisfy a certain equation.
I kind of know what that equation was already.
I was the one who made the table.
But it turns out that they satisfy that equation y equals x squared plus 1.
y equals x to the second power plus 1.
That's not the equation of a line because of that power of 2 on the x.
Remember, a linear equation has a power of 1 on the x.
So it's going to be something like y equals x to the 1 plus something,
or y equals 7 times x to the 1 plus another number.
So that power of 2 in the equation y equals x squared plus 1
would actually tell us that this data cannot satisfy a linear equation.
So if we'd have had that equation, we could have finished this problem a long time ago.
But that's the helpful thing about algebra.
The equations can tell us a lot.
The fact of the matter is that without the equation, all we had was the data.
And that's pretty real world.
Sometimes all you can do is get data and tables of numbers,
and you have to figure out what's going on from there.
So if we had the equation, it could have told us immediately
that this was not data from a straight line.
Well, there's another way we could have known that it wasn't going to be data for a straight line.
What if we had just drawn the graph?
Well, what does the graph look like for something like y equals x squared plus 1?
Well, in fact, it sort of looks like a bowl or a cup.
It's called a parabola.
We'll talk about parabolas in future lessons,
so you don't need to know that term right now.
But the point is if we had had the graph,
and we had seen that the graph made this curved shape that looks like a bowl or a cup,
we would have known immediately that we would not have been staring at a linear equation.
We would have been staring at something else.
Now, I'd like to transition to a slightly more real-world type of problem
that can come up when you're looking at data.
So here's the word problem, and I'll walk us through it as we go.
A scientist measures the circumference of a certain tree.
So she's measuring the outside distance of this tree as it grows over a period of four years.
And the data she collects can be found here.
Now, here's a table which is going to look a bit complicated
compared to some of the other tables we've seen, but it's not a problem.
The x values are in years, and the x values are going to be 0, 1, 2, 3, 4.
These are the years that she's taking her measurements.
So x equals 0, think of it as the first time she made the measurement.
So it's like the beginning of the experiment.
x equals 1 then would be her measurement after one year from the beginning.
x equals 4 would be a measurement exactly four years after she started.
The y values which are corresponding are going to be in centimeters,
and they are going to be 45.72 when she began at x equals 0.
When x is 1, it's 60.96.
When x is 2, we have 76.20 centimeters.
When x is 3, 91.44 centimeters.
And when x is 4, the y value, which is this circumference of the tree trunk, is 106.68 centimeters.
So this tree has been growing as the years have gone by, and here's the question.
Does the tree's circumference appear to be growing in a linear fashion?
And if it is, use that information to predict the circumference of the tree in year 10.
Okay, the first thing you might do is say, oh my word, there's no way I want to try this problem.
Look at all those decimal numbers.
How in the world am I going to figure out whether this data follows a linear equation?
Well, you shouldn't jump into it that negatively.
We can really handle this by just checking the slopes as we go from one point to the next.
If we can show that the slopes between any two pairs of points are the same,
then we'll know that all of these points live on one line.
So that'll be the first part of this problem.
So let's take the pairs of points just two at a time in the table, and let's calculate the slopes.
Let's start with the first two points.
The first point is 0, 45.72, and the second one is 1, 60.96.
Do the slopes.
The slope of that is going to be 60.96 minus 45.72 divided by 1 minus 0.
To do that difference in the numerator, you might actually need to write the numbers in a vertical way.
That's how I like to write numbers in decimal form when I need to add or subtract them,
and then line up those decimal points and do the subtraction.
When you do that, the numerator is going to become 15.24.
The denominator, that's the easy part, is 1 minus 0, which is 1.
So the slope between those two points is 15.24 divided by 1, which is just 15.24.
Now, the slopes between every other pair of points then must be 15.24 if all of this data is actually living on the same line.
So let's now try the second pair of points and see if the slope is 15.24.
Well, those points are 1, 60.96 and 2, 76.20.
So the slope is going to be 76.20 minus 60.96 divided by 2 minus 1.
And again, the denominator is really friendly.
2 minus 1 is just 1.
I can do that.
What's the numerator?
Again, you might need to write the numbers vertically, 76.20 minus 60.96, line up those decimal points.
When you do that, that difference is going to be 15.24.
Hey, divided by 1, that's 15.24.
And that's a great sign.
It means that the slopes at least between the first two pairs of points are the same.
So those three points are definitely living on a straight line.
But, you know, it could be the case that the tree grows in a sort of linear fashion like that,
and then all of a sudden it has a growth spurt and it starts to grow really, really fast.
So we can't determine yet that we're on a straight line until we check all the other points.
So let me do that pretty quickly.
Let's take the slope between 2, 76.20 and 3, 91.44.
When I do that, I need to do the change in y's divided by the change in x's.
That's going to be 91.44 minus 76.20 divided by 3 minus 2.
Notice the way the table is working here.
All the denominators are 1, which is really friendly.
And 91.44 divided by, or 91.4 minus 76.20 is 15.24.
When I divide that by 1, I get 15.24.
This is a great sign, but it doesn't mean we're done yet.
So let's check the last slope between that last pair of points.
3, 91.44 and 4, 106.68.
When I do my difference of y's on the top, I'm going to have 106.68 minus 91.44.
I'm going to divide that by my difference in the x's, which is 4 minus 3.
And I will have, when I do those differences, 15.24 divided by 1, which is 15.24.
Guess what? All of these points live on the same line.
So indeed, this table, which looked kind of messy at first,
really turns out to contain a whole bunch of points on one line.
Now here's the question.
If you want the equation of that line, you need the slope.
And if you can get it, the y-intercept.
Well, what's the slope?
Well, you just calculated it four times.
It's 15.24.
So there's m, 15.24.
What's the y-intercept?
Go back to your data.
The y-intercept needs to be the point where the x value is zero.
Remember, the y-intercept lives on the y-axis for the graph.
And if you're on the y-axis, your x value must be zero.
So your y-intercept is right in front of you.
It's 0, 45.72.
And therefore, equipped with the slope and the y-intercept,
you know that the equation of the line in slope-intercept form
is y equals 15.24x plus 45.72.
Now, you could actually sketch the graph of this line.
And if you do so on a piece of graph paper,
it might be a little complicated
because you're not exactly sure how to make all those grid lines
in terms of their units.
I mean, 15.24 and 45.72 might be a little hard to figure out.
But if you sketched it, maybe on a calculator or a computer,
one such sketch would look like the following.
Now, notice that that line has positive slope, 15.24,
and that works out well.
And it also goes through the right y-intercept.
You could also plot all the individual points in the table
to make sure they live on that line and everything would work.
So you started with a problem
that you might have been real scared about.
In fact, you figured out that equation with relative ease.
Now, the problem was actually two problems, if you remember.
We were told that if the data satisfied a linear equation,
that we wanted to use that equation
to figure out the circumference of this tree in year 10.
So now that I know the equation,
I can actually figure out this prediction.
What's going to happen?
I'm going to take my equation y equals 15.24x plus 45.72.
Year 10 is an x value.
And so I'm going to plug in 10 for x into that equation
and simplify to find y.
Remember, y was telling me the circumference of the tree
in centimeters.
So my equation was y equals 15.24x plus 45.72.
Plugging in 10 for x gives me
y equals 15.24 times 10 plus 45.72.
And that's y equals 152.4 plus 45.72.
Remember, when you multiply a decimal by 10,
it just moves the decimal point to the right, one unit.
And when you add 152.4 to 45.72,
you get y equals 198.12.
Remember to add those, it's probably good to write them
in that vertical notation.
Life will work out real well for you.
Now, we've predicted then, using our equation,
that the tree is going to be 198.12 centimeters around
its circumference in year 10.
It would probably be wise to take our graph
and see if that point, 10 comma 198.12,
is actually on the graph.
If you do so, you'll find that it really is.
Now, let me give you a few comments about the example
we just did before we leave it.
First, the fact that this data was exactly linear
is, okay, probably not completely realistic.
I mean, trees don't grow that precisely,
and there's probably a bit of human error involved
in taking the measurement around this tree.
So, I know that in a real world,
we might see a trend towards linear growth,
but we probably would not have seen these exact values.
So, I'm willing to admit that.
On the other hand, it was still good to see
how these decimal numbers could actually fit along
a linear equation on the graph of a line.
Secondly, what if I had asked you to use that same equation
to predict the circumference of this tree in year 1,000?
Now, of course, this scientist is probably not going to be
around for 1,000 years, but she could keep handing it down
to later scientists and so on.
If we use that equation,
y equals 15.24x plus 45.72,
and we replace x by 1,000 and simplify,
you're going to get y equals 15.24 times 1,000
plus 45.72, which is 15,240 plus 45.72,
which is 15,285.72 centimeters.
That translates to a circumference of over 500 feet,
and currently the world record is just under 200 feet
for a tree's circumference.
So, did we do some mathematics incorrectly?
No, not really.
The issue here would really be our assumptions.
To assume that that tree is just going to keep growing
at the same rate over the next 1,000 years is faulty.
There are lots of reasons that trees and lots of other things
don't just keep growing at the same rate.
Drought, insect attack or disease, old age, you name it.
This tree is hard to imagine that it will grow
the same way for 1,000 years.
So, what's the point?
When we want to use mathematics to help predict the future,
we should be wise as to how far out in the future
we try to predict.
The uncertainties of the future are exactly why
the weatherman usually can't tell you accurate predictions
about the temperature or rainfall
for much more than a few days into the future.
So, be very careful when you're using mathematics
to try to actually predict what's going to go on well
into the future.
Well, we've begun to think a bit about looking at word problems
and how real-world situations can be looked at
via linear equations.
I want to continue to look at these kinds of themes
in our future lessons together.
I'll see you then.
