Sometimes mathematical situations arise where we aren't worried about whether certain quantities
are actually equal to one another.
And we just want to know that one quantity is maybe less than or greater than the other.
For example, if we have an expression for the cost for our business and another expression
for revenue or income for our business, we'd like to know the circumstances under which
the cost expression will be less than the revenue expression.
In other words, we'd like to make a profit.
So we'd like to see mathematical situations where we're not worried about things being
equal just whether one thing is larger than or smaller than another.
And this leads us to the topic of solving linear inequalities.
A linear inequality provides an algebraic way to identify a part of the XY plane or
the Cartesian coordinate plane whose boundary is a straight line.
For example, if we wanted to discuss the part of the XY plane where the points satisfy y
greater than zero, then we'd be talking about all of the points in quadrants one and two.
We'd also be talking about the boundary line because y equals zero or the x-axis are the
same thing.
But if you're only looking at y greater than zero, strictly greater than zero, then you
only care about quadrants one and two.
Before we jump into these linear inequalities, which cut the plane into two regions, I'd
like to talk for a moment about some basic properties of inequalities.
And I'd like to discuss inequalities on just the number line, the number line by itself,
not the Cartesian plane, but just the one-dimensional number line.
It's really important to remember some basic facts about inequalities.
So let's start with the following.
First, let's let a, b, and c just be three variables that represent some numbers, real
numbers.
And then we know the following.
If a is less than b, then a plus c is less than b plus c.
In other words, if you have one number that's already less than another and you add the
same amount to both sides or the same amount to both numbers, then the inequality stays
the same.
Why is that actually true?
Well, you can think about it on the number line.
If a is less than b, that means that a would be to the left of b on that number line.
If you then add the same quantity, say c to a, you'll shift a by c units to the right.
But by doing that, when you add c to b, you would shift b by the same amount.
So on the number line, if a is here and b is to its right, adding c to both of them
simply shifts them together.
So if a was to the left of b before, then a plus c would still be to the left of b plus
c.
And that means that if a is less than b, then a plus c would be less than b plus c.
So adding the same amount to an inequality doesn't change the sign.
So for example, we know that five is less than eight, that's pretty common knowledge.
That means that if you added four to both sides of five is less than eight, you'd get
five plus four, which is nine, is less than eight plus four, which is 12.
That's just a small numerical example of the rule I was telling you a few moments ago.
By the way, that same property is also true if a is less than or equal to b, not just
strictly less than.
In other words, if a is less than or equal to b and you add c to both sides of that inequality,
you'll have the statement a plus c is less than or equal to b plus c.
That would be another rule that you could state.
A similar statement can be true when the inequality symbol is a greater than symbol and also when
it's greater than or equal to.
In other words, here's the point.
If you have an inequality written down and you add the same amount to both sides of that
inequality, then the inequality sign doesn't change.
That's the important property we need to keep in mind.
Similarly, if you have an inequality written down, whether it's with a less than symbol
or a less than or equal to symbol or a greater than symbol or a greater than or equal to
symbol and you subtract the same amount from both sides, then the inequality stays the
same.
The reasoning there is the same kind of reasoning as we had before.
If a is less than b on the number line and you subtract c from both sides, then the numbers
just get shifted, but they get shifted together.
That means if a was less than b to begin with and you subtract c from both of them, then
a minus c will still be less than b minus c.
Subtracting from both sides of an inequality keeps the inequality symbol the same, whether
you start with a less than or a less than or equal to or a greater than or a greater
than or equal to.
For example, you know five is less than eight.
We also know then that three is less than six because five minus two is less than eight
minus two.
So addition and subtraction don't really do much to inequalities.
They don't change the inequality symbol, but what about multiplication and division?
Well, it's a very, very different story.
Consider for example that five is less than eight.
You already knew that.
What if I multiply both sides of the inequality, five is less than eight, by the same number?
Let's say two.
Then I'll have five times two is less than eight times two or 10 is less than 16.
Is 10 less than 16?
Yes, it is.
So that's a good thing.
The two, but multiplication by two didn't change the inequality.
Now, what if I take five is less than eight and I multiply both sides of that by negative
three?
Then I'm going to have the statement negative 15 is less than negative 24.
That's actually not correct.
In fact, negative 15 is bigger than negative 24 and you might be saying, how in the world
could that be?
Well, here's how.
Take your number line again, put the zero somewhere in the middle and now ask yourself,
where is negative 15 and where is negative 24?
Negative 15 is 15 units to the left of your zero.
So it's here and negative 24 would be negative 24 units to the left of zero.
So it would be even farther out.
Now which numbers to the right and which numbers to the left?
Well, negative 15 would have been here and negative 24 would have been farther over to
the left and that means that the negative 24 is actually less than negative 15 or negative
15 is greater than negative 24.
So notice what would have happened then.
We started with five is less than eight and when we multiplied by negative three, we got
negative 15 is greater than negative 24 and that little example leads us to a very big
and very important math fact and here's what it is.
If you start with A is less than B and C is a positive number and you multiply both sides
of the inequality by C, then the inequality doesn't change.
You're left with AC is less than BC but if A is less than B and C is a negative number
and you multiply both sides by that C, then the inequality sign must change.
So if A had started out less than B, then AC needs to be greater than BC and this property
is true whether you're using a less than symbol or a greater than symbol, a less than
or equal to or a greater than or equal to.
All of those are going to have the same property.
Multiplication by a negative number switches the inequality.
A similar statement can be made when you divide by numbers as well with inequalities.
Here's what that statement is.
If you have an inequality and you divide by a positive number, then the inequality doesn't
change.
So if you start with A is less than B and you divide by a positive number C, then A divided
by C will still be less than B divided by C but if you start with A is less than B and
C is a negative number and you divide by that C, then A over C becomes bigger than
B over C.
So when it comes to multiplying or dividing an inequality, you must know what the sign
of the numbers are because if you multiply or divide by a negative number, the inequality
is going to switch.
That doesn't matter when you're adding and subtracting.
When you add and subtract to an inequality, the inequality symbol just sits there.
But when you multiply or divide, you must know whether you are multiplying or dividing
by a positive number or a negative number.
Okay, that's a quick review of some of the arithmetic facts that have inequalities in
them and they're very, very important.
I'm going to use them as we walk through the rest of this lesson together.
With those done, I'd like to turn our attention now to graphing inequalities just on the number
line.
We're going to do an example or two of that very quickly.
So for example, let's say we wanted to graph the inequality, X is less than or equal to
three just on the number line.
What do we do?
You've probably done some of these in the past but let's just make sure we're on the
same page together.
If you want to graph, X is less than or equal to three just on the number line.
You draw your horizontal line or number line, you label some of the points, you better label
three because it's an important one, maybe you label zero as well.
You draw a dot at three and you fill in that dot and then you somehow shade the portion
of the number line to the left of three.
Why to the left of three?
Because you're trying to show all the points that are less than or equal to three.
Once you've done that, several things ought to be noticed.
First of all, by doing this problem you have split or separated the number line into two
different pieces.
You've grabbed the parts that are less than or equal to three and you've also distinguished
the parts that are greater than three.
You've got the piece you shaded and the piece you didn't.
That's one comment to make.
The second comment to make is if the inequality had been X is strictly less than three instead
of X is less than or equal to three, you would have used an open circle to mark the point
at three.
You would not have shaded it in because three is not included in the set of numbers which
satisfy X is less than three.
Three is not less than three.
So these two comments are going to come into play when we start talking about linear inequalities
in the plane in just a second.
With all of this as background, I do want to go now to some linear inequalities in the
Cartesian plane or the XY plane.
So the idea is going to be we're going to be handed an inequality which is going to
have a line as its boundary in the XY plane and we're going to want to know which part
of the Cartesian plane do we shade in.
Just like a moment ago, we took our number line in one dimension and we shaded in one
part of it and left the other part alone.
So let's look at the following example.
I want us to graph the solution set of the linear inequality Y is less than 2X plus 1.
Now before we go anywhere, let's make sure we understand exactly what I just told you
to do.
Graph the solution set of the linear inequality Y is less than 2X plus 1.
There are lots of solutions to Y is less than 2X plus 1.
In fact, there are infinitely many different pairs for X and Y that you could plug in so
that the Y was less than 2X plus 1.
So I'm looking for all of those pairs inside the Cartesian plane.
To start the problem, I'm going to first sketch the graph of Y equals 2X plus 1.
Not Y is less than 2X plus 1.
What can I do with that line?
Well that line, of course it's just a straight line because Y equals 2X plus 1 is written
in slope intercept form.
That line serves as a boundary, a very natural boundary for the region of the XY plane which
does represent the set of solutions for the inequality.
So when I draw that line, I'm going to do it in a dashed fashion.
Not as a connected line if you will, but in a dashed form.
Why am I going to do it dashed?
Well because the points on the line Y equals 2X plus 1 are not part of the solution set
for Y is strictly less than 2X plus 1.
And now here's the analogy with the open circle on the number line from a few moments ago.
Remember on the number line when you're just dealing with one dimensional problems on that
number line, you use an open circle to show that that number is not part of the solution
set.
When my line in two dimensions is not part of the solution set, I'm going to draw it
in a dashed fashion so that I remind myself that the points on the line are not part of
the solution.
And they're not going to be part of the solution exactly when the original problem started
out with a strictly less than or a strictly greater than.
And now the question is, and this is the whole question for the rest of the example, which
two regions of the XY plane do I want to shade in?
In other words, the solutions of Y is less than 2X plus 1 are all going to be either
on one side of the line we just drew or they're going to be on the other side.
So I want to pick which of those two, it's a 50-50 problem, okay?
You just have to pick which of the two to shade in.
In this case, we want Y is less than 2X plus 1.
And because of that, I'm going to choose to shade in the part of the plane which is below
the line.
And I'm choosing that because I want the Ys to be less than as opposed to greater than.
And so I shade in that whole region of the XY plane.
All of the points in that region are solutions of the inequality.
Now before we go on though, you know me, I always want us to check our answers.
So we should do that here.
Well, here's how you would check your answer very, very quickly just to see if it's plausible.
Every point in the region you've shaded is supposed to satisfy the inequality.
Pick a point in that region and just see if it actually works.
Notice that the origin is in the region you've shaded, that's the point 0, 0.
That means that 0, 0 must be in the solution set of the inequality.
So let's plug in 0 for X and 0 for Y in the original inequality and see if we get a true
statement.
Y is less than 2X plus 1 is going to become 0 is less than 2 times 0 plus 1 when we plug
in 0, 0.
The left hand side of course is 0, then I have less than 0 plus 1 because 2 times 0
is 0 and 0 plus 1 is 1.
So I have the statement 0 is less than 1.
Now that's not an equality statement, but it is a mathematical statement, 0 is less
than 1.
Is that a true statement?
Yes, it is.
And because that's a true statement, I'm confident that 0, 0 is part of my answer set and because
0, 0 is in the region that we shaded, I say we did it right and I say we moved forward.
So let's move forward to another example.
Let's graph the solution set of the linear inequality 4X plus 8Y is greater than or equal
to 10.
So to start this problem, I need to figure out the boundary edge which is the straight
line defined by 4X plus 8Y equals 10.
This is the standard form of the equation of this line and once I can figure out where
that line is, I can plot it and then I know that all of my solutions live on either one
side or the other side of that line.
So let's take 4X plus 8Y equals 10 and rewrite it in slope intercept form just so we can
plot it quickly.
4X plus 8Y equals 10, subtract the 4X to the right hand side and you'll have 8Y equals
negative 4X plus 10.
Now you can divide both sides by 8 and you'll have Y because the 8's cancel equals negative
4X over 8 plus 10 over 8 or you'll have Y equals negative 1 half X because 4 over 8
is 1 half plus 5 over 4 because 10 over 8 reduces to 5 over 4 or 5 fourths.
And now I know what my boundary line is for the solution set here.
It has a slope of negative 1 half and it has a Y intercept of 5 fourths.
Notice also that the original problem had a greater than or equal to symbol rather than
just a strict greater than symbol and because of that I'm going to draw in my line in a
solid way, not in the dashed way but solidly.
So let's draw that line in now.
You need to do that on some graph paper if you have it and once you've drawn in that
line you have now defined two very natural regions of the XY plane.
One of them is sort of above that line, the other one is below.
The question is which set of points, the ones above the line or the ones below the line
are going to satisfy the original inequality?
Well I want the ones where Y is greater than or equal to minus 1 half X plus 5 fourths.
So I'm going to choose the region that is above because I want the Y's to be greater
than or equal to this line and therefore the Y's need to get big.
So I'm done.
Well again I should really check my answers.
So we should pick a point that's in the region that you've shaded and let's see if it actually
makes the inequality true.
Notice that the origin now is not in my solution set.
I've shaded away from the origin so I need to pick another point.
Why not a point on the Y axis which is above the Y intercept of the boundary line?
Something like how about 0 comma 3?
0 comma 3 is in the set.
Is it really going to make the original inequality true?
Let's check.
The original inequality was 4X plus 8Y is greater than or equal to 10.
X equals 0, Y equals 3 gives me 4 times 0 plus 8 times 3 is greater than or equal to
10.
That says 0 plus 24 is greater than or equal to 10 or 24 is greater than or equal to 10.
Now is 24 greater than or equal to 10?
If one of us had $24 and the other of us had $10 I think the one with 24 would have more
money.
So indeed 24 is greater than or equal to 10.
It's a true statement and therefore the point we chose really is in the solution set.
Now there was nothing special about 0, 3.
We could have actually picked any point that was in the shaded area.
But in our case it was very helpful to pick it because one of the values inside the ordered
pair was 0 and that 0 kind of simplified our arithmetic and that's why I chose that one.
Now I want to move to another example that might be a bit confusing at first.
My goal in showing it to you is to try to get over that confusion so that if you see
such a problem again later on like in the guidebook you won't be bothered by it.
So here's the example.
Graph the solution set in the Cartesian plane of the linear inequality x is greater than
5.
Now why do I say this is confusing?
Well notice that you only see one variable in the inequality x is greater than 5.
There are no y's.
So you might think I'm just talking about doing a problem on the number line like I
did a few minutes ago with you.
But I said in the problem that I wanted you to graph the solution set in the Cartesian
plane and that means that you need to be working in the two dimensional space of the Cartesian
plane not just the number line.
Well what do you do?
Well once you know that that's what you're supposed to be doing working in the Cartesian
plane you do this problem just like you do all the other problems.
You need to find the boundary line which splits the Cartesian plane into two pieces and then
figure out which side of the plane to keep.
So what's our boundary line?
Well in this case it's going to be x equals 5.
Okay what kind of line do you have if the equation is x equals 5 and there's no y term?
Do you remember?
Well when you have just x equals a number you always have a vertical line.
Think about it.
What kind of points are on the line x equals 5?
Well 5, 0, 5, 7, 5, 11 and so on and all of those points are on a vertical line where
the x equals 5.
So once you know that your boundary line is just this vertical line at x equals 5 now
you just need to ask yourself which part of the Cartesian plane are you going to keep?
Well the original inequality was x needed to be just strictly greater than 5.
So I need to pick all the points in the Cartesian plane where x is bigger than 5 and that means
I'm going to choose all the points that are to the right of this vertical line x equals
5.
And once I've done that I'm going to shade that part of the plane in and I'll be done.
Okay now after I've completed that example I need to ask myself does that answer actually
make sense?
In other words do I want all of these parts or all these points I should say from quadrants
1 and 4?
Well all of those points have an x value greater than 5 so indeed you've got the right ones
and so you're good to go.
Now I'd like to move on to a word problem that demonstrates how you might want to look
at a linear inequality to solve the problem.
Here's the word problem.
Your business sells two types of sneakers.
For simplicity let's just say one type is black and the other type is white.
The profit on the black sneakers is $12 per pair and the profit on the white sneakers
is $8 per pair.
How many pairs of sneakers must your company sell to make a profit of at least $400?
That's the problem.
One of the features of this question is the presence of the phrase at least.
I wanted to know that the profit would be at least $400 and that's a hint that this is
not a question about an equality it's a question about an inequality.
So let's proceed with that in mind and let's see if we can write down the right mathematical
expression to take care of the problem.
First what do we do in these kinds of situations?
We define the variables.
So let's do it real simply.
Let's let x be the number of pairs of black sneakers and let's let y be the number of
pairs of white sneakers that we sell.
That's simple.
Now what is our inequality?
Well based on that information about the profits $12 on one type of shoe and $8 on another
type of shoe we know that in order to make at least a $400 profit we need to write down
this equation.
12 times x or 12 times the number of black sneakers sold plus 8 times the number of pairs
of white sneakers sold is at least or greater than or equal to 400.
Notice that we used greater than or equal to instead of strictly greater.
If the problem had asked for the profit to be more than 400 then I would have used strictly
greater but since it said at least 400 I used greater than or equal to.
That's a real key in this example.
So I'm just trying to solve now the inequality 12x plus 8y is greater than or equal to 400.
I do it the same way I did all the other examples so far.
I'm going to look at the boundary line 12x plus 8y equals 400 and I'm going to see where
that line is located in the Cartesian plane.
To do that I'm going to write the equation in slope intercept form.
That way I can plot it pretty quickly.
So I've got 12x plus 8y equals 400.
I subtract the 12x over to the right hand side.
We've done a lot of this together so we move that 12x over to the right and it becomes
negative 12x and so I have 8y equals negative 12x plus 400 and now what do I want to do?
I want to isolate that y and the way I do that is divide by 8.
If you divide the left by 8 you must divide the right by 8 and you'll be left with y equals
negative 12x over 8 plus 400 over 8 and if you simplify those fractions a little bit
you'll see that that's the same as y equals negative 3 halves x plus 50.
Now that equation is in slope intercept form and you've seen equations like that quite
a bit in your previous lessons so you should now be able to plot that line using a solid
line because my inequality here is greater than or equal to and not just greater.
So pull out a piece of graph paper and give yourself some units and once you've done that
on the x and the y coordinates you can plot this line.
Now that line cuts the xy plane into two pieces.
There's a piece sort of below it and there's a piece sort of above it and the question
is which one do you want?
Well the question really asks how many pairs of sneakers must the company sell to make
a profit of at least $400?
There are lots of different ways the company could make at least $400.
You could sell zero pairs of one type, the x type and you could sell 50 pairs of the
y and you would end up with a profit of $408 or you could sell 100 of the first type and
zero of the second type and you'd end up with a profit of $1,200 and there are lots
of other ways to answer the question but it's okay to have lots of different answers.
So what I really want to know is what are all of the answers in this case?
Which part of the plane do I actually shade?
So I go back to this region and I ask myself which one do I want to shade?
Well I want to shade the one where the values are greater than or equal to.
In that case I'm going to shade the part that is above the line.
And so that's going to give me the solutions for this inequality.
But let's not get lazy.
If you look at that region for just a second there are lots of points there where things
don't make a whole lot of sense compared to the problem.
For example, the point x equals negative 5 and y equals 100 is actually in the solution
set.
Just go plug in x equals negative 5 and y equals 100 into the original inequality.
But that answer doesn't make any sense.
How could you sell negative 5 pairs of black sneakers?
You would definitely never want to go to your boss and say, hey boss let's sell a negative
number of pairs of sneakers.
So you need to be sure to remember the context of any word problem you do before you give
the final answer to that word problem.
Well today we've talked about the idea of linear inequalities which are a lot like linear
equations but with an equal sign being replaced by some sort of inequality sign.
We've graphed the solutions of these linear inequalities and we also saw how such inequalities
might come up in a word problem.
Next time we're going to turn a pretty significant corner and we're going to begin talking about
something called quadratic polynomials.
These are expressions like 3x squared plus 7x plus 2.
Notice that without the 3x squared you would just have 7x plus 2 and that would be linear.
We've studied those for a lot of lessons.
But with the 3x squared thrown in we have a totally different kind of expression in
so many ways.
So next time we'll begin talking about these quadratic polynomials.
I'll see you then.
