In the previous lessons, we've talked about the foil process for multiplying two binomial
expressions. Remember, foil stands for first, outer,
inner, last. We also discussed how to factor general quadratic expressions like x squared
minus 7x plus 12 and 2x squared plus 5x plus 3 by undoing the foil expansion of the product
of two binomials like x minus 4 times x minus 3. We noticed then that the process of factoring
is one of recognition, almost like solving a little mystery as we try to think backwards
on the foil process to see what the factorization ought to be. In this lesson, we want to focus
our attention on how to quickly recognize certain types of quadratic expressions whose
factorizations are very, very special. And in this way, we can actually speed up our
factoring process. So you should think of this as like adding extra tools to our factoring
toolbox. The first kind of factoring I want to mention today involves quadratic polynomials
or quadratic expressions where the constant term is zero so that you don't see a constant
term at all. So with that in mind, let's look at the following example. I want to factor
x squared minus 18x. Now, I want you to notice that this is the same as the expression x squared
minus 18x plus zero. I could add a plus zero there if we really want to see the constant
term, but since it's zero, we're just going to throw it out. Now, we could start our factoring
process the way we did in the previous lesson by writing down parentheses and then x minus
and another x minus and then working out what our constants should be. This was what
we did in the earlier lesson when we were undoing the FOIL process. But this seems kind
of strange here because the product of the constants which is supposed to give us the
number or the constant term in our quadratic expression has to be zero. So we could write
down x minus zero times x minus something else and just fill in the other constant in
order to make everything work out okay. But this seems like more work than it really ought
to be. It's just not worth it. And to be honest with you, I think that adding that zero really
just gets in the way. So I want to make the following suggestion as we think about factoring
these expressions. Notice that both of the terms in the polynomial we started with, x
squared and negative 18x have an x in common. Or to use some language that we had a few
lessons ago, their greatest common factor of those two terms is x. That means an x can
be factored out of that original polynomial immediately if we write down x squared minus
18x as x times x minus 18 times x. We see that common x floating around in both terms.
It can be factored out in the front. And when you do that, you have x times what's left.
And what's left is x minus 18. Well, guess what? You just factored the polynomial that
we started with. It looks a little bit different from our previous results, but it's really
the same thing because x times x minus 18 is actually the same as x minus zero times
x minus 18 because x minus zero is just x. So what's my point? My point is this. When
you're handed a quadratic expression and the constant term is zero, you should immediately
just look for the greatest common factor of the terms that you have and factor that out.
Once you've done that, your factorization will be done. You won't have to think about
undoing FOIL or anything along those lines if you're trying to factor a quadratic expression.
So as I said earlier, this is all about recognizing that kind of a special case. Now, to practice,
let's do another example. It's always good to practice in mathematics to make sure we're
really understanding what we're doing. So I want you to factor 27x squared plus 21x.
So we have a quadratic expression. It's quadratic because the highest power on x is 2, that x
squared term. And I want you to notice that the constant term is zero. It's just gone.
There is no constant term there. So all about recognition, I want to factor this polynomial
without thinking about FOIL at all. Instead, I want to look for the greatest common factor
of the two terms in the original expression, and I want to factor that out. So let's ask
ourselves, what is the greatest common factor of 27x squared and 21x? Well, let's factor
these two terms. 27x squared is 3 times 3 times 3 times x times x, and 21x is 3 times
7 times x. So looking at those two sort of factored ways of looking at the terms, can
we see the greatest common factor of the two terms? Well, they both have a 3 in them. Notice
that the 27x squared has more than one 3 in it, but the 21x only has one 3 in it. So
I'm going to keep one 3 in my greatest common factor, and notice that they both have at
least one x in them as well. So I'm going to keep an x in the greatest common factor,
and the greatest common factor here is 3x. So if I go back to the original polynomial,
27x squared plus 21x, and I pull out a 3x from each of those terms, then I will have
the following. I'll have 3x times 9x, because that's 27x squared, plus 3x times 7, because
3x times 7 is 21x. Pulling out that common 3x from both of these pieces is going to leave
me with a 9x plus a 7, and therefore, my factorization of 27x squared plus 21x is exactly
3x times 9x plus 7. Again, this could be written as 3x plus 0 times 9x plus 7, because 3x
plus 0 is the same as 3x. I think that's overkill. I think it's too much to do. I would just
write the final answer as 3x times 9x plus 7. Now, I'd like to look at another type of
special quadratic expression that comes up when we're doing factoring, whose factoring
can be done pretty quickly if we recognize it. So in order to look at this kind of special
family of expressions, let me remind you of some of the math work we've done in the past.
We know from FOIL that if I take something like a plus b and I square it, it's the same
as taking a plus b times a plus b. And if I FOIL that out, I'm going to get a squared
plus a b plus basically another a b from the inner terms, plus b times b from the L piece
of FOIL, and b times b is b squared. In other words, a plus b squared has a special look
to it. It's a squared plus 2 a b plus b squared. In a similar way, I could have a minus b whole
thing squared, and that would be just a minus b times a minus b. And if I FOIL that out,
I'm going to have a squared a minus a b from the outer terms, a minus a b from the inner
terms, and then I'm going to have a minus b times a minus b, which is positive or plus
b squared minus times a minus as a plus. So for example, instead of all these a's and
b's floating around, let's look at some actual polynomials where you got some numbers in there.
What about x plus 3 whole thing squared? Well, it's going to be x squared plus a 3x plus another
3x, which is 6x, plus 3 times 3, which is 9. In other words, it's x squared plus 6x plus
9. Or you might have x minus 7 whole thing squared, which is going to be x squared, a
minus 7x, another minus 7x, and then a plus 49, or x squared minus 14x plus 49. I promised
in the last few lessons that you'd have to be able to FOIL well, and here we see ourselves
FOILing once again. Make sure you're getting good if you aren't already at FOILing. These
kinds of polynomials that I talked about, x plus 3 whole thing squared and x minus 7 whole
thing squared, are sometimes called perfect square trinomials because, first of all, they're
trinomials. They have three terms in them, like x squared minus 14x plus 49. It has three
terms in it, but they can be written as the square of a binomial. In other words, something
like x minus 7 whole thing squared. They're known as perfect square trinomials, and it
turns out that if you are handed a perfect square trinomial and you recognize it as such,
then you can pretty quickly write down the factorization. If you notice that you have
a quadratic expression whose squared term, that's the term in the front, typically, and
whose constant term are perfect squares, then you might have a perfect square trinomial.
For example, if you have x squared in front, and maybe the constant is 9 at the end, or
x squared in front and the constant is 49 at the end, that's a hint that you might have
a perfect square trinomial. You also need to look for a second thing in case you have
a perfect square trinomial, and that is this. The middle term of the expression needs to
be exactly two times the product of one factor from the x squared and one factor from the
constant term. For example, if the middle term is 14x, that would be coming from two
times one of the x's and one of the 7's if you were multiplying out x plus 7 times x
plus 7. If your largest square term, the x squared, and the constant term are perfect
squares, and the middle has this property of being two times a product of a factor from
each of those, then you can quickly factor this polynomial. Now, all those words may
have gotten confusing. I could understand that. So, let's look at an example. That's
the beauty of mathematics. Let's factor x squared plus 16x plus 64. Okay, now, of course,
I've been telling you all this stuff about perfect square trinomials, so now you might
be looking for that. In general, if you're handed an expression that's quadratic like
this, you're going to want to think about different things, but for now, let's see that
this thing really is a perfect square trinomial. Notice that the x squared, of course, is just
x times x. That's a perfect square. And the 64, which is the constant, hey, that's also
a perfect square because it's 8 times 8. And again, I can't say enough that knowing these
sort of arithmetic facts is very, very useful in the study of algebra. Knowing that 64 is
a perfect square here is very helpful. So, the front term, the x squared, and the constant
term 64 are both squares. That's a hint that we might have a perfect square trinomial here.
That means we need to look at the middle term. In this case, it's 16x. It is 16x the same
as 2 times the product of one of the factors out of the x squared and one of the factors
out of 64. Well, 16x really is 2 times an x times 8. Remember, where's the 8 come from?
8 times 8 is 64. So, the middle term here, 16x, really is 2 times the product of the
x and the 8. That immediately tells us that we really are working with a perfect square
trinomial, and that means that we know the factorization. x squared plus 16x plus 64
actually equals x plus 8 times x plus 8, or just x plus 8 whole thing squared. That's
why it's called a perfect square. Now, if you wanted to check your answer here, what
would you do? Well, you would take the x plus 8 times the x plus 8 and you would foil it
and you would see that you get x squared plus 16x plus 64. I'm going to leave that arithmetic
actually that algebra to you to make sure that I really have the right factorization
there, but I promise x plus 8 whole thing squared really is the factorization for that
expression. Okay, let's try another one. Let's try another example where we might have a perfect
square trinomial. Here's the example. I want you to factor 4x squared minus 36x plus 81.
Now, this thing looks a bit daunting. I understand, but that's okay. Don't worry about it right
now. Let's just see if we can look at this thing and figure out its factorization. Now
you might start out with something like factoring as an undoing of the foil process with 2x
minus a big blank times another 2x minus another number here, and that would be okay. You could
certainly do that, but I want to point out that it would be just as valid at the beginning
of this process to write down 4x minus something times x minus something because 4x times x
gives you 4x squared just like 2x times 2x gives you 4x squared. So already as we start
there are two whole different ways that we might be able to write down the factorization
of this expression. Well, that's more than I really want to think about. So let's step
back for a second and ask ourselves, do we have a perfect square trinomial here? Because
if we do, we can write down the factorization very quickly. So let's look back at the original
problem. The term in the front was 4x squared. Notice that 4x squared is the same as 2x times
2x, which means it's a perfect square because it's actually 2x whole thing squared, right?
So 4x squared is a perfect square. Look at the constant term. The constant term there
was an 81, and 81 is 9 times 9, or 9 squared. Well, what that means is that you are set
up here for this to possibly be a perfect square trinomial, but as you were doing the
problem, you'd have to recognize that immediately to know if that's where you were. So again,
it's very important to recognize. Now, once we see that 4x squared and 81 are perfect
squares, we actually have a hint at what the possible factorization is if the polynomial
we were given, if the expression we were given, is a perfect square trinomial. It would have
to look like 2x minus 9 times 2x minus 9, or just 2x minus 9 whole thing squared. So
where in the world did I get the 2x and the 9 from? Well, the 2x comes from the fact that
4x squared was 2x times 2x, and the 9 comes from the fact that 81 is 9 times 9. Where
does the minus sign come from? Well, the middle term of the expression we started with had
a negative sign in front, and that's why I need a minus sign inside 2x minus 9. How
do I check to see if this is right? This is all about just checking to see if you really
get the right answer. You're really trying to just guess it at the beginning, which is
okay. Well, let's FOIL out 2x minus 9 whole thing squared. That's the same as 2x minus
9 times 2x minus 9. And when you FOIL that, you'll have the following. 2x times 2x, then
you have 2x times a negative 9, then you have negative 9 times 2x, and then you'll have
negative 9 times negative 9. I just marched through the f, the o, the i, and the l in FOIL.
And now if you simplify that, you're going to have 4x squared, because 2x times 2x is
4x squared, minus 18x, minus another 18x, and then you'll have plus 81 from negative
9 times negative 9. Well, the only like terms there are at negative 18x and the other negative
18x, and when you combine a negative 18x with another negative 18x, you get negative 36x,
leaving you with a final answer of 4x squared minus 36x plus 81. Go back to the polynomial
we started with. To the expression I started us with in this example, is that what we wanted?
Yes, it really is. So we know that the factorization of that expression, 4x squared minus 36x plus
81, the factorization of that expression is 2x minus 9 whole thing squared.
Well before we move to the last special type of quadratic expression I want to talk about
today, I'd like to solve a brief word problem actually that involves these perfect square
trinomials. So let's look at the following word problem example. The area of a certain
square is given by the expression 25t squared plus 40t plus 16. So it's 25t squared plus
40t plus 16. That's the area. I want to find an expression for the length of the side of
the square. So let's begin by noticing that the expression for the area is a quadratic
expression because the t is raised to the second power. That's the highest power of t that
you'll see. Notice that the variable is t instead of x. Not a problem. We can use t's
instead of x's. Now next, in any problem of this type, it would be smart to try to factor
the expression that we were given. A factored version of the expression can tell you a lot
of things. And so let's try to factor 25t squared plus 40t plus 16. Now, I'm hinting
a little bit that this might be a perfect square trinomial because that's what we're
talking about at this part of the lesson. But nevertheless, I want you to practice this
recognition of these perfect square trinomials. First, if you want to see if it's a perfect
square trinomial, you look at the front term and the constant term. Are they both perfect
squares? Well, 25t squared is 5t whole thing squared. That's good. 16 is 4 squared. That's
also good. So that's a hint that one way the 25t squared plus 40t plus 16 can be factored
is 5t plus 4 times 5t plus 4, or 5t plus 4 whole thing squared. So that's a hint that
remember where the 5t and the 4 come from? 5t whole thing squared is the 25t squared
and 4 squared is the 16. Now, let's check to see if this really is the factorization.
I write down 5t plus 4 times 5t plus 4 and I get 5t times 5t plus 4 times 5t plus another
4 times 5t plus another 4 times 5t plus the 4 times the 4. I'm just foiling there. And
when I multiply all that out, I get 25t squared plus 20t plus another 20t plus 16, combining
the middle terms because they're like terms, gives me 25t squared plus 40t plus 16. And
that was the expression we started with. And that's fabulous. Except we need to go back
to the problem now and figure out what they asked us to do. So let's go back to it. The
problem said that the area of the square is 25t squared plus 40t plus 16. I now know
that that's equivalent to 5t plus 4 whole thing squared. I also know that the area of
a square is exactly equal to its length times its length. In other words, its length squared.
If the area is 5t plus 4 squared and the area of a square is also the length squared, then
I can deduce that the length is 5t plus 4 because of course the area was 5t plus 4 times
5t plus 4. So the length of the side of that square is exactly 5t plus 4. And without the
factored version of that expression for the area, we would have never been able to figure
out that that was the length. Okay, now I want to turn a corner and I want to think about
another special family of expressions that can be factored very quickly and it's all
again about recognition. And these special expressions are called differences of two
squares. I've referred to that a bit already in our lessons, but let me remind you again
what that means. A difference of two squares simply means that I have two squares and I'm
subtracting them one from the other. Remember the word difference means subtraction. So
I'm just saying I'm taking one square minus another square. In some of our earlier mathematical
work, we saw that if you took a squared minus b squared, it would be the same as a minus
b times a plus b. So for example, if you had x squared minus 25, it would be the same as
x minus 5 times x plus 5. If you don't believe me, just foil out x minus 5 times x plus 5.
And what you'll notice is is that the O and the I terms from the foiling cancel each other
out so that do you see what's missing from x squared minus 25? It's missing the x term
sort of in the middle, like a 7x or a 10x. It's completely missing. And all you have
is the x squared minus the constant 25. Notice also, for example, if you had 9x squared minus
121, that's the same as 3x minus 11 times 3x plus 11. Now to recognize that I had a difference
of two squares, I needed to notice that 9x squared is the same as 3x times 3x. And I
also needed to notice that 121 is the same as 11 times 11. So the factorization here
is actually very quick if you notice that you're missing that x term. Missing that
term in the middle is a clear sign that you might be dealing with a case that you might
have a case of a difference of two squares. Of course, not every quadratic expression that's
missing its middle term is a difference of two squares. I mean, think about something
like x squared minus 3. It's missing its middle term, but it's obviously not a difference
of two squares because 3 is not a perfect square of some integer, unlike 16, which is
a perfect square because it's 4 squared. So if we can recognize these difference of
two squares types of expressions, we can write down their factorizations extremely quickly.
Again, it's all about recognition. So let's do a few more examples of these before we
close out our lesson together. I want us to factor 25x squared minus 9. It's a perfectly
good quadratic expression, 25x squared minus 9. And what I'm claiming today is that this
can be factored very, very quickly without having to try to undo a foil or anything along
those lines. Notice that 25x squared is a perfect square because it's 5x times 5x, which
of course is 5x whole thing squared. Notice that 9 is a perfect square because it's 3
or 3 squared. And notice that the sign between the 25x squared and the 9 is minus. So I have
a difference of two squares. And that means immediately I know that the factorization
of 25x squared minus 9 is 5x minus 3 times 5x plus 3. Now, again, the reason that's true
is because if you foil out 5x minus 3 times 5x plus 3, the first terms will survive and
give you the 25x squared. The last terms will give you the negative 9 and the O and the I
terms will actually cancel with each other, leaving you with no term in the middle, no
x to the first power term in the middle. Let's factor another point in the middle.
How about 400x squared minus 169? Your first thought is, whoa, those coefficients are way
too big for me to try to think about this. But if you notice that you don't have the
x term in the middle, one of the first things you might want to do is say to yourself, wait
a minute, maybe this is a difference of two squares. And if it is, it means that you need
to see if those two terms that they gave you actually are perfect squares. So what I want
to do now is start thinking, 400x squared minus 169, are they both perfect squares? Well,
400 is actually 20 times 20, and 20 times 20 is 20 squared. So 400x squared can actually
be written as 20x whole thing squared. What about 169? Is it a perfect square? Now you've
got to really start thinking about your arithmetic. Well, 169 is 13 times 13, or 13 squared.
And therefore, what we were handed is a difference of two squares. And as soon as I know that,
I know exactly what I should write down. The 400x squared needs a 20x in both of the binomials
and the 169 needs a 13 and a 13. And because I have a difference of two squares, that's
I need one of the signs to be positive, and I need the other to be negative, and I'm done.
My factorization is 20x minus 13 times 20x plus 13. Imagine if you wanted to do that
example like we were doing in the previous lesson, where you just wrote everything down
and started thinking about different factors, you would have been there a long time, probably.
One more example of this type, and we'll close out our lesson together. Let's factor 5x squared
minus 245. Well, we have a problem actually. At this point, you might want it to be a difference
of two squares. 5x squared, though, is not a perfect square. So what are we going to
do? Well, I want you to step back and think for just a moment. 5x squared is not a perfect
square, but I notice that there's a factor of 5 in the 5x squared, and actually there's
a factor of 5 in 245. That means that 5 is acting like a common factor of these two terms.
So let's factor out a 5 from both terms. You are always allowed when you're factoring
to factor out a common factor, always, always, always. So let's factor a 5 out of 5x squared
and let's factor a 5 out of the 245. When you do that, you will have 5 times x squared
minus 5 times 49. Factoring out that extra 5 then becomes 5 times the quantity x squared
minus 49. And guess what? x squared minus 49 is a difference of two squares. It was
hiding underneath. That 5, that extra 5, was just messing us up. And so I know how to factor
x squared minus 49. It is a difference of two squares, and it's x minus 7 times x plus
7. 49 is 7 times 7. And therefore, the original polynomial that was given to us has the following
factorization. 5 times x minus 7 times x plus 7. So what we notice in this example is
that we've seen a mixture of two issues there. You had a difference of two squares, but it
was being hidden by a greatest common factor. We needed to actually do both in order to
factor that polynomial successfully. But we did it. It was a good job. We've spent some
time talking today about some very special types of expressions, quadratic expressions,
and how to factor them. My hope is that with practice, you'll be able to recognize these
special expressions and use the tools we've discussed to quickly factor such expressions
in the future. Well, we've now spent a good bit of time talking about factoring quadratic
expressions. But to be honest, there are lots of quadratic expressions that we can't factor
at all. So we did another set of tools for solving equations which have unfactorable
polynomials or unfactorable expressions. Next time, we'll talk about such a tool which is
called the quadratic formula and is extremely helpful to us. I look forward to talking with
you then.
Thank you.
