We've now spent a couple lessons talking about radical expressions and radical functions,
how to simplify them and how to do algebra on them with the usual operations.
In this lesson, I'd like to come back to the theme of visualizing or seeing the graphs
of these functions just like we've done with linear functions and quadratic functions and
more recently with rational functions.
As with our other lessons on graphing, some graph paper would probably be good to have
as we walk through these examples.
You might also want a calculator just to calculate any square roots that come up in case you
want to do those by a calculator rather than by hand.
So let's get started with what is probably the most basic example we can draw, which
is the graph of a radical function.
Here's the example I want us to look at.
Sketch the graph of f of x equals square root of x.
The function can't get any simpler than that, just f of x equals square root of x.
Now the first thing we should do when working with a graph like this is to ask ourselves
what the domain of the function is.
Remember, the domain of a function is the set of input values we're allowed to plug
in to the function.
So when we have square roots, we have to really think about the domain mainly because we're
not allowed to plug in negative things under a square root symbol.
So keep in mind that we can't plug in negative numbers and that means in this case that the
x underneath the square root symbol must be greater than or equal to zero here.
So the domain of this function is the set of real numbers that are not negative.
Now that's an important point to make because it means that the graph of this function is
only going to live in the right hand side of the Cartesian plane because that's where
all the non-negative values of x live.
So it means that when we draw our axes to graph this function in a moment, nothing, no part
of the graph will live on the left side of the y-axis.
All of the graph will actually be on the right hand side, either in quadrant one or down
in quadrant four.
Now in order to keep going and getting this graph, I suggest that we plug in a few points
and see what sort of values we'll get as the coordinates of points that live on this graph.
So let's just plug in some x values and see what we get.
When I plug in x equals zero, which I am allowed to plug in here, I'm going to have f of zero
equals the square root of zero, which of course is zero, because zero times zero equals zero.
So that means we have a point on this graph, zero comma zero, which is what we normally
call the origin.
The origin will be a point on this graph.
Let's try plugging in one.
F of one is the square root of one, which is also one.
So that means that one comma one is also a point on this graph.
Now let's plug in four.
F of four is the square root of four, and the square root of four is two.
So we have the point four comma two on this graph.
We can also plug in nine, and the square root of nine is three.
So we would have the point nine comma three on our graph.
And lastly, let's just plug in one more number.
How about 16?
F of 16 is the square root of 16, which is four.
And that means that the point 16 comma four is on the graph as well.
So now on a piece of graph paper, you could draw your axes if you haven't already done
so and then fill in the origin, because zero, zero is a point on the graph, and also fill
in the points one comma one, four comma two, nine comma three, and 16 comma four, given
the calculations we just made a moment ago.
Now I want you to remember, the point 16 comma four is on the graph since square root of
16 equals four.
Don't confuse that with the point four comma 16, which is not on the graph.
Square root of four is not equal to 16.
It's important here that we remember which numbers are going into the x-coordinate and
which numbers are going into the y-coordinate.
Now one other comment before we continue drawing our graph here.
Some of you might have wondered, how did he know to plug in zero, one, four, nine, and
16?
Why didn't he plug in two or three or five or something else?
Well I plugged in the values that I plugged in because I knew that they would give me
nice square roots, and that's it.
There's nothing wrong with plugging in x equals two or x equals three, but the output values
are not going to be as pretty or as clean if you do that, because you'll have to calculate
square root of two or square root of three, and you won't get whole numbers in that case.
When you're going through the plotting of these graphs, you get to pick what x values
you want to plug in, because ultimately you're just going to plug a bunch of them in and
then connect the dots.
So I chose those carefully so that the output values would be clean.
Now let me suggest that after you've plotted those points that you do connect those dots
and you see what's happening.
And you should be getting a graph which starts kind of abruptly at the origin and then travels
in quadrant one in a gently rising fashion.
Why does the graph start abruptly at the origin?
Remember, x equals zero is the smallest value of x that you're allowed to plug into this
function.
Remember the conversation I had about the domain a few minutes ago.
So you can't plug in any x values that are negative.
It means that x equals zero is the smallest thing you can plug in.
So the graph is going to start there, it's not going to go off this direction, it's just
going to start at x equals zero, and then you see it sort of gently rising.
Now the next question asked is, what does the right side end of the graph do?
So I see it taking off to an extent, but does it go off to plus infinity in a rapid fashion,
like we saw the ends of y equals x squared do where they actually take off really, really
quickly?
Is this graph going to sort of level off underneath a horizontal asymptote like we had with the
graph of a rational function so that there's a horizontal line kind of bounding where it
can go?
Actually it turns out that this graph doesn't do either of those things.
It doesn't have a horizontal asymptote and it's not going to shoot up like this sooner
or later, like y equals x squared does.
But it does go to plus infinity.
So it does keep going up and up and up and up, but it does so very, very slowly.
How do I know that it keeps going up and doesn't sort of level off underneath a horizontal
asymptote?
Well, let's plug in a few more sort of smart values for x and I'll show you that the y
values do keep growing and never stop.
Just for example, if you plugged in x equals 100 into this function, you would have the
square root of 100 then, and you know what the square root of 100 is, it's 10.
So the point 100 in the x direction and then 10 in the y direction, that point is on this
graph.
Okay, so now I've gotten up to a y of at least 10 in that case.
But go out even farther in the x direction, plug in something like 10,000 for x, and in
that case you'll have square root of 10,000, which is 100, because 100 times 100 is 10,000.
So way down the x axis, after you go 10,000 units to the right from the origin, you actually
go up 100 units and you have a new point on your graph.
So now the graph has not only gotten up to 10 for the y value, it can actually get up
to 100.
And you can take this further then.
Let the x value be 1 million, that's big, but you can do it, it's allowed to happen.
And if you plug in 1 million to this function, you'll have square root of 100, which is 1,000.
Because 1,000 times 1,000 is 1 million.
So I see here that the y values, 10, 100, 1,000, are getting bigger and bigger as I
plug in really, really large values of x.
When those y values are not getting big very quickly, they're doing it slowly.
Notice I had to get all the way out to a million for x before I could get a y value of 1,000.
But it does tell me that they are going to keep getting bigger, bigger, bigger.
And that means there is no horizontal asymptote here.
There is no ceiling, so to speak, that keeps the graph from getting any higher.
It just keeps growing, but it grows very, very slowly.
You know, that's the basic shape of the graph of y equals square root of x.
In fact, in general, that's going to be the basic shape of a lot of graphs that have the
square root of x function in them.
Not all of them are going to look like the one we just drew, but many of them will.
So to help you see what I mean here, I want to look at a second example.
But keep in mind this very special shape, starting at one point, coming up, and then
just making this nice angled shape as we move from left to right.
Let's look at this second example now and sketch the following graph.
Sketch the graph of f of x equals square root of x minus 3.
Now, I'm going to ask the same first question that I asked in the previous example.
What is the domain of the function?
Well, now I need to be sure that the quantity that's under the square root symbol, which
is the whole x minus 3, is never negative.
Again, the thing underneath the square root symbol can't be negative.
And that means you have this equation, or inequality, actually.
X minus 3 must be greater than or equal to 0.
And if you take that inequality and think about the work we did in previous lessons
on inequalities, we know that we can add 3 to both sides of that inequality to give us
x is greater than or equal to positive 3.
So that is our domain.
We're only allowed to plug in numbers that are greater than or equal to positive 3.
Think about it.
If you tried to plug in 2, you would be calculating square root of 2 minus 3, which is the square
root of negative 1, and that doesn't make any sense.
That's completely undefined.
And if you tried to plug in something like 0, which is also less than 3, you would have
square root of 0 minus 3, which is the square root of negative 3, and again, that's undefined.
So we'll only have a piece of the graph wherever x is greater than or equal to 3.
So there won't be any graph to the left of the point x equals 3.
Now, let's plug in some values of x that are allowed, that are in the domain, and see
what we get back for the y values.
So again, I'm going to pick sort of intelligent values for x to plug in, and that way the
output values, the y values, will be clean.
So let's plug in 3, and you'll have f of 3 equals the square root of 3 minus 3, which
is the square root of 0, which is 0.
And that means that the point 3 comma 0 is on my graph, 3 for x, 0 for y.
Let's plug in 4.
f of 4 is the square root of 4 minus 3, which is the square root of 1, which is 1.
So there's also another point on the graph, 4 comma 1.
You now have two points that you can start plotting if you have a new piece of graph
paper in front of you.
Then let's plug in 7.
f of 7 equals square root of 7 minus 3, which is the square root of 4, which is 2.
So you have another point, 7 for the input value, the x value, and 2 for the y value,
7 comma 2.
You can plot that now if you'd like.
Then you plug in something like 12, let's say.
f of 12 is square root of 12 minus 3, which is the square root of 9.
That's why I chose the 12, so I'd get a nice square number there, square root of 9, and
that equals 3.
So the point 12 comma 3 is also on the graph.
And finally, f of 19 is square root of 19 minus 3, which is the square root of 16, which
is 4.
So 19 comma 4 is also a point on the graph.
And as I said, I'm just plugging in values that are going to work nicely.
If you plugged in other ones, it's OK, but you would have to maybe use a calculator to
estimate what the y value is as opposed to getting these nice whole numbers.
Now, take out that piece of clean graph paper and plot all these points and connect the
dots.
What do you see?
Well, what you should see is the exact same kind of graph as you saw in the earlier example,
except there's one big difference.
What is that difference?
It's the starting point, so to speak, on the left of the graph.
It's no longer at the origin, is it?
It's now at the point 3 comma 0.
But I want you to notice that if you just picked up the graph and moved it so that its starting
point on the left was 3 comma 0 and then drew it, you'd actually have the exact same graph.
What we've done from the first example to this example is taken the same graph, the graph
of the square root of x, and shifted it 3 units to the right.
Why 3 units to the right?
Because of the 3 that we put under that radical symbol in the rule for f of x.
And this actually leads us to a very important rule about drawing graphs of functions.
Let me state it here.
If you replace the variable x in a function by the expression x minus a, where a is some
positive number, then the graph simply shifts to the right by exactly a units.
So the graph of the original function can be simply shifted over to the right by a units
and you'll get the graph of the new function.
It's that simple.
So when we went from the square root of x to the square root of x minus 3, we simply
moved the graph from starting at the origin for square root of x and shifted it 3 units
so that it started at 3,0 for the square root of x minus 3.
I think that's pretty cool.
And with that in mind, I want to look at another example, which is very, very similar.
And I want us to see if we can sort of quickly graph it rather than having to plot a whole
bunch of points.
So here's the example I want us to look at.
Sketch the graph of y equals square root of x minus 5.
Now given the rule I just mentioned, I know exactly what the graph of this function has
to look like.
Basically, I'm taking the square root function and I'm replacing the x inside square root
of x with the quantity x minus 5.
So I just wrote down the graph, well, I can just write down the graph of square root
of x, but move it, now in this case, 5 units to the right and I'm done.
So the point for the graph of the square root of x, which is starting at the origin, if
you will, now gets moved along with the rest of the graph to start at the point 5, 0.
And then it swoops in the exact same way upward to the right and you're done.
By the way, if you're not sure that I'm right here, you could plot a whole bunch of points
and plug them in on a new piece of graph paper and check to make sure that when you connect
those dots, you get the same graph.
You really will, though, see the same graph as the one I just described.
So the graph of square root of x minus 5 is exactly the same as the graph of square root
of x, except you've moved it completely 5 units to the right.
Now I'd like to move on from there and mention to you that this rule that I've just used,
this shifting rule, can actually be used for other functions as well.
So for example, remember the graph of y equals x squared?
I know we did that a lot of lessons ago.
But the graph of y equals x squared, if you remember, was a cup-shaped parabola, so it
opened upward and y equals x squared had a parabola whose vertex was right at the origin,
so it was right where the two axes cross.
Now with that said, what about the graph of y equals x minus 3 squared?
Notice what we've done.
We started with x squared and replaced the x with x minus 3.
Well guess what?
The graph of x minus 3 squared is exactly that same parabola, except instead of having
its vertex at the origin, we shifted 3 units to the right so that its vertex is actually
at 3, 0.
The whole rest of the parabola is exactly the same as the parabola would have looked for
y equals x squared, except we literally just moved it on the page 3 units to the right
so that its vertex is now at 3, 0.
Okay, let's try another example now of this type, but it's got a little bit of a twist
to it.
So stay with me as we do this example.
Sketch the graph of y equals square root of x plus 2.
Notice my emphasis there.
I've now changed from having a minus underneath that radical symbol to a plus.
Now what happens when you put a plus 2 in there instead of a minus 2?
Well it turns out that you still shift the graph of square root of x in some direction,
but this time now you're going to shift it to the left.
So here's the rule now if you want to add a plus sign, so to speak, into the problem.
Let me say it carefully.
If you replace the variable x in a function by the expression x plus a, where a is some
positive number, then you shift the graph of the function over to the left by exactly
a units.
That's the rule.
Instead of shifting to the right, I now shift to the left.
So the graph of y equals square root of x plus 2 is pretty easy to draw.
You start with the graph of square root of x, and remember that starts at the origin
and then goes to the right, and you take that graph and you shift it the whole thing to
the left, exactly 2 units.
That means that the graph of square root of x plus 2 starts at the point negative 2,
0, because that's 2 units to the left of the origin, and then the graph goes to the right
in exactly the same way that all the other graphs have gone.
So in some ways, each and every one of the graphs you and I have seen up to this point
in the lesson are sort of like shadows of one another.
They're all going in this sort of left to right swooping motion.
It's just that they start in different places, and I think that's pretty cool because it
means we now have some rules which allow us to draw graphs pretty quickly as long as we
know the graph of a basic function.
And in this case, that basic function we know the graph of is y equals square root of x.
Now I want to look at a very different kind of graph now that involves a radical function,
and this one really is very different.
So we're going to shift gears here pretty significantly with the following example.
Sketch the graph of f of x equals square root of x plus 4.
Now I should probably say that with slightly different emphasis because what I'm really
doing here is the square root of x plus 4.
Notice that I have not replaced the x in square root of x by x plus 4.
What I've done is put a plus 4 completely outside of the square root symbol.
That is very, very different from what we did in the previous examples where we were
actually replacing the x under the square root symbol with something like x minus 2
or x plus 3.
So now what we've done is just added a 4 to the square root of x function.
That's very, very different.
Now to start drawing this graph, we need to go back to the domain of f of x again.
What do I have to watch for here?
Well, it's the part under the square root symbol that always has to be greater than
or equal to 0.
So I need the x that's under the square root symbol to be greater than or equal to 0.
Very important point.
Notice that the 4 doesn't have anything to do with the domain here.
The presence of that 4 is not going to hinder me from plugging in any particular value of
x.
What's going to cause me trouble is if I ever have a negative amount under the square root
symbol.
So the domain here is just x has to be greater than or equal to 0.
And from there now I suggest we plug in some numbers for x and see what we get.
So I'm going to again plug in some kind of smart values for x so that the y values are
easy to figure out.
So let's start with x equals 0.
That's the smallest value of x I'm allowed in this example.
When I plug in 0 I have f of 0, which is square root of 0 plus 4.
Remember the plus 4 is not part of the square root here.
And square root of 0 is 0.
So what I really have is 0 plus 4, which is 4.
So when I plug in 0, I get 4 back.
When I plug in 1, I'm not going to have square root of 1 plus 4.
The square root of 1 is 1, so I really just have 1 plus 4, which is 5.
Plug in 1, get 5 back.
Let's plug in x equals 4.
Then you have square root of 4 plus 4.
The square root of 4 is 2, so what you really have is 2 plus 4, which is 6.
So when you plug 4 in for x, you get 6 back for y.
Let's plug in 9 for x.
Then you're going to have square root of 9 plus 4, and the square root of 9 is a 3.
So what you have is 3 plus 4, which is 7.
And finally, just one more point, let's plug in 16.
That gives me square root of 16 plus 4, which is the same as 4 plus 4, which is 8.
So now I actually have 5 points on my graph, 0 comma 4, 1 comma 5, 4 comma 6, 9 comma 7,
and 16 comma 8.
OK, let's pull out a piece of graph paper, draw our axes, and let's plot the 5 points
I just mentioned and connect the dots.
And what do you see?
Well, what you should see is the same graph as the graph of the square root of x, but
something's different.
Do you see what's different?
The graph has now been shifted up by 4 units, so that instead of starting at the origin,
like the graph of the square root of x does, this graph starts at 0 comma 4.
So notice here, I didn't move it to the left or to the right, I moved the graph of square
root of x up 4 units in this case, and this brings us to a new rule for graphing.
And here's the rule.
If you add a positive constant, let's call it B, to a function, then you shift the graph
of the function up by exactly B units.
Notice that in this rule, what I'm saying is I'm adding a positive constant B to the
whole function.
I'm not just doing it to the variable x.
Here I added 4 to the function square root of x.
I left the square root of x part alone, and I just had square root of x plus 4.
So I added 4 to the whole function, and that's exactly why the graph went from starting at
the origin and going over to the right, to starting at the point 0 comma 4, 4 units up,
and then same picture again.
Notice that there aren't any other changes to this graph at all.
It has the same general shape.
It slopes upward gently from left to right.
It's like a shadow again, but instead of moving left to right, it actually moved up.
Now let's try another example that's similar to this.
Let's sketch the graph of f of x equals square root of x minus 5, OK?
Now this looks a lot like the example I just did, except now I've subtracted 5 from the
square root of x instead of adding 4 to the square root of x.
What do you think this subtraction is going to do?
Well, by subtracting 5, I'm actually going to take the graph of the square root of x,
and I'm going to shift it down exactly 5 units.
So the graph of f of x equals square root of x minus 5 is pretty simple to draw.
You take a starting point now of 0 comma negative 5, that's 5 units below the origin, and then
you draw the same graph as you've drawn before.
So that leads us to a new rule, right?
When you subtract a constant like that, you're going to end up dropping the graph as opposed
to raising it up.
By the way, I want you to notice in this case that the graph will have an x-intercept now,
somewhere to its right.
We didn't necessarily see a whole lot of x-intercepts before.
Certainly in the case of square root of x plus 4, we started above the x-axis, and then
we just kept going up.
So we didn't have an x-intercept there.
But in this case, we will have an x-intercept.
Do you remember how we would find that x-intercept?
Remember that it occurs wherever the function equals 0.
So in other words, an x-intercept occurs when the y-coordinate is 0.
So to find that x-intercept, I'm going to take y equals the square root of x minus 5
and set the y equal to 0.
And that's going to give me basically square root of x minus 5 equals 0.
And now I'm going to solve that for x.
And that should remind you of the previous lesson.
We looked at solving radical equations in the previous lesson.
Let's solve this one really quickly.
If we add 5 to both sides, we'll have square root of x on the left just equals 5 on the
right because 0 plus 5 is 5.
And now what do you do?
You square both sides of that equation and you get x equals 25.
Now you should check.
Remember, I warned you in the previous lesson, you should always check that that really works.
In this case, it really does, but I'll leave it to you to check to make sure.
But what that means is you have an x-intercept here when x is 25.
So the point at which the graph will cross the x-axis is exactly at 25 comma 0 when x
is 25.
Now you might not have seen that unless you had a pretty big piece of graph paper because
you've got to go out 25 units to the right to find it.
But here we just found it pretty quickly using some algebra.
And that's exactly where this graph is going to cross the x-axis.
Now in order to make sure we don't forget this rule about shifting down, let me just
state it here just so we've done so.
If you subtract a positive constant B from a whole function, then you shift the graph
of the function down by exactly B units.
So now we've actually seen four rules today.
One which helps us shift graphs to the right, one which helps us shift graphs to the left,
one that helps us shift up, and one that helps us shift down.
And so we now have some pretty nice tools in our graphing toolbox to help us know how
to shift these graphs whichever way we want.
Now I'd like to consider what happens if we complicate the function just a bit basically
by mixing in two of these tools at once.
So let's look at the following example.
Catch the graph of f of x equals square root of x minus 2, then plus 6.
So again, I'm trying to emphasize with my voice that the x minus 2 is under the square
root symbol, but the plus 6 is not.
One way to go about sketching this graph would be to just plot some points and connect the
dots.
To do that, we need to first ask what the domain is.
It's very important.
So here we need to have x minus the 2 greater than or equal to 0 so that we can calculate
the square roots legally.
And that means that x needs to be greater than or equal to 2.
So let's plug in some values of x and see what kinds of points we get.
I'm just going to plug in a few very quickly.
If I plug in x equals 2, remember that's the smallest value of x I'm allowed here,
I'm going to have square root of 2 minus 2, then plus 6.
And that's the same as square root of 0 plus 6, which is 0 plus 6 or 6.
So what does that mean?
It means that there's a point on the graph at 2 comma 6.
Let's plug in 3.
F of 3 is the square root of 3 minus 2 plus 6.
That's the same as square root of 1 plus 6, which is 1 plus 6 or 7.
So I have another point at 3 comma 7.
Similarly, I could plug in 6 for x and I would get 8 back for y.
And if I plugged in 11 for x, I would get 9 back for y.
And again, I just chose some y's values of x to plug in so that the y values that would
come back would be very, very clean.
The only thing I had to be careful of is that the x values I plugged in had to be greater
than or equal to 2.
That was what we learned when we looked at the domain.
That was the one thing I kept in mind.
Now let's move forward.
If you draw your axes now and plot these points and then connect the dots, what are you going
to see?
Well, what you're going to see is that you started this graph at 2 comma 6 and connected
the dots through 3 comma 7, 6 comma 8, 11 comma 9, and so on.
If you carefully plot those points on your graph paper, you're going to see exactly the
same basic shape as the graph of square root of x.
But now the graph is starting at the point 2 comma 6.
What happened?
Well, basically, you move the graph of square root of x to the right two units and up six
units.
But that's exactly what the rule tells us to do.
We replace the x by x minus 2 to get square root of x minus 2.
So that tells us to go to the right two units.
And then we tacked on a plus 6 at the end, and that tacking on a positive constant at
the end tells us to move up six units.
So in fact, these rules can sort of be mixed in together if you do it carefully, and two
rules can kind of work together in order to shift the graph both to the right and also
up.
Now, if you wanted to check the answer, you could always plug in more points and draw
it by hand.
That would be fine.
But in this case, I promise that's exactly the graph you're going to get.
Well, in this lesson today, we've talked about graphing radical functions.
You've noticed how the domains of these functions affect the look of the graphs.
We've also talked about some common ways that we can draw graphs of more complicated functions
based on the graphs of simpler functions, like shifting graphs horizontally to the left
or right, or shifting them vertically up or down.
These tools can be used for many graphs, not just radical function graphs.
In fact, we could have been using them in the past as well.
But this was a nice place to introduce it today.
In the last two lessons of this course, we're going to look at some mathematics that's very
different from anything we've seen in this course so far.
We're going to start next time by talking about sequences and patterns that we can find
in sequences.
I look forward to talking with you then.
