How about civilization? Is that an easier to define? Alas, no.
The word comes from a Latin root, C-I-V-CIV. We see this, for instance, in Latin words
like kiwis, which means citizen, kiwitas, which means city, kiwilis, which means civil,
yes, but it means polite, yes, but it means to behave like a person from a city, to behave
like a citizen. A citizen is a person from a city. These very words sneak something into
our consciousness about what civilization is or it must be. It must have cities. It must
have cities. Our words tell us that. Now, Greek vocabulary is much the same. The Greek for
city is a polis, and that gives us our words like political and politics. The Greek word
polyteia means a constitution. So we have, again, a sense that there is a whole vocabulary
and a whole culture lurking behind it rooted in the idea of cities. So to get civilization,
to begin to form any kind of an understanding of civilization, we've got to make cities.
Okay, how do we do that? How do we do that? How do we make cities? How do we make cities
happen historically? Cities emerged. It is now pretty generally thought as a result
of, as a consequence of, after a process which we call the Neolithic Revolution, the Neolithic
Revolution. Now, this is a revolution which began probably something on the order of nine
or 10,000 years ago. Okay? At the end of its process, perhaps something like 5,000 years
ago, the Neolithic Revolution had generated cities and more than that, probably what we
would call civilization, in both Mesopotamia, the land between the rivers Tigris and Euphrates,
and in Egypt. Now, in our next lectures, we'll look in more detail at what actually happened
in the historical period in Mesopotamian Egypt. For the moment, what we want to say is what
was this Neolithic Revolution, this rather leisurely revolution that took perhaps five
millennia to work itself out. Its effects and consequences were revolutionary. There's
no doubt about that, but it did move along at a rather genteel pace. Fundamentally, we
can put names on the things that happened during this revolution. Agriculture and the
domestication of animals. Agriculture and the domestication of animals. Now, Neolithic
is Greek. It means new stone. Naos, let's ask, the new stone age. If we were to think
in images, if we were to think in metaphors about the Neolithic period, it would mean
the period when people began, for the first time, to fashion tools and weapons that permitted
them to exert some control over the world around them rather than being controlled by
it. Let's not exaggerate. Anyone who has lived through a great natural disaster, a hurricane,
an earthquake, a tornado knows perfectly well that even now with all our vast technology,
we cannot control nature. But we're talking about a time, 10,000 or there about years ago,
when people began for the first time to exercise some control over the world around them. But
moving away from images and symbols and metaphors, we can say that in agriculture and the domestication
of animals, we see some real changes in the kinds of things that groups, groups of human
beings did. So this is a very long process, this Neolithic revolution. We can think about
it in concrete terms or in symbolic terms. But however we think of it, and however long
it took, it produced cities and then civilization. Extracting food from arid regions lies behind
the story we must tell. Civilization arose in river valleys, as far as we know. It arose
in the Tigris and Euphrates River Valley in Mesopotamia. It arose in the Nile River Valley
in Egypt. It arose in the Indus River Valley in India. It arose in the Yangtze River Valley
in China. It arose in the Congo in Africa. In some of these places, the climate was
very different from that. For example, in Africa, where you have an equatorial humid
hot climate. It was not quite like the desert climate of Egypt or Mesopotamia. Egypt Mesopotamia
more like, for example, the Indus than like the Congo, but there are differences here
as well. We're going to focus on Mesopotamia and then on Egypt. Hot, dry, arid climates
from which we wish to extract life, from which we wish to extract food. This is going to
be a significant problem of human organization. It's going to require social cohesion. It's
going to require cooperation. As near as we can tell, the great motor process is irrigation.
I have a river. I have water in the river. I have land. The land is dry. I want that
water out on that dry land.
