This didn't make it very easy to keep information, to disseminate information, but it did for
the first time make it possible to preserve information in a fairly durable way.
And there are thousands upon thousands upon thousands of these clay tablets still surviving
today for scholars to look at and to work with.
Well, I emphasized in the first lecture on the rise of civilization that we've got to
have cities.
And indeed, this is the period when cities arise.
And when they begin to take on some of the characteristics of cities from then, really
until much later times.
All right, so as I emphasized a moment ago, there's a number of them.
They are small, independent city-states.
There is no nation-state of Sumer.
There is Ur and Uruk and Lagash, and these are basically small, independent towns.
They begin to have circuits of walls, sometimes up to about five miles in circumference.
That's a fairly large settlement for such an early time.
And buildings made almost entirely of mud brick, or mud brick over wooden framing.
Now, it's very important to say that the Mesopotamians were not sort of dull-witted.
It wasn't that they couldn't build another material.
They didn't have stone.
Stone was very far away.
So for example, we don't find in Mesopotamia the kind of monumental architecture that we
find in Egypt, or that we find later on in Greece, or in other places.
They simply didn't have stone available, and you can only build so large using wood
and mud brick.
Now, the creation of the walls around the towns, there's a good deal of evidence that
these walls were built in the first place as sort of symbolic representations of the
towns, and gradually over time rebuilt and rebuilt and rebuilt to serve as defensive
tools.
Why?
Well, we'll come to that in a few minutes.
And that's where we'll start, particularly rivalry among these cities.
In these cities, the earliest impressive buildings are always temples.
The temples usually took the form of a ziggurat.
Now, a ziggurat is a sort of a high-banked structure built up in a series of steps from
sort of ground level up a certain distance.
This is probably the sort of thing, for example, that in the Old Testament we read about as
the Tower of Babylon, as the Tower of Babel.
Obviously, that was being built, this thing that was going to reach all the way up to
heaven.
Now, if the largest buildings in these cities are ziggurats, are temples, what does this
tell us about the people then and about that society?
Well, religion was important, and the priestly class was very important.
That seems pretty clear.
But there are those walls, after all, and they are going to become a factor a bit later.
When we move into what we call the dynastic period of Mesopotamian history, the period
from about 2800 to perhaps 2350 or thereabouts, we see a time of fierce competition among
these little cities, and perhaps inside them too.
In other words, the struggles on the outside, the struggles between cities, may very well
have begun to lead to social struggles inside the cities.
And we begin to see, for example, the building of palace complexes, and we begin to see the
rise of sort of local big shots, the text of the time called them Lugals, which basically
means big shot, kings, important individuals, powerful individuals on the local scene.
And as I mentioned a moment ago, city walls began to be larger, stronger, and more important.
Now, with these kings, we meet for the first time in the Western tradition, a particular
kind of institution, monarchy, which will be with us right through these lectures all
the way to the end, and we meet a particular kind of monarchy.
These kings were thought to have been put in place by the gods to rule with the special
favor of the gods to be accorded victory, for example, in battle by the gods, to be accorded
prosperity by the gods.
They were not, and this is very important, they were not themselves thought to be gods.
But they were thought to have been put in place by, and to be made specially answerable
to the gods.
We call that theocratic kingship.
Two nice Greek words, they also call us, rule by God, but rule by God through a particular
agent on earth, a king.
So one of the earliest justifications for kings then is that they are people chosen
out by the gods.
Now why would that have been the case?
Was that people's idea in the very first place?
Probably not.
Probably what we see here is that as individuals came to exercise leadership over a society,
they had to find some way of describing, of justifying, you see, who they were, the position
they had, the power that they had, and so they did this through particular connections
with their gods.
Now, as warfare became more important, particularly between these various cities,
