We notice something else, large landowners.
Now, it's very hard for us today to say exactly why this happened, how it happened, what the mechanism was,
that produced some people who owned a great deal more land than others,
and then some people who worked on the land of these more powerful people.
The fact that these large landowners began to form a kind of a warrior aristocracy,
that's not so difficult to understand because these were obviously the most prominent people in a local town
who had to assume some responsibility either for defending that town against the attacks of others
or perhaps for leading an attack by your town on the next town over.
So these people as warrior aristocrats and warrior aristocrats are going to be with us
right through this entire course of lectures.
Their presence is not surprising, their presence is not.
That's easy to explain.
What in the first place led to the social differentiation so that some people had more land than others
and thus a greater stake in the society than others, that's trickier.
It's also important to bear in mind that with any of these towns, even with the circuit of walls,
let's say a five miles or thereabouts, the agricultural land was not in the town.
There might have been some house gardens in the town.
The land was outside.
If the city is going to be subject to attack by outsiders,
then those persons who own that land are going to have a very real interest
in what's going on outside those walls as well as inside the walls.
You see?
And so what we see is a society where kings are increasingly advised by other warrior aristocrats.
Clearly in the social dynamics and the social mechanisms of the towns,
these kings had to get along with these warrior aristocrats.
That's clear.
And it's clear that they had to listen to them.
It's clear that they had to take their advice.
And probably the tension at the other end of that is precisely these kings trying to say,
no, no, we're here because of the gods.
We answer only to the gods.
We answer only to the gods in the sense of we don't answer to these guys,
because of course what they had to do was answer to those guys.
So we can see a sense of social tensions.
Now we can also see tensions between these important people and others in society.
I'll come back to that question in a few minutes when I talk about law.
Mesopotamia is a large open plain.
You have two rivers surrounded by desert with mountains at the far edges of this region.
The area has no natural frontiers.
There is nothing there to ward off invasion, nothing there to ward off migration.
We could think, for example, today there is an example that would give us some sense
of the way it must have been in antiquity.
I'm referring to the Kurds.
These are people who live in northern Iraq, eastern Syria, south eastern Turkey,
north western Iran.
They are a stateless people.
They simply move around.
Well, they've been doing this for millennia.
And in antiquity, this must have been the way this Mesopotamian world was virtually all the time.
Now, the areas beyond Mesopotamia, or the areas sort of on its fringes along its edges,
were inhabited by people who basically could see the higher cultural development,
the higher political development, the higher economic development,
the greater prosperity of the Mesopotamian cities.
And not surprising, they were attracted like moths to a bulb on a summer night
to these Mesopotamian cities.
And they came again and again and again and again.
Yes, it's true.
And eventually great conquerors, the Persians and then Alexander and then the Romans
and then the Arabs and then the Turks have overrun this part of the world.
But on a much smaller scale, that process of overrunning Mesopotamia was happening even in antiquity.
Now, after about 2350 BC, so we have the period before 3000 is sort of the Uruk period,
when we can see civilization taking its rise, and the period after 3000,
when the various Sumerian cities are sort of working out in the dynastic period,
their own local, political, social, economic development,
after about 2350, we see for the first time one of these great conquests
of the region of Sumer, southern Iraq, by an outside force.
In this case, the individuals involved were the Akkadians.
Now, the Akkadians came from the area, if you're going up the Tigris and Euphrates River,
and you can always try to remember that the Tigris is on top.
So you have the two rivers, Tigris and Euphrates, the Tigris is on top.
Mesopotamia technically would be the land between those two rivers,
precisely what the word means, what is between the rivers, Mesopotamia.
But actually, we think of Mesopotamia also as the landline on both sides of those rivers.
Akkad is in the area where the river sort of bow out just a little bit,
sort of north and west of Sumer, a sort of slightly fat region in the middle,
where the rivers bow out before they come close together again
and flow into the mountains in Anatolia antiquity, Turkey today.
So Akkad is up there a few hundred miles to the north of Sumer.
