connection with the Pharaoh that, and we talked about this a little bit earlier on,
that this represents the first appearance of an abstract sense of rule, of a
separation of ruler and office. That point is sufficiently important that it
bears repeating. It's also important that this was a time when the Pharaoh is really
separated from the ordinary run of human beings, from the ordinary realm of human
beings. For instance, you were only permitted to speak, an ordinary person
was, in the Pharaoh's presence. You could not speak to the Pharaoh. So, for instance,
if the Pharaoh was sitting on his throne, and a person would approach at right
angles and speak as it were past the Pharaoh, that person could not look the
Pharaoh in the face and speak directly to him. So, whereas in Mesopotamia, for
example, we talked about theocratic kingship, the king rules as the agent of
the gods chosen by the gods on behalf of the gods at the gods pleasure, in Egypt
Pharaoh was a god, and in the old kingdom the most prominent and most important of
the gods. Now over the course of Egyptian history, Greek Egyptian religion
grew considerably more complicated over time. For example, the peace, the
prosperity, the security of the old kingdom basically led to a very happy, to
a very optimistic outlook. This was not a time of great challenge. The Egyptians
weren't being conquered by anybody. The country was prosperous. There were not
famines. There were not violent, unpredictable floods. People didn't
have reason to ask tough questions about life. The way, for example, that people,
that the people who wrote Gilgamesh asked tough questions. If we think about the
afterlife of the Egyptians at this period, it's a continuation of this life. Many
religious traditions promised people a new, a better life. In Egypt, people wanted
this life to continue. So, for example, when archaeologists have found tombs that
weren't robbed in antiquity, they are typically full of all of the ordinary
products of life you needed in the next life, all the things you'd had in this
life. Now in the old kingdom, this wonderful afterlife was clearly meant
for the Pharaoh, for members of the Pharaoh's family, perhaps for the most
important advisors of the Pharaoh, but perhaps not for everyone. Then, during the
Middle Kingdom, we begin to see a profusion of temples, a profusion of cults,
many more gods and goddesses, names we know about. This is the period about
which the Greek historian Herodotus was speaking when he said, the Egyptians are
the most religious of all people. Now, I don't think that they were the most
religious of all people, but even for the Greeks who were polytheistic, the
Egyptians seemed sort of unbelievably polytheistic. Now, this might have been
the reemergence of pre-dynastic religion that had been sort of suppressed
after the unification of Egypt. It may perhaps have been new developments. The
afterlife, for example, seems now to have been considered much more available,
available perhaps to everyone, certainly to larger numbers of people in the
society. We meet the concept of maat. Maat means, well, it's a little hard to
define in a way. It means truth, justice, balance, order, harmony, that there is
some sense that things will level out out there. You may, for example, have seen
depictions of Egyptian art where you have seen a scale. Perhaps you've been to the
Supreme Court building in Washington, D.C., and you've seen the scales of
justice depicted there on the building. During the Middle Kingdom, the myth of
Osiris began to be very, very popular. Now, Osiris had been killed, and then
Isis went to find his killers, to avenge his death, and also to find his body. It
had been carved up and divided. She had to find the parts and bring them back
together. And one part of this myth is that Isis would measure a ka, the soul,
against the feather. Now, if the ka were light, that is to say, not burdened with
evil, it would be lighter than the feather, and then this ka could go and find
its body again and live this happy afterlife. If, on the other hand, the
ka were weighted down with evil, it would be heavier than the feather, and it
would be doomed to wander forever throughout all eternity. Now, what's
interesting here is the first faint hints of an ethical dimension. There is
something here suggesting that how you live your life is going to matter how
you live your afterlife, how you live your next life. You'll recall, perhaps,
that we saw in Mesopotamia that we didn't have that. Now, the New Kingdom in
Egypt saw really a quite remarkable religious experiment. The Pharaoh
Akhenaten, servant of Atten, the Sun Disc, abandoned the traditional worship of
the Egyptian gods and tried to promote the worship of the cult of Atten. Now, in
doing this, Akhenaten became, for the first time, a person whom we might call a
henotheist or a monolatrist. Henotheism and monolatry are synonymous words. They
mean the worship of one god without denying the existence of others. So, it
is not monotheism, only one god period, but it means we'll worship one, but not
the others. Now, Akhenaten's experiment died with him. His successors returned to
the worship of the traditional gods, and that was the end of that. But this was,
nevertheless, a quite bold and interesting religious experiment. Now,
scientific and artisanal advances are also striking in Egypt. For example, the
use of papyrus. When we were talking about Mesopotamia, we saw that stone
tablets, clay tablets, with cuneiform writing were not a particularly
efficient writing technology, information technology. The Egyptians
developed papyrus. It gives us our word, paper. Papyrus is a paper-like product
made from soaking and then weaving together and then hammering, soaking,
hammering, soaking, and then finally drying. Papyrus plants the reeds of
papyrus plants. It makes a paper-like product on which it is possible to
write, and which makes it much easier to carry that writing around. And Egypt
being a very dry climate, this material can survive for very long periods of
time. Thousands upon thousands of these papyrus documents have been found. But
it would be not very efficient to try to write hieroglyphics on paper, on
papyrus. You may have seen pictures, for example, of Italian, of Egyptian
tomb art, where they have these beautiful pictures that depict writing.
Pictographic writing. Hieroglyphic writing means priestly writing, writing over
which priests had control, but technically...
