586 BC, the kingdom of Judah, the southern kingdom, fell to the Neobabalonians.
And when the Assyrians conquered Israel, they deported a very large portion of the population.
They spread them throughout the far-flung Assyrian Empire.
This is remembered then in tradition as the Ten Lost Tribes.
It's also remembered as the exile, the time when the Hebrews have been exiled from their land,
the first such exile that they experienced.
So, we are faced then with a kind of an interesting puzzle.
We have a people not very numerous, not very powerful, not very well-united,
momentarily economically significant, but never anything like, for example, the Phoenicians were.
And yet they have left us, and yet they have left us, a religious heritage second to none
in the Western tradition.
Well, this is a reminder that you don't have to be powerful, you don't have to be top dog
to be important.
Indeed, I think it would be fair to say that there's no other people,
no other people, so politically insignificant and so culturally significant in the history
of Western civilization.
But what then is the nature of this imprint that the Hebrews have left?
Or perhaps to put that question a little differently, how do we know about it?
Our knowledge of Hebrew beliefs comes from a very large, a very rich, a very complex
set of writings.
We know those writings as the Bible.
We know them in particular, we ought to know them in particular as the Hebrew Bible or the
Hebrew Scriptures.
It's that collection of materials that Christians call the Old Testament.
Of course, it's not the Old Testament at all for the Jews, for the people who made these books.
Now, the books themselves provide us with a series of revealing insights into these people
from about 2000 BC, if one dates Abraham that early, down to about 200 BC.
All right, down really to the beginnings of the Roman conquest of the Mediterranean world.
Most of the writings, however, that we have in the form in which we have them are written
between about 1000 and 500 BC.
There are some that are written after 500, and there are certainly in the materials that
take shape as we know them after 1000, older materials embedded.
But essentially, this great body of material witnesses most precisely to the period from
about 1000 to about 500.
In other words, from the creation of the unified kingdom down into the full period of exile.
That's the period chronologically, where the material comes from,
and the period that it reveals to us.
Now, the Hebrew Bible consists of three basic kinds of materials.
There's three bodies of material here.
The first five books of the Hebrew Bible, Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy,
are called the Torah.
It means, as sometimes we call these the books of Moses, the name means the teaching.
Now, what precisely is it that these books teach?
Well, two things.
It tells the Hebrews about the initiation and the unfolding of their early relationship with
their God, and of their settlement in the kingdom, the land that had been assigned to them.
I shouldn't have said kingdom, the land before it was a kingdom that had been assigned to them.
And in the second place, and in particular, in Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy,
an enormous array of prescriptive material.
Do this, and don't do that.
In that regard, this early legal material is very much like
the law codes that we saw in Mesopotamia in other places and in earlier times.
That is to say, no great scientific jurisprudence,
not yet informed clearly and directly and systematically by ethical principles,
but rather a whole series of requirements and prohibitions,
relatively simple at this particular stage.
The Torah, the first part of the Hebrew Bible.
Second, there's an enormous collection material called the prophets.
Now, the prophetic books, immediately you'll think of Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, the great
prophets.
But in fact, there's a series of historical books that are reckoned among the prophets
before, as the scriptures are laid out, we typically come to the prophets themselves.
These are, for example, the books of Kings and Samuel and Chronicles.
These are books that are prophetic in the sense that they show the unfolding
of God's relationship with his people.
When they observe his law, when they keep his rule, when they keep his commandments,
they prosper.
When they fall away from his law, from his rule, from his commandments, they suffer.
So it is in that sense that these books are imagined later as prophetic,
and therefore charting a future.
We've talked about that in earlier lectures, the way people create histories
as a way of imagining pasts that point them to a future.
So these books were supposed to be, and were designed to be,
