Lecture 5, A Succession of Empires
Hello again, and welcome to the fifth of our lectures on the foundations of western civilization.
The last time we talked in particular about the Hebrews.
Today we're going to turn to a succession of great empires,
particularly in the first place, the Assyrians who conquered the Hebrew kingdom of Israel,
then to the Neo-Babylonians who conquered the kingdom of Judah,
and then we'll move on through a number of smaller imperial states
to a consideration of the Persian Empire.
In a certain sense, the theme of this lecture,
the central point that we'll be tracking,
is the building of larger and larger and larger states on the land of Mesopotamia,
on the land of the Middle East,
the land with which we began in Sumer in our second lecture.
Now the period of Phoenician and Hebrew independence then,
and you'll recall perhaps by saying that this independence emerged
because there was a kind of a gap between great imperial states.
The Egyptians and Hittites had warned themselves out,
the Assyrians had not quite come on the scene yet.
But this period of independence for people like the Phoenicians and the Hebrews
was brought to an abrupt end by the Assyrians,
who built a very large empire indeed,
the largest that had been built up until that time.
Now the Assyrians were a Semitic speaking people
who had been important in northern Mesopotamia in the second millennium BC.
They then declined for a period of years,
and then after about 900 BC, from their capital at Nineveh,
they began a lightning series of military campaigns
that created an empire stretching really from the boundaries of Persia,
Iran to us, over to and indeed including the north of Egypt.
Now, I've several times mentioned Semitic speaking peoples.
For example, I mentioned the Hicksos,
and now I've mentioned this in connection with the Assyrians,
and of course also the Hebrews spoke a Semitic language.
It's important perhaps just to say here,
so that in later lectures we can refer to it,
that scholars now divide people historically around the globe
by language groups.
No longer do we try to divide them by races,
no longer do we try to divide them by ethnicity.
These are modern and constructed categories.
They're not biological, they're not in the blood.
You can't take somebody's blood and say,
