speaks a Semitic language or that person is Irish or that person is something else.
So we divide people up more or less neutrally by languages. So we're dealing now with another
of the Semitic people. You'll recall perhaps by imagining the Hittites were the first
Indo-European speakers whom we encountered. We'll encounter many more of those as we go along.
Now back to our friends the Assyrians. They built this enormous imperial state largely on the basis
of a very large army. The use of iron weapons and the use of cavalry. Now a large army is not
so remarkable in and of itself. The use of iron weapons is important. Previously we have been
working through what we might call the Bronze Age and the weapons were bronze. The Assyrians with
their iron weapons simply had a higher grade of military technology than the peoples whom they
encountered. Cavalry for the Assyrians was basically a tool of getting to the battlefield
quickly. They didn't really understand the use of cavalry on the battlefield. The Persians as we'll
see in a few minutes were the ones who discovered how to use cavalry on the battlefield. But the
Assyrians were able to get there fast and that was really what they learned from the use of horses.
Now in 722 BC as we saw in our last lecture they conquered the kingdom of Israel and they
deported its inhabitants, the ten lost tribes, beginning the period of the exile.
Now the Assyrians were, as I hinted in the lecture on the Hebrews, bad guys. Their basic
policies were cruel. Their basic policy was state terrorism. They routinely rounded up and killed
large numbers of people just by way of sending a message to everybody else that they could do that
to them too at any time and for no reason. Even their art glorified fear and destruction. If
you've ever seen for example any of the great Assyrian stone carvings, there are some in museums
in this country in the metropolitan New York, but there are particularly large and fierce ones
in the British Museum in London if you've ever been in the room there of antiquities. To walk
by one of these panels is actually to feel eerie, to feel scared. That's exactly what they meant
to evoke in you, fear, terror. Well not surprisingly the Assyrians didn't evoke much loyalty.
They didn't evoke much affection and what they did evoke was a challenge. Now this challenge arose
from a coalition of peoples who very often were seen as liberators, you see, as liberators from
the Assyrians. They didn't necessarily want to be conquered by these new guys, but they really
wanted out from under the thumb of the Assyrians. Now in this great coalition of people, one key
group were the Neo-Babylonians. Now you'll remember we talked of the old Babylonians. That's the
people of Hammurabi, he of the great law code. The Neo-Babylonians are the people whose most famous
king was Nebuchadnezzar, who turns up in some of the later books of the Hebrew Bible. He reigned
from about 605 to about 562 BC. Now he built a very large realm based in Mesopotamia, based in the
same areas where the Assyrians had been. Their capital now is at Babylon and not at Nineveh,
but the point is that the center of this realm is basically in the same place that the center of
the Assyrian realm had been based. Now the main achievement of the Neo-Babylonians, whose high
point lasted only about a century, they were not really on the scene very long, was the massive
rebuilding of the city of Babylon, creating there the famous Hanging Gardens, one of the
Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, an elaborate palace complex with beautiful pleasure gardens
surrounding it. So then the Neo-Babylonians were one of the peoples in the great coalition that
brought down the Assyrians. There were also a number of minor players at this time. For example,
up in central Anatolia, people called the Lydians. Now the Lydians might very well have disappeared
from history. They weren't particularly remarkable. Were it not for two things. One, they invented
coinage. As far as we can tell, they invented coinage. And eventually, of course, virtually everyone
who came after them used coined money. Did they always borrow it from the Lydians? Well, it may
very well be, as we'll see in a minute, that they borrowed it from the Persians, who borrowed it from
the Lydians, who disseminated it a great deal further. But the point is the Lydians invented
coinage. The second thing is their legendary King Cresus. Now his wealth was legendary, probably
because he heaped up coins, because he collected a large number of these coins as taxes and tribute.
His very name meant wealth in the ancient world. We still say somebody's rich is Cresus, or maybe
some of us say things like that. So, Cresus is famous, and the Lydians made money, but they also
walked their weary hour on the stage and departed, not really much to be heard from afterwards.
Not so the other great party, the other great party to the anti-Assyrian coalition. These were the
Medes and the Persians. Now, these were peoples who had been living the Medes in the Zagros Mountains.
The mountain range basically that divides Iran from Iraq. They'd been living in those mountains
for a very long time, and we haven't heard much about them. And indeed, people in antiquity
hadn't heard much about them. The Persians, on the other hand, lived down on the Iranian plain.
They had been there for a very long time, but again had not been particularly interested in
the lands to their west in Mesopotamia. Eventually, and we can say actually of the Medes and the Persians,
that they are ethnically related. They speak a similar language. They're roughly the same
kinds of people, but there are some differences among them. In any case, they began to forge a
great unity. And under the great King Cyrus. Cyrus was the Shah. He was the Shah in Shah,
the King of Kings. Founded a monarch
