was that many people spoke.
There's an interesting point hiding there.
One of the things that we would have to encounter
in all of these imperial states we've been talking about
in these successions of empire after empire
that we've been talking about,
how is communication to be affected?
How is communication to be affected?
What language is everybody going to speak?
Well, communications will have been,
over long periods of time, a very complicated matter indeed.
The Persians took the step of adopting Aramaic,
which was a language that large numbers of people
would have known at least a little bit, you see?
And therefore, communication would have been possible.
Justice, for example, later on, Greek,
Koinei Greek, the common Greek,
not the highfalutin Greek of the Attic orators
and of Plato and Aristotle, but a common Greek
became the language widely used in the Mediterranean rule.
More widely, actually, than Latin ever was.
In the 18th century, French became the language
of sort of international communication.
Today, obviously, English has become the language
of international communication.
But in a very real way, and a very long time ago,
the Persians had an insight into that process,
and so they used the Aramaic language.
Now, the Persians built a number of beautiful buildings
at their capital at Percephalus, for example,
but we think of the Persians particularly
when we think of their culture
in connection with their religious ideas.
Now, the chief manifestation of Persian culture,
of Persian religion, was what we call Zoroastrianism.
Now, this is a rather complicated matter, once again,
as with Abraham, as with some of the other religious figures
that we'll talk about this term.
Scholars dispute the date for Zarathustra,
the great teacher of what we call Zoroastrianism.
Sometimes you'll hear him referred to as a raster,
sometimes Zarathustra, same person.
Some would say he goes back perhaps as far as 1000 BC.
Others would say, well, perhaps more like 750.
Others would say, well, it's really closer
to the time of King Cyrus
and the spread of the Persian Empire.
In my own view, we probably have something
which is actually very old at its origins
and then grows and develops and took on new shapes
at slightly different points in time.
And that as new manifestations of Zoroastrianism appeared,
people would tend to attach novelty to them,
would attempt to say, this is where the origins are,
this is where it all began.
As a result, we get this confused tradition
of multiple dates of origin.
What we have, as is often the case,
is something that is evolving for a long period of time.
It's developing over a long period of time.
It's really a fool's errand to go and say,
that is the moment when it all got started.
Now, Zarathustra's teachings are revealed to us
in a collection of songs called Gathas.
Now the Gathas are poems basically,
but the word apparently does mean song more than poem.
So it may very well be the case
that they were meant to be sung
or perhaps intoned, chanted in some way, okay?
The Gathas are preserved in a larger work
called the Avesta.
Now these are, in a way, the spiritual scriptures
of the Zoroastrians, therefore of the Persian peoples.
If we think about this body of material as a whole,
the Gathas are a part of the Avesta.
The Gathas, most scholars think,
are the ones, is the section of the Avesta
that is particularly to be attributed
to Zarathustra himself, you see?
And the other parts here are parts of the tradition
that has emerged over a longer period of time.
What did Zarathustra teach?
He taught the idea of a single benevolent God
called a Hurra Mazda.
And if you're driving a Mazda automobile,
you're driving around in a Zarastrian car.
Now, Zaraster imagines, Zarathustra imagined a Hurra Mazda
to be the single creator of all.
In this, of course, Zarathustra is not wholly unlike
the Hebrew, but he is most certainly a henotheist
or a monolatrist, more than a monotheist.
So there's increasing the idea
of focusing on a single deity.
Zarathustra was also much intrigued by the problem of evil.
Well, how many people over long periods of time
have been intrigued by the problem of evil?
If there is a single God who has made all things
and who is somehow benevolent,
why is there evil in the world?
Why do bad things happen?
Can one supreme being at once have created all that is good
and all that opposes it?
Well, Zarathustra's answer to this question
is a rather interesting one.
Zarathustra taught that a Hurra Mazda had twin children.
And after a Hurra Mazda's own time,
these two children struggled with one another
and that world history, in a certain sense,
is a playing out of this struggle.
The one child is wholly benevolent.
The other child is wholly evil.
Now, if this begins to sound a little like,
for example, the tradition of Satan.
As a figure who is wholly evil
and opposed to another figure, God, who is wholly good,
there are certain similarities.
I think it would be an exaggeration to say, borrowings.
I think what we see here is people reflecting
in comparable ways to similar phenomena.
We have this very interesting problem
of imagining a benevolent God
and then looking at the world around us.
Now, this perpetual struggle between the forces of good
and the forces of evil produces a rather interesting way
of thinking about the world.
And we call this dualism.
Now, we meet this dualism for the first time here
with the Zoroastrians.
We'll meet it later again and again and again.
It basically involves us in a series of polarities,
good and evil.
Sometimes it puts us in a realm of poetic images,
light and dark.
Sometimes it puts us in a series of emotional images,
hope and fear.
Sometimes it puts us into a series of spiritual
and psychological images, flesh and spirit.
St. Paul says the spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.
Well, St. Paul was not a Zoroastrian,
but there were certain common ways of talking,
certain common ways of thinking.
Imagining these polarities.
