What we do know comes overwhelmingly from archaeology.
Now these Minoans left us some pretty impressive hints about themselves, about what they were
like.
For example, in the enormous palace complex, this legendary palace of Minos at Nassos,
this is an enormous complex.
The building itself, the complex of buildings, occupies some five acres.
It has in its center a great central courtyard, a ceremonial space that was about 55 meters
by 25 meters.
That's a very large interior space inside a house.
Well, of course, this is a royal house, so it's very big.
The size, the beauty, the decorations of this palace suggest wealth, suggest leisure, suggest
a rather comfortable life, suggest very elaborate aesthetic standards.
I'll come back to a couple of those issues in just a moment.
But the point is that this palace permits us to make certain inferences, but we don't
have the kind of, for example, written documentation or later tradition that permits us to confirm
our inferences.
Now, one of the things that is true about this palace is that all the way along its
exterior flanks are great storehouses.
So obviously the kings who live there stored up various products, cereal, grains, and olive
oil and what have you.
And we think that these linear documents, much like, for example, some of the cuneiform
documents that we find from Sumer, are bureaucratic records.
They're probably attached to the administration of the palace, to the administration of the
island of Crete, and perhaps, indeed, also to the administration of the Minoans fairly
far-flung commercial ventures.
So we have a sense of bureaucratic rule.
We can infer certain things about a fairly sophisticated administration, even though
we cannot, strictly speaking, write its history.
Now, the architectural forms, for example, in the palace and some of the artistic forms
in the frescoes, the wall paintings inside the palace, you know what fresco is.
Fresco is painting on wet plaster.
It is not painting on a dry plastered wall, but it is putting paint actually into the
wet plaster so that as the plaster dries, the painted surface, in effect, becomes part
of the surface of the wall.
Alas, if a wall falls down, you lose everything.
But the point is that a fresco is a fairly durable art form.
And fragments of many frescoes have been found from the palace of Minos at Nassau.
Now the artistic motifs that we see and architectural motifs that we see suggest contacts with the
Near East and also with Egypt.
Well, we know the Minoans were great trading people.
We know they were substantial seafarers, so that's not surprising.
And here we can see the transfer of ideas, a point that I've raised several times in
earlier lectures.
But again, we work at the level of inference.
We can't work at the level of confirmation.
There's some other interesting things about Crete, about Minoan Crete, that permit us
inferences, and utter lack of fortifications.
None.
Not a few, none.
These people apparently had no fear of being attacked by anybody.
This suggests that they were themselves not aggressive, that they weren't interested in
attacking anyone.
No fortified harbor complexes, even though they were great traders.
No fortified palace complexes, even though they were wealthy and powerful.
Now inside these palaces, we find evidence of a very elegant life.
For example, depictions of women wearing cosmetics with beautiful hairdos, with beautiful jewelry
and beautiful clothing.
Now no one would paint so lovingly and so accurately and in such great detail were these
things not appreciated.
And it's probably fair to say, that at least let's say for queens, for princesses, for
important women of the court, that these depictions may come close to reality.
I don't want to suggest that there's something like photographs, they may come very close
to reality.
So it may provide us an insight into what gave these people pleasure, what they liked to
look at, what seemed pleasing to them.
But again, that's an inference.
We might say, for example, we have some very interesting depictions of bull leaping.
This appears to have been their favorite sport.
Now perhaps you've watched the vault in the Olympics, where an athlete runs down a long
runway, leaps into the air, turns over in the air, touches hands on a vault, and springs
over the other side of it, perhaps sometimes doing various somersaults and spins and flips
in the air.
But no one's did that, except instead of a stationary vault, they went at a running
bull.
One suggests that the penalty for slipping up was more than getting the judges to give
you a bad score.
But in any case, it suggests you see peaceful sporting activities, unlike other arts that
we see, where military affairs and military men and weapons and so on may be featured.
I mentioned the Assyrians in this connection.
