And he then gives its name to a period in early Greek history.
It is almost certainly these Mycenaeans who conquered Minoan Crete.
To be sure, conquered Minoan Crete at a very late stage in its development, they'd probably
been learning from them for a long time.
They probably grew jealous of them and they saw that they were ripe for the plucking and
they plucked them.
Now the high point of Mycenaean civilization falls between about 1400 and about 1200 BC.
In other words, the couple of centuries following their conquest of Minoan Crete.
This is the period of the great cities of Mycenae and Corinth and Pylos, the very cities for
example that are mentioned in Homer's Iliad.
We're going to talk about the Iliad more in a few minutes, but this is basically the
world that Homer begins to bring into focus for us.
This is a period of massive building projects.
For example, at sites like Mycenae, a huge citadel built on the top of a hill, a massive
road flanked on each side with stone walls leading up to that great citadel at Mycenae.
So these were people who could build quite impressive structures, who could build quite
impressive buildings.
It was a time we think of very considerable wealth.
Mycenaeans seem to have sustained themselves mainly by agricultural pursuits in the Greek
mainland, but also by engaging in overseas trade, in overseas commerce, and in having
contacts with people overseas as well.
We know about the Mycenaeans from three different kinds of evidence.
In the first place, we have a great collection of what are called linear B documents.
Now there are thousands of these.
Again, it turns out they are overwhelmingly bureaucratic records.
We didn't find the first edition of the Iliad or something like that in these documents.
It would have been lovely to have done so, but we didn't.
The linear B documents differ from the linear A documents in a couple of very important
respects.
The first and fundamental one is we can read them.
We can read these documents.
Now, for a very long time, nobody could read them.
We still can't, as we've seen, read the linear A documents.
We don't know what the language is.
Well, for a long time, prevailing archaeological theory held that the Greeks came into Greece
sort of after about 1200 BC, and therefore theory held those people before 1200, whatever
they might have been, weren't Greek.
So people went and looked in one place after another for the language in these linear B
documents.
Right after the Second World War, a group of individuals led by an Oxford classicist by
the name of Michael Ventress, they had all worked at Bletchley during World War II.
These were the enigma code breakers, very interesting people to put to work on the task
of puzzling out a language.
So they assembled all this brain power, and they were going to crack this code.
Ventress gets the bright idea, maybe it's Greek, but written in a different script.
Hello, it's Greek.
So actually they'd need all that brain power in the long run.
It took one simple flash of brilliant insight, and now it was possible to read these documents.
By the by, to adjust earlier archaeological theory.
These people are speaking Greek, writing Greek, they're probably Greek in some way or another.
Now, one other interesting thing to say about the linear B documents before we leave them
is you may be puzzled by what does this linear mean?
Well, it means simply writing that is a raid in lines.
I think, well, that doesn't sound terribly interesting.
Uniform could be a raid in lines, hieroglyphics would be a raid in lines, but it is writing
that is a raid in lines running from left to right, you see, across the pave.
But it is a particular kind of writing, and I want that's the point that I want to just
put a little bit of emphasis on at the moment.
It is syllabic writing.
We can have basically three kinds of writing.
We have talked already about pictographs, hieroglyphics, for example, picture writing.
Where pictures stand for nouns and verbs.
And then colored in certain ways can give us the other array of words, adjectives, adverbs,
all that modify things and various connective words.
Picture writing, as we saw, not terribly efficient.
Syllabic writing is more efficient.
The demotic, for example, that began to be used on papyrus in Egypt is syllabic writing.
Cuneiform is syllabic writing.
The languages which the cuneiform symbols represent are laid out syllabically.
It's almost certainly the case that the linear A documents are like that, too.
We just know what the language is.
And the linear B documents are laid out this way as well.
Now, what on earth does this mean, syllabic writing?
It's vastly more efficient than pictographs, but a lot less efficient than alphabetic writing,
to which I'll come in just a second.
Like writing, let's suppose we were going to make up a syllabary for English.
We would have to have a symbol.
