any subjects, and there was a battle that went back and forth in the scholarly world.
To put this battle in its very simplest terms, there are some who said, the Homeric poems
are works of art. They spring full-blown from the mind of a great bard, a great rapsode,
a great teller of tales, Homer, whoever he was. And what we have is his artistic vision.
Homer said, no, no, that's not how we should understand the making of the Iliad, the Odyssey.
We should understand them as oral formulaic poetry.
The oral formulaic poetry, again, if you've ever read the Iliad, and you know about Rosy
Finger Dawn and the wine-dark sea, and wide-ruling Agamemnon and Diomedes of the Loud War cry,
you see, all of these formulas that recur again and again and again, because they fit
a certain metrical pattern. It's not unlike sitting around in the evening with a great
group of friends, and you're making up verses to a song as you go along. Well, you've got
to kind of stick with the theme of the song, and you have to stay with the beat of the
music, you see? All right, so people can build poems that way.
Well, if that's the case, then is this thing simply a free-for-all? In other words, if
it's a composed epic by Homer, whoever Homer was, then we really aren't authorized to
say that this Homer guy knew very much about Mycenae, and therefore we can't really read
the poem for that, though we can appreciate it as great poetry. But if it's oral formulaic
poetry, we say there's no rules here. People are kind of making it up as they go along.
Well, after the Second World War, two Harvard scholars, Milman Perry and Albert Lord, who
had worked in Yugoslavia during the Second World War with the Office of Strategic Services,
the predecessor of the CIA, working with various groups in the Balkans attempting to hold that
territory against Nazis in the first place, against possible Soviet incursion in the second
place, one of the things they discovered up there was a local bardic tradition. There
were singers of songs, tellers of tales up there, and they discovered some of these guys
who could keep in mind up to a half a million lines of material. Half a million lines of
material. Now, we've encountered this, I suppose, most recently in something like Alex Haley's
famous book Roots and the television series Roots, where Haley went back to the Gambia
and found the storytellers and had them start reciting the tale until he began to hear
things that resonated. Then he tried to start stitching this tale together. We might think
also, for instance, of performers today. Think of a really good sort of popular singer. How
many lyrics must that person know? It's an enormous number of things. Think of a great
actor, Lawrence Olivier. How many scripts must he have had in mind? He did every Shakespearean
play in his life. And I don't suppose, necessarily at every minute, he could remember every line
from all of them. But he must have had an awful lot of it in mind. We don't exercise our
memories today the way we did in earlier times, the way people did generally in earlier times.
So the capacity to remember large amounts of things and to hand it on quite faithfully
makes it legitimate to think that this oral formulaic poetry was not playing in a game
with no rules and did in fact transmit down over the centuries a great deal of quite substantial
and accurate and authentic information. Having said that, and probably at that stage today
almost no one would disagree, we get to the hard part. Okay, how much of it's authentic?
Of this material is really accurate. Well, the Mycenaean elements in the story are likely
to be among the most basic and concrete names of characters. There's no reason for those
to change. Names of places. There's no reason for those to change. There are certainly hints
of warfare in the old days. There's some problems with that. Iron weapons crop up a couple of
times in the Iliad. Well, there was no iron weapons at Mycenae. That was still the Bronze
Age. There are some references, for example, to military armaments, to armor that didn't
really appear at the time of Mycenae and almost certainly did appear later on.
So there's a certain amount of basic information in the Iliad that is almost certainly authentic
and that has come down from earlier times. What kinds of things? Well, let's remind ourselves,
it's a story about the Trojan War. Now, the Greek tradition remembered the Trojan War
as having taken place 1194 to 1184 BC. It took place for 10 years. The Iliad shows us the
battlefield in the very last stages of that war. Quite remarkably, scholars today actually
pegged the Trojan War at between 1225 and 1200 BC. So there's one place the tradition
is remarkable, remarkably close in remembering when
