In a certain sense it actually arose before that, archaeology was essentially the servant
of museum science and then of art history.
Archaeologists went out and looked for beautiful things to put them on display.
That's fundamentally what they did.
One might sort of put tongue in cheek and say that the great goal of early archaeology
was to find the Venus de Milo's arms.
You see, this would have made you famous.
And you found these wonderful things and you put them in museums and you arrayed them room
by room and so on.
Now there's no archaeologists in the world today who wouldn't love to find a beautiful
thing.
But archaeology today is based on and is dedicated to something very different.
Modern survey archaeology is designed basically to take large sites and slowly but surely
to strip the soil away layer by layer by layer to uncover life as it was lived.
To find humble things, ordinary dwellings, to find humble things like ordinary crockery,
ordinary ceramics, to go digging through garbage pits to find what percentages of chicken bones
and what percentages of pig bones and what percentages of beef bones you find in the
garbage pits in order to make guesses about diets, in order to make guesses about what
people ate, in order to make guesses about their protein intake and this kind of thing.
Today, archaeology is really much more interested in figuring out how people lived than in go
finding the beautiful things that they left lying about.
What that means is that day by day by day the Greek dark ages are actually less dark
to us than they were once before.
Even though we don't have these great spectacular palaces and as near as we can tell beautiful
things to find and to look at and to admire.
Now between about 800 and about 700 BC, the Greek world began to show the first clear
signs of life and energy.
Kind of a revival begins to appear all over much of the Greek world.
Historians refer to this as the transitional period between the dark ages, less dark all
the time as I've said, and the archaic period.
The great classical period to which we'll turn in a series of lectures beginning with
the next one follows this archaic period.
Now the great achievements of this transitional period of the early part of the archaic period,
the great achievements of this period, the fundamental achievement is the creation of
the polis, the Greek city-state, the fundamental Greek political institution, a political institution
that gave vocabulary, that gave ideals to the western world ever since.
For our next couple of lectures we're going to look at some detail at Athens and at Sparta,
two of the greatest of the Greek polis.
For now I just want to emphasize that we can begin to see the first faint stirrings like
a small sprout coming through the ground in early spring of what will later be the full-flowered
polis.
Now dark age Greece appears on the hold to have been a pretty peaceful place, a fairly
easy place.
Now I said earlier in the last lecture that Greece was never an easy land to eat a living
out of, and that's certainly true.
But it's also true that in a world that was depopulated, in a world with much less contention
than it had marked the Mycenaean period, people were able to live their lives largely undisturbed
by external forces.
And as a result, the population began to grow.
Now one of the great problems in the Greek world is that the mountain crags, the mountain
ridges, tend to work in such a way as to leave a kind of a patchwork quilt of small areas
of arable land.
And as a result of this, the population can easily and pretty quickly outstrip the capacity
of that arable land to support it.
Now you've got a problem.
You've got more people than you can feed.
What are you going to do?
This began to generate a whole series of important and complex social tensions in the Greek world.
And it's probably this gradual pressure of population on resources that leads to some
of the steps that begin to generate the polis, as I suggested a few minutes ago.
Now by around 900, 800 BC, the commercial exploits of the Phoenicians may very well have been
in the first place a spur to the Greeks.
Life generated by trade might either supplement or upset the very delicate balance of life
in essentially agricultural communities.
The Greeks knew that the Phoenicians were trading.
There were some Greeks who were already beginning to engage in trade.
There's no place in the Greek world that's more than about 150 miles from the sea.
It's much easier to get to the sea and travel around by sea than it is to travel overland
in Greece.
If you've ever driven in Greece, if you've ever tried to take a train in Greece, you
know this to be the case.
It's not an easy land to move about in.
By around 750 BC, or thereabouts, various Greek cities began to display one or another
of three responses to these tensions generated in this period, occasioned by rising population
and limited resources.
The first response, particularly associated with Sparta, you conquer your neighbors.
You don't have enough soil, you don't have enough land, you conquer your neighbors.
The Spartans conquered the Messenians, the people who lived to the west of them in the
Peloponnesus and reduced them to slavery, turned them into helots, state slaves.
We'll talk more about them in the next lecture when we turn to Sparta.
Another way to do it, we might.
