is to Phoenicianize. Athens was the Greek city that decided that what they would do essentially
is live by trade. Rather than making everything they needed, they would trade and generate the
wealth to permit them to buy whatever they needed. So the Athenians turned in particular
to commercial ventures. Now this made them, as I said, a bit like the Phoenicians, makes them a
bit like the later Phoenicians in Dutch, a point that I'd emphasized already in connection with
the Phoenicians when we talked about them. A third possibility. Corinth is perhaps the best
example of this, but there were others in the Greek world. You colonize. You export your surplus
population. Now you don't just sort of throw them out the door, that's not the point, because you
do have pressures in the city. These are your fellow citizens. You want to maintain some connection
with them. So you'll send these people to places where they will create cities of their own and
maintain very close, very cordial, very effective relations with the mother city. Quite literally,
that's what the Greek word metropolis, metropolis means. It means a mother city. We in English
tend to use the word metropolis for a big city. We think of New York as a metropolis, you see,
but actually strictly speaking, it's a mother city. You have to have sent out colonies,
and then you're a metropolis. Well, these colonies were planted all around the Black Sea region.
They were planted along the North African coast in the area that we would think of as Libya.
They were planted in southern Italy and in Sicily. Indeed, southern Italy and Sicily became so full
of Greek colonies that the area came to be called Magna Graeche, a greater Greece.
Have I ever strike you that the cities in Sicily bear Greek names? Syracuse? That's not a Latin name.
That's a Greek name. And Naples? Not bully. What could be more Italian than not bully? Italian
Schmanion. Neopolis. New city. A Corinthian colony. So the Corinthians then planted colonies,
but other Greek cities planted colonies as well. Now, this process of colonization is
interesting and important to us because it reveals sort of the inventiveness, the cleverness,
the adaptability, the flexibility of the Greeks in responding to a problem. They all faced more
or less the same problem, and they dealt with it in quite different ways. That's one important thing.
Another important thing though is to say that spreading these colonies all around the Mediterranean
world was of enormous historical significance. If you've traveled in the Mediterranean world,
you have seen beautiful Greek temples in Sicily, and you've seen beautiful Greek
temples in southern Italy, and you've seen beautiful Greek temples along the North African coast.
Greek art, Greek architecture, the Greek language, Greek values, Greek literature,
Greek political institution, Greek ways of life were spread all over the Mediterranean basin.
Now, I suggested when we talked about the Phoenicians that they represented the first
such evidence of a spreading of a common culture around the Mediterranean.
But the Phoenicians were never as numerous, and they were never as self-conscious as the Greeks were
about spreading themselves and all that they represented. And remember, these colonies were
meant to maintain close relationship with their mother city. They weren't meant to be something
wholly new, something wholly different. They were meant to be little extensions of Greece,
wherever they went, and so they were. Now, this was crucial in continuing this process,
but accelerating this process of making of the Mediterranean basin a common cultural realm.
Now, it's important to say too, the Greeks did not merely spread out and take themselves
all about the place, they learned, they borrowed. We'll have occasions when we talk about Greek
philosophy, perhaps we talk about Greek history, to see some concrete ideas which the Greeks learned
from others and borrowed from others. But for the moment, let me just instance one crucial thing.
They borrowed an alphabet from the Phoenicians, so that when the Greeks finally started writing again,
probably in the 8th century BC, they write in the familiar Greek script that we know,
basically the Greek script that has been used since about the 8th century BC, right down to now.
Not like the script of those Linear B documents, and then of course, as I mentioned,
they stopped writing altogether for a period of some perhaps two or three hundred years,
something like that. So the Greeks were never unwilling to borrow. We mustn't
suppose that Greek influence is always a one-way street, the Greeks are giving things to people,
they also knew how to take things from others. Now, the latter stages of the Dark Ages and the first
phase of the Archaic period, okay? This transitional period, perhaps the 8th century BC,
more or less, also begins to show us evidence for some of the most familiar aspects
of Greek ways of thinking, of Greek attitudes, of Greek values, of issues that will be with us
for the next several lectures. So let's suggest a little about what some of these emerging ideas were.
Say a few things about them and see if we can't see how we may take them with us
in some of our following lectures. Decorations on pottery. Well, you may think this a humble
place to start, but designs on ceramics. Now, the Greeks were able to make beautiful pots,
but the Greeks were not the first people historically to make beautiful pots.
But they were among the first people to put beautiful geometric designs on their pots.
Geometry, the science of measuring.
