earth. But what does this suggest to you? If I ask you to close your eyes, and if you're
listening to this in a car, you probably don't want to do that. But if you close your eyes
and think geometry, you think shapes, you think forms, you think, don't you, of a certain
sense of order, of balance, of harmony, of measure, of proportion. And don't all of those
things sound awfully Greek? There's a tendency on some of these pots to reduce the shape
of living things to geometric forms. A very common motif, for example, often around the
neck of a Greek pot, is to have a series of deer all following one another, or stags,
actually. And in each instance, the bodies of each deer are described in almost exactly
the same way. It's a highly stylized kind of image. It's a very abstract kind of image.
It is an image that abstracts something from the world around us, something from the familiar
world that we see. It is to turn the familiar into what is even more familiar but less visible.
That is to say, geometry. It is to suggest, in another way, that behind all that we see,
there may be another realm, another kind of truth, another kind of beauty, another kind
of perfection, of which all things in this world are but imperfect examples, or suggestions,
or hints, or possibilities. Now, we saw that, did we not, in connection with rastrianism.
I'm not trying to turn the Greeks into rastrians. I'm not trying to turn the rastrians into
Greeks. I'm saying, again, it is a common phenomenon, a common way of thinking about
certain issues. But the next time you're in a museum and you see a Greek pot with these
geometric designs, or these highly stylized animal designs, think, stop, and think, what
do they suggest to you? What do they invite you to think about? And I think you'll see
this sense that not everything is quite as we see it, and that there is a quest for order
balance, harmony, and proportion. Now, it's also very important to say that at a very
early stage, the Greeks achieve a spectacular level of technical virtuosity in their sculpture,
in their ceramics, in vase painting eventually when they put pictures on ceramic and so on.
So this is important too. And we'll come back to that point. Because with the Greeks, there
is always techné. Techné is Greek for skill. There's always skill, accomplishment. But
then there is the vision that informs the use of that skill. The Greeks are not alone in
this. What is alone, what the Greeks are unique in, is the ways in which they put these two
things together. Early Greek sculpture across this archaic period begins sometimes in stone,
sometimes in bronze. The bronze figures obviously are cast, not carved. But early Greek sculpture
begins to give us some interesting and important hints, some interesting and important hints
about little differences between the way the Greeks think of the world and the way some
of their neighbors did. If you looked, for example, at Egyptian sculpture, if you looked
at a good deal of Mesopotamian sculpture, if you looked at Hittite sculpture, one of
the things you would see is figures that are rigid and frontal and unblinking, unfeeling,
unchanging. What they communicate is all that does not change. There is again a sense of
abstraction there. That's true. But with the Greeks, we begin to get, begin. In a later
lecture, we'll bring this more fully into view. But we begin to get a hint, a suggestion
that an image represents an actual person who walked upon the earth, who is distinctive,
who is different from everybody else, who looks like that, and not like a rigid, lifeless,
eternal kind of figure. So the Greeks have the capacity to be technically proficient.
They have the capacity to look for abstraction behind the world we live in, and they have
the capacity to observe very, very closely the world we live in. This blend we will see
later is enormously positive and creative and generative.
Now, let's go back to Homer's poems. We left off poor Homer as we were trying to extract
from his poems certain things that we might be able to learn about the Mycenaean world.
Now let's put Homer back in his own time and place, 800 to 700 B.C. in that period, and
say, what do we see in these poems that may begin providing us hints about this polis
that is just beginning to emerge like late winter's first crocus?
Well, what we open up I think now, and I suggested this at the end of the last lecture, is a
vista on ideologies, on values, but also I think some hints of that world's changes.
Remember we've talked about this period 800 to 700 as transitional between the Dark Ages
and the Archaic period. I think in the very Homeric poem we can feel some of these changes.
For instance, one of the things we find in the Iliad, you find these things in the Odyssey
too, but I'm essentially focusing on the Iliad, one of the things that we find is intense competition.
These Greeks are very competitive people. Now we may think they after all invented the
Olympic games, and the Olympic games happened every four years, but in the other three years
there were other games, the Isbien, the Nemean, and the Panhellenic games. So there were games
going on in the Greek world all the time. Athletic means about prizes. You didn't play
for the fun of it. The game was not the thing. Winning the game was the thing. These Greeks
were competitive. Now think of the soldiers in the Iliad. We have a picture of two great
armies arrayed on a battlefield, but they're basically nameless and faceless to us, aren't
they? What we have is two warriors. Our vision is always on two warriors. They come out on
the battlefield and they make speeches to each other. They fight verbally before they
ever strike a blow in earnest. And then they fight and they speak your fight and they fight
and they speak your fight and they fight and they speak your fight. So there's physical
competition and there's verbal competition. What would the Greeks have loved more than
verbal competition? Somebody will be struck a mortal blow. He doesn't just die and kind
of get himself off. He dies for a hundred lines, making speeches, telling us he's fighting
with us sometimes, the audience.
