That's not true.
Sparta's earliest development is shrouded in legend.
Now, by now, that's not going to surprise us.
The origins of everything, it seems, are shrouded in legend.
The Spartans told a story.
Supposedly, a mythical lawgiver by the name of Lycurgus on the command of the gods gave
Sparta a constitution all at once in about the year 750 BC.
Well, there are several things wrong with that.
First of all, for instance, we do think Lycurgus is a real historical person.
We do think there was such a person at Sparta, and that he may very well have been an important
reformer.
He may very well have played a significant role in the elaboration of the Spartan system.
But it's also clear, it seems, that the Spartan system emerged over a long period of time and slowly,
and probably, in fact, reached its culmination at about the time when the Spartans conquered
the Missenians.
Perhaps you'll recall, in the last lecture, we had said that the pressures of the early
archaic period, or of this transitional period, could be met in the Greek world in various
ways.
You could colonize and export your population, for instance.
You could engage in trade, or you could conquer additional land, and the Spartans in particular
chose that option.
They conquered their neighbors to the west, the Missenians.
So it seems that some aspects of the Spartan system, however old they might have been,
however many sort of embryonic features they may have contained, were really sharpened,
were hardened, after the conquest of the Missenians.
Now, that takes place in the 8th century BC, so the tradition remembering that somewhere
in the 8th century BC the Constitution was made is not bad.
Remember, we talked about how close Greek tradition on the date of the Trojan Wars is.
We talked about handing things down orally over long periods of time.
Traditions are not false because they're traditions, and legends often have much in
them that is true.
It's sorting out what is true and what is false, in terms of facts that is tricky.
But when we discuss myth, when we discuss legend, if we are seeking only those few kernels
of truth, we're going to miss the whole point, because myth and legend are meant to tell
stories that tell much larger truths than the tiny and humble facts which they contain.
What the Spartans thought then about their past was that a great law giver had given
them their system at once.
Now, that's worth pausing to think about for just a minute, because in that regard,
the Spartans are not unlike a lot of other peoples.
The Athenians, for example, also thought their laws were given to them by a person called
Theseus.
Now, they never quite, the Athenians didn't, associate their whole system with Theseus,
the way the Spartans did with Lycurgus.
But we might think about Moses, to whom the law is attributed, and yet clearly the law
evolved over a long period of time.
Much later, the Romans remembered a figure called Numapompilius as having given them
their law.
There is a tendency always to imagine a founding father, not a founding mother, and that is
interesting as well, to imagine a founding father or perhaps founding fathers, think
how frequently we Americans speak of the founding fathers, and how much legend and myth has
attached to what they did, you see, and sometimes we're interested in the facts, and sometimes
we're interested in sort of the larger story, the big picture.
Well, the Spartan system, then, is revealed to us by a number of ancient writings.
We actually have quite a lot of source material.
We don't have Aristotle's Constitution of Sparta, but we have a lot of writings about
Sparta, and we know a lot about the system.
It was in many ways quite a peculiar system.
We might very well think in the modern world that a successfully, a particularly successful
political system is one that is designed to accommodate change, in other words, one that
can incorporate contention, institutionalize contention, diffuse contention, and move forward.
The Spartan system, on the other hand, was designed not to accommodate, but to prevent
change.
This was one of the most conservative political systems created in human history and created
such by design, and not at all by accident.
Now, the first feature of the Spartan system that we want to think about as we proceed
along to try to understand it as a political system and as a social system, because these
two systems complement one another in important ways.
The first feature, then, that we want to talk about are the social classes at Sparta.
Who were these Spartans?
The first and the most important class of people at Sparta were called the Hamoyoi.
That means the equals.
