There was much cooperation among the groups of people who went to liberate the Ionian Greeks.
And then in 454 BC, Athens turned this sort of voluntary association into an Athenian empire.
And the Athenians collected with a vengeance tribute from that empire.
Allegedly that tribute was to pay for the military cost, the naval cost, to fighting the Persians.
In point of fact, it went into the pockets of Athenians.
It paid their politicians, for example, and it built those glorious buildings like the Parthenon.
The Athenian system was also paid for by slave labor.
Slavery was less prominent, less visibly prominent, less structurally prominent in Athens than in Sparta.
But it was nevertheless an important component of the system.
Who defended Athens?
Pericles did, the great leader, in his funeral oration in Thucydides' great history of the Peloponnesian War,
the wars between Athens and Sparta, and will turn to Thucydides' history and that oration in a later lecture.
So it will pause for the moment and say that almost everybody criticized Athens, attacked Athens.
Plato and Aristotle, for example, said that what was wrong with Athens is that it did not bring the best men forward.
They said government should be by Heueristoi the best, aristocracy.
It's not by a bunch of people born privileged, but in the Greek sense aristocracy is ruled by the best.
Plato and Aristotle said it never happened.
Democracy is not going to bring the best forward.
An anonymous treatise written by somebody called the old oligarch said that what was wrong with the Athenian system
was that it lacked deference.
It lacked deference for the great and the good and the important citizens.
It was changeable. It was subjected to demagoguery.
You never knew what they were going to do next.
Here was this call for stability.
Thucydides gives us many examples of folly, cruelty, perversity.
He really was giving the concrete examples of the kinds of changeableness that the old oligarch,
the Plato and Aristotle, and others had commented on.
Thucydides simply parades the follies of the Athenians and invites us to reflect on them.
And he does this despite being actually, and in the end, favorably disposed to Athens.
What must our verdict be?
Athenian democracy has, after all, as I've suggested in earlier lectures, fired people's imagination for two and a half millennia.
The Athenians demonstrated what a democracy might be.
It remained for others to show how it might work and for whom it might work.
Now, I said that a polis is a political and a social institution,
and we've talked a little about Sparta and Athens as political and social institutions.
I also said the polis is a cultural institution.
And in the next several lectures, we'll reflect a little bit on the kind of culture that a polis makes.
Hello again, and welcome to lecture number 10 in our series on the foundations of Western civilization.
In the last couple of lectures, we talked about Sparta and then about Athens,
two of the most famous and most important of the Greek polis, the Greek city-states,
and we talked about them as social and political institutions.
But I want to turn to now, in a series of several lectures actually, is the culture of the polis.
What kind of culture did these cities make?
Now, if we think about it for just a moment, there are certain common features to the culture of cities,
and then every city has distinctive features all its own.
Boston is not quite like New York. New York is not like Los Angeles.
Los Angeles is different from Chicago. Perfectly natural to us.
And yet they do have some things in common.
Most of what we know about the culture of the Greek polis, we know about the Athenian polis.
So in certain respects, we can't really generalize to the culture of the polis overall.
What we know is really about Athens.
And so, let us visit that great city, and let's take several vantage points on its finest period.
The Golden Age, the 5th century BC, the Classical Period.
Let's begin with the most public of cultural manifestations, the most public of art forms.
In Athens, this means architecture and drama.
Now, no cultural form is more public or communal than architecture.
Great civic buildings are just there.
We see them every day. We like them or we don't like them.
We argue about them. We praise them. We criticize them.
But there they are.
And so, buildings can tell us some interesting and important things about the places where they are and the people who built them.
Now, in Athens, drama is very important too, and we'll turn to that in a few minutes.
Homer mentions temples. As we saw in an earlier lecture,
the Homeric poems probably took something like the contemporary shape in about 725 BC, plus or minus a bit.
So, we can't necessarily argue from Homer, again we talked about this,
as proving that there were temples in the Mycenaean world,
but certainly the fact that Homer mentions temples means that they existed in his time.
In the Dark Ages, and in the Archaic period in Greece,
as near as we can tell from the surviving archaeological record,
people no longer built palaces and no longer built urban fortifications on the scale of
