the Mycenaean period.
Architecture was perhaps, we might say, increasingly civic,
but it served the civic purposes of these emerging poles.
Public buildings where, for example,
legislative deliberations could take place,
temples, for example, where the people of the city
might worship their gods.
Greek colonies, we've talked about the Greek colonies
around the Mediterranean world and how important that was.
The Greek colonies tended to build architecture
that mirrored the architecture of the metropolis
that had sent them out in the first place.
So, not surprisingly, we find not great palace complexes
in Mycenaean fashion, but rather temples and public buildings
in the fashion of the dawning poles.
Pisistratus, as we saw, built a considerable number
of buildings in Athens, or were responsible for having them
build, and partly this was to generate pride,
to sustain pride in the city of Athens.
Partly it was to put large numbers of people to work,
but it does point to this civic context for architecture
and building buildings in a city that we're going to enter
into some kind of a dialogue with the people who
lived in that city.
Now, during the Persian wars, I keep referring to the Persian
wars and keep promising that eventually we'll talk about them,
but once more, we're going to pass right by, except to say
that during the Persian wars, the Persian army entered,
sacked, and burned much of Athens.
So, much of the great civic structure, the great civic
fabric that Pisistratus had created was gone.
This, of course, then left a remarkable opportunity
for people of the generation of Pericles.
The restoration of peace then, and the revenues that
flowed into Athens from the Athenian Empire,
provided the wherewithal to build these buildings.
So, there was will, there was opportunity,
and there were material resources.
Now, there were a large number of buildings built
between the 450s and about 420 BC in Athens,
a number of very beautiful ones.
But the greatest, the most important, I think in many ways,
the most interesting of these is the Parthenon.
So, let's talk about the Parthenon a little bit
as a way of talking about a Greek temple and a Greek building,
and we can learn a little something about the form
by discussing the Parthenon, and then move along a little bit
to ask ourselves, what does the Parthenon tell us
about Athens and about the Athenians?
How can we read this building as a contemporary document?
Well, the Parthenon is the temple to Athena Parthenos,
Athena the Maiden, Athena, not surprisingly,
the patron deity of Athens.
The building is built between about 447 or 446 BC
and about 438.
So, the basic temple itself is built
over a period of about eight or nine years.
It's sculptural programs,
more about them in just a couple of minutes,
it's sculptural programs were completed by about 432.
So, this great building is put up in less than two decades.
Now, in case you're interested, we do actually know
the names of the architects who are most responsible
for designing the building were Ictinus and Colicrates.
Now, it's a bit puzzling here
because we can't confidently identify other buildings
that they built and yet they were so good,
they must have done other work.
Their signature must be someplace else.
The principal sculptor was Phidias.
It was he who did the great golden statue of Athena
that was inside the temple itself.
That statue disappeared already in antiquity.
We have no idea what became of it.
But Phidias, the greatest of the sculptures in Athens
at that time was commissioned
to make the great sculpture of Athena.
Now, in order to understand the Parthenon in particular,
let us in general talk about the elements of a Greek building.
Let's talk about the elements of a temple,
the temple structure.
Though the temple structure was a form of building
that could be actually be adapted
to a large number of other uses.
We're gonna see this later when we talk about Romans.
The Basilica is basically a large rectangular hall
which can be adapted to lots of purposes.
So I'm gonna be talking about a temple form here,
but that doesn't mean that every building like this
is and only is a temple.
All right.
The key elements of a floor plan.
Let us imagine a Greek temple's floor plan
from two points of view.
Imagine that you are standing on the ground
even with the temple and looking straight at it.
But like Superman, you have X-ray vision.
So you can look right through it.
You can kind of see how all the elements work.
Now let's hoist you up in the air in a helicopter above it
and you look straight down at it.
All right.
So what I want you to do is imagine those two views
so that in a certain sense what we have
are horizontal and vertical dimensions.
And we're gonna try to understand
how these horizontal and vertical dimensions
operate in tandem with one another.
Now we can refer to the main
