building, was to make Athenians proud, to make them accept the empire, to make them
accept the price of all the sacrifices which they had paid.
The historical, including the mythical sculptures, put Athens' long and proud history on public
display for all to see, for anyone who was a citizen of Athens, for anyone who visited
the city.
The unusual secular scene of the Panathenaea held up a mirror to the Athenians in which
they could see themselves reflected.
So this was a building whose technical proficiency we must admire, but which also was a building
engaged in a constant and continuing conversation with the people who built it.
That's one public element of the culture of Apollos.
Another is drama.
In many respects, the great public art at Athens was drama.
It was performed in impressive open-air theaters.
From the time of affialties and pericles, citizens at Athens got free tickets, but those were
the things the empire paid for.
Drama, of course, are running.
Tragedy, the great dramatic form.
What is tragedy?
The word means goat song.
That's not very helpful.
It suggests that the remote origins of tragedy go back to rather wild celebrations in honor
of Dionysus, called by the Romans Bacchus.
So if we were to think of a bacchanal, what kind of a party would a bacchanal be when
you hope your teenage kids don't have?
That's what it is.
So there was some kind of a primitive and rather wild and rather wooly celebration.
By the 5th, 6th century BC, I'm sorry, this began to be tamed a little bit.
Tradition has it that a dramatist and actor named Thespis, now actors are still Thespians,
performed the first dramatic tragedy in Athens around 530 BC.
So the classical dramatic form began to lose whatever its origins were in the goat song
and become tragedy, drama, as we would more familiarly recognize it.
The oldest surviving play dates from about 470 BC.
Here is a tragedy about tragedy.
We know the names of more than a hundred plays, fewer than two dozen survive intact.
We know the names of dozens of dramatists.
We have plays by three, Escalus, who lives from 525 to 456 BC, Sophocles, who lives from
496 to 406 BC, and Euripides from 485 to 406 BC.
Our losses are enormous.
Now for Aristotle, whose book The Poetics is the world's first work of literary criticism,
tragedy was a kind of poetry.
It was a kind of poetry that was serious, that was written in beautiful language, beautiful
moving, elegant language, and it aroused fear and pity.
It aroused fear and pity in a way that was to purify the emotions of the audience.
This was the great Cutharsis, the purification.
Tragedy is fundamentally an elegant story of an admirable person struggling nobly against
insuperable odds.
It is not the ordinary and the accidental.
It is not when someone sort of of great promise dies in an automobile accident today.
Aristotle would say, that's not tragic.
It's not even interesting.
Everybody's going to die anyway.
It is the struggle that ennobles tragedy.
That's the key point.
Escalus, the first of the great dramatists whose works survive for us, wrote in trilogies,
as we think other early dramatists did as well.
Only one of his trilogies survives.
Indeed, only one trilogy survives at all.
And this is the Aristia.
Now, the Aristia, the plays about Orestes, Orestes is a son of Agamemnon.
While Agamemnon was off fighting the Trojan War, his wife, Clinton Nestor, took up with
another man, partly because her husband, she felt had abandoned her, partly because her
husband had sacrificed their daughter, Iphigenia, to get favorable wins in order for the Greek
fleet to sail to Troy.
Well, when Orestes came, when Agamemnon came back from the Trojan Wars, Clinton Nestor
and her paramour killed him.
Orestes was now faced with the task of avenging his father's death.
So the three plays become a long meditation on the nature of justice, the nature of divine
justice, the nature of human justice.
Now, it is cast way in the past, and yet, this play is performed in Athens in 458.
Four years before the Areopagus was stripped of its last powers in Athens.
Orestes is finally tried in the third play, before the Athenian Areopagus, except there
it's a court made up of the gods, you see.
But the play is speaking profoundly to contemporary issues, to hot issues.
And this is one important reason why this is a public art.
It's not only public because it happens in public.
It's public.
