because it engages the great issues of the day.
He also wrote, Askelos did, quite distinctively in this,
a play called The Persians.
The only play on a contemporary theme.
He wrote a play about the Persians.
The Persians had just attacked the Greeks,
had burned Athens to the ground,
and Askelos writes a play to show that
the Persians are people too.
That they have the same hopes and dreams
and fears and aspirations as everyone else.
The second of the great tragedians,
Sophocles, abandoned the trilogy.
His plays explored justice.
They explored principle.
They explored the consequences of right action.
For Sophocles, there is always a profound tension
between what I ought to do and what I want to do.
Let's just think of two examples.
One of his most famous plays is Antigone.
Now, two men, Antigone's brothers,
Polly Nicese and Atheocles,
have fought in single combat before the walls of Thebes.
They've both died.
Atheocles had actually been defending Thebes.
Polly Nicese attacked it.
So the king of Thebes at that time,
a man named Creon, swore that Polly Nicese's body
was to be left there on the field to rot,
was not to be buried.
Now, this violated Greek taboos of all kinds.
But Polly Nicese's sister Antigone said,
the gods command that I bury my brother.
She goes to the king and pleads
to be permitted to bury her brother.
The king says, no, I made a rule.
You do not bury Polly Nicese.
Well, she goes out and buries him anyway.
The king is then outraged,
put spies to find out who did this.
They track Antigone down.
He sentences her to death.
She is to die by being walled up in a cave.
What's going on in the play?
What Sophocles is showing us
is that Antigone is answering to a higher law
than the law of men.
Creon is a mere man.
He makes rules, they come, they go.
She is obeying the gods.
She answers to a higher calling.
Now, part of what is tragic about the play
is Creon's son Hyman is Antigone's paramour
and they are to be married.
And she kills herself and he kills himself.
And Creon is disgraced and the play goes on.
The more familiar play is a Oedipus Rex.
The story of Oedipus the king,
this wonderful man, this good kind just man
who threw terrible quirks of fate
has killed his own father and married his own mother.
And the blind seer Teraeus again and again says,
don't push it, don't ask questions,
don't try to find out,
there's more going on here than you know.
Now, this play is beautiful and brilliant
for a lot of reasons.
When you read it, one of the things to notice
is all of the rope tying, bonding imagery in the play.
These people are tied, they can't escape.
Sight, again and again there is discussion of sight.
It is only blind Teraeus who at the beginning of the play
can see.
And at the end of the play it is only Oedipus
when he's plucked out his own eyes
and Luca becomes blind who then can see.
We're all blind as we operate.
But the point is that Sophocles shows us this man
and says he has committed great offenses
and for these he must be punished.
Now, we would probably say there's got a jury in the world
that wouldn't convict Oedipus.
Sophocles convicted him.
And that is the power of that play.
And he's entering, as we'll see in a later lecture,
into some of the great philosophical debates of his day.
Euripides was unconventional in all kinds of ways.
He gets rid of the chorus.
He doesn't write trilogies.
He adapted dramatic forms.
He adds more actors.
He's very inventive.
He also is responding to the great philosophical issues
of the day.
His plays show emotion, revenge, jealousy, envy.
For example, his play Electra.
Electra is a resty sister.
She also is outraged at the death of her father.
But whereas for Escalus,
the Aurestia is a great play about justice.
For Euripides, the play Electra is about the sheer,
blind fury of Electra at the death of her beloved father.
She reacts like an ordinary human being.
No march of divine principle here,
the rage of an individual person.
So Athenian tragedy,
one of the great public arts of Athens.
There was another comedy.
Not all, drama was tragic.
Committees tended to be stories set in the present,
not in the remote past.
Not among mythical characters,
but among people who live now.
Pointing again, as drama, excuse me,
as tragedy could do,
pointing into contemporary issues,
satirizing them, ridiculing them,
holding prominent citizens up to a spectacular abuse.
Now, the greatest of the comedic writers was Aristophanes.
His plays could be vulgar.
