in the form that his master had used.
It could have been sheer literary contrivance
from the very beginning.
It just may have been his particular style.
Slowly but surely though,
over the long period of time when Plato wrote,
his works become more and more straightforward treatises
with the dialogue element almost absent
and sometimes indeed absent completely.
Now, there are some things that are a bit controversial
about Plato's writings.
We could go on at great length about these things actually.
I want to just notice briefly some of the controversies
that surround Plato's writings.
First and foremost, how much of Plato is Socrates
and how much of Plato is Plato?
The honest answer is that we'll never know.
My inclination is to say the early platonic dialogues,
the apology for example,
the remarkable discussion of Socrates' trial
before an Athenian jury,
there's probably a lot of Socrates there.
And slowly but surely I think it's safe to say
the dialogues become Plato himself
and they are no longer really his teacher,
but we're never really going to know.
Second, did Plato use the Socratic elancus
or did he formulate positive doctrine of his own?
Now, we never see Plato as it were wandering
around the Athenian Agorah questioning people,
but the elancus can be a public rhetorical art
or a private one that's put on the page.
The point here quite simply is,
is Plato sort of always playing defense?
Is he defending against positions of other thinkers,
other philosophers, other writers,
and in a sense showing what's wrong with them
without actually formulating a positive doctrine of his own
or does he actually lay out his own ideas?
My inclination there is to say he does both,
but finally there is more of the latter than of the former.
Finally, and we can put this one paradoxically,
was Plato a Platonist?
You all think I've taken leave of my senses.
I think of course Plato was a Platonist.
What else would he be?
Well, you see, the question is important for this reason.
Did Plato have a systematic approach to knowledge,
a systematic approach to ideas?
Is there a kind of a red thread that runs through his thought?
There are a kind of a Platonism that underlies,
that undergirds the foundation
on which all of what Plato said is built.
Or is Platonism something that is actually developed
by those in later times who commented on Plato?
The people who analyze Plato,
did they reassemble and repackages thought?
Did they find order and system there
which Plato had not built in in the first place?
In other words, was Platonism invented after Plato
or was Platonism indeed invented by Plato himself?
My inclination there is to say that once again,
I'm really pretty wimpy, that both things are true.
There is a certain core of ideas
that are unquestionably Plato's.
There is also a systematizing of those ideas
that is clearly attributable to those who came after him.
All right, now in general terms,
I think what we can try to do
is understand Plato's theories of knowledge and of morality.
Remember he's asking these two big areas of questions.
What's going on out there in the world
and how can we know about it?
And what's the moral life?
What's the best life to live?
Now, I've said, Plato wrote a very great deal.
We could talk about many more things,
but I'm just gonna pursue these two issues a little bit,
partly to see what Plato said about them
and partly to get a feel for how Plato went
about his business,
how he actually worked his way through problems
philosophically.
But first of all then,
let's turn to the world out there
and how Plato understands how we're gonna think
about the world out there,
how we're gonna talk about knowledge
and how we're gonna talk about communication.
In his Republic, Plato said,
we are accustomed to posit some one form
concerning each set of things
to which we apply the same name.
The form is the very thing to which the name is applied.
Now, if that sounds abstract and difficult to grasp,
think of it this way.
If you're in a position where you can do so,
look at a chair.
Now, ask yourself if you have in any other room
of your house or your office, wherever you might be,
another chair that looks just like that.
Is there a chair just like that in your neighbor's house?
Is there a chair just like that in your colleague's office?
Have you ever seen a chair like that before?
Is there a chair like that in your grandmother's house?
Okay, so all these things are chairs, right?
But they're all different.
So what is it that makes them chair?
You might say, oh, well, because you can sit on them.
Well, I can sit on a table.
That's not a chair.
I can sit on the ground.
That's not a chair.
So a functional answer won't help us.
So I see all of these objects
and somehow my mind says chair.
I don't have any problem with that.
And yet these things are all really quite different.
Well, what I have in mind is the form,
is the idea that works behind all of these visible things
in the tangible world that we speak of
as, in this instance, chairs.
All right, that's really what is involved, okay?
The form is invisible.
It's grasped by thought.
It's grasped in the mind.
Its relation to the named thing is as original to copy.
The Greek word karakter is a very interesting word.
Now you think of someone's character.
This is the imprint of their soul.
This is what they really are.
But karakter in Greek is, for example,
the very word you would use if suppose I had a die
and I put a flat piece of metal on it
and I put the upper die over it
and I struck it to make a coin.
