certain very basic characteristics. A soul has mind, intelligence, knowledge,
noose. A soul has courage, the capacity to look out for one's interests, the
capacity to defend oneself. And finally, the soul has appetites. It wants
things. It wants food. It wants shelter. It wants companionship. It wants things. So
Plato says this would be more or less typical of any soul. It has these three
qualities. Now virtue, in Plato's scheme of thing, equates to knowledge. To know
this is to be virtuous. But by extension, it is a proper arrangement, for instance,
if we're talking about the soul of these three qualities, of reason, of courage,
and of appetites. So an ideal polity would have. Farmers, persons marked
fundamentally by appetites. The essential characteristic which they possess is
appetites. And they would be permitted to own all the property, to have all of the
fine things. The second place, soldiers, people endowed particularly with courage.
And they would defend the community. Did he have Sparta in mind when he was
thinking about a property less class of soldiers whose role is sort of
corporately to defend the society? So there's a question that's hard to say.
And finally, philosophers who have such an elevated understanding that they fell
to duty, not a desire to serve those by leading, who were committed to material
things and to the exercise of physical skills. Now you see, the point is that
no one of us as we exist in the world is arrayed in just this way. We are each, as
it were, imperfect manifestations of this transcendent soul, which would have these
three qualities of reason, courage, and appetite absolutely properly arranged. So
he says an ideal state would be one that matched this ideal soul. Well and good.
That's what he says. Is there a state like that? No. Has there ever been one? No.
Could there be? Yes. Because we could study this, we could understand this, and we
could do it. But we're not likely to do so. Plato's greatest pupil, he had many.
His greatest pupil was Aristotle. Aristotle came from the far north of the
Greek world. His father was a doctor, and had important ties to the Macedonian court.
We'll talk about the Macedonians in the next lecture. At 17, Aristotle entered
Plato's Academy. He spent some time also as tutor to Alexander the Great. He lived
in Ionia for a while after Plato's death. In about 335 BC, he founded his own school,
the Lyceum, in Athens. So today, still in France, a school was at least safe. Aristotle
learned a great deal from his master, and the differences between them should not be
exaggerated as has sometimes been the case in the past. Aristotle, like his master Plato,
was a prolific writer, and also a rigorously systematic one, and also not a particularly
elegant one. It's easiest to describe Aristotle's prose as a drum solo, and the drummer has
one stick. Thump, thump, thump, thump, and it goes on. Now, I've probably offended all
the Aristotelians among you, but reading Aristotle is not the same pleasurable experience as
reading Plato. Aristotle is marked by what one scholar called as inspired common sense.
He based his ideas on close observation and study, not on pure thought. His earliest work,
his earliest important work, for example, was in zoology. His most durable work in the
long run was in biology, which has been the despair of every high school student for 200
years. Perhaps we see there the influence of his father, the doctor. Hard to say. But we
can also see the long reach of the Ionians beginning with Thales. Aristotle returns in
a way to that world out there, in a way that Plato spent most of his time on the world
in here, the world in our heads. Aristotle turns back to the world out there. Now, Aristotle,
for example, did not see change as illusory. He didn't see change as proof of the contradictory
nature of being. That, for example, an oak tree, excuse me, that if you plant an acorn
and you get an oak tree, Aristotle says this is a perfectly natural process. This is not
change. I don't have to explain that. Now, if I planted an acorn and grew a donkey, I
would have a serious problem. I would now have a change, and I'd actually have something
to explain. You see, earlier Greek thinkers had reflected on, for instance, planting a
seed. If I plant a seed, it grows, it bears fruit, it withers, it dies, it decays. There
seemed to be a progression. There seemed to be a cycle here. Was this change? Was this
natural? Was this something that required explanation or not? Well, the problem of change, or perhaps
you'll recall by saying the problem of motion, was one that taxed the pre-Socratic philosophers
in Greece, all of those before Socrates, considerably. Aristotle says it's a non-problem. If you
understand things correctly, change is a natural process, and we can explain it, or he would
have said alternatively, there's actually no such thing as change. Forms, he would have
said, plateaus forms, have no existence separate from the things by which they are named.
A chair is a chair is a chair is a chair. There's no such thing as chairness. We don't
need that. What he's really saying is we don't need that concept. What we do is study closely
things around us, and eventually we'll realize that we've got a whole lot of things we can
call chairs, and that they aren't tables, that they aren't other kinds of things. Reality
exists in the specific and the observable, but this requires close observation. Here
he's very much like Herodotus, isn't he? I know what I've seen myself. Here he's very
much like the medical writers. Well, his father's a doctor. Again, close observation. He had
a profound love of order. For example, Aristotle classified all kinds of sciences, and he said
that there are various branches of knowledge. There are the theoretical, those that aim at
knowledge purely, practical, those that aim to improve conduct, productive, those that
aim at making beautiful and useful things. So he takes everything we know and he begins
carving it up. He wrote on specific disciplines.
