So the Macedonian kingdom then was slowly but surely gathering force, gathering power.
Under King Philip II, 382-336 BC, we find a man who was a particularly accomplished soldier,
in fact a very gifted military leader, a reasonably cultivated man.
We know from, for example, his palace complex, we know from his art,
that this was a man of some heightened aesthetic sensibilities.
And then after all, this is the man who hired Aristotle to tutor his son,
Little Alexander, about whom more in a few minutes.
He was ambitious too.
This seems to have been something that ran in the blood of these Macedonian kings.
One of the most ambitious people who ever lived was his son, Alexander.
So the Greek world has been through 150 years of problems, of struggles, of quarrels, of controversies.
These quarrels and controversies have been occasioned by instability inside individual Greek poles,
and by constant battles between and among the Greek poles.
Pause for just a moment and think with me.
Whatever else it may have been, the Greek polis as an independent city-state,
as a fiercely independent city-state, was at the very heart of Greek thinking
about government and social organization.
And yet, from really the end of the archaic period, right to the middle of the fourth century,
the point we have reached now, it is leagues and alliances and associations and empires
constantly fighting one another.
In a very curious way, that's not supposed to happen.
We're supposed to have all of these tiny and fiercely independent cities,
and yet what we have are shifting coalitions.
This group against that group, another group against yet another.
The polis had quite simply failed as an effective agent of political organization.
But as the polis is failing, before the Greeks' eyes, and as Macedon is emerging,
before their eyes as well, to the extent that they were paying attention,
down in the Greek world, we begin to see some very interesting reflections on government.
Some of these very much attuned to the issues of the day.
Some of these, we might almost say, bewilderingly out of step
with what people ought to have been able to see with their own two eyes.
In a sense, we can say that certain people, Plato and Aristotle,
so we're going to come back to them for a moment or two,
were imagining ideal kinds of states.
Well, they may have been occasioned to think of ideal states,
because the ones they had sure didn't seem to work very well.
And then other thinkers were elaborating a doctrine, an idea,
a complex of ideas that we call panhellenism, all Greek-ism,
a way of trying to forge the Greeks together.
All right, ideal solutions first then,
in the midst of all this trouble, all this struggle, all this chaos.
Aristotle, and I hope you recall that we had mentioned this in an earlier lecture,
had said that man is a political animal.
That is to say, man is an animal who, by nature, lives in a polis.
So Aristotle was not willing to abandon the polis as the locus for his thinking
about government, about politics, and so on.
Indeed, he and his pupils, and I repeat a point again that I had made
in an earlier lecture, studied 158 of them.
May recall my mention, we don't have all of those studies.
It would be wonderful if we did.
Aristotle himself studied the Constitution of Athens.
In reflecting on all of these different kinds of political organizations,
all of these polis that had existed at one time or another, in one place or another,
and I think too, in reflecting on the inescapable reality of the history
that these polis, the rather sad history, that these polis had made
over some 100, 150 years, let's say, since the Persian wars,
Aristotle began to think about how a state might actually be organized.
He said that in the first place, a state should be governed by a few,
by an oligarchy.
Oligos in Greek means few.
Arche again means rule.
So an oligarchy is a rule by a few.
Which few?
Well, that seems self-evident, Aristotle.
And probably would, to any of us, if we thought about it for a minute, the best.
We want the best citizens to rule.
Hoy Aristoy.
We want aristocracy.
Now you'll recall perhaps when we were talking about the critiques of democracy,
of Paraclian democracy, that there were a number of writers who said
that one of the problems here is that it does not bring forward the best.
So in a sense, when Aristotle was one of those critics,
thinking back about that earlier time,
but now, in a sense, we see that thinking in its own context.
