Well, as I told you a few minutes ago, the Greek world was not united at the time of
the Persian Wars.
They did not stand as one.
They did not share ideas about how to fight the enemy, and as we've seen, they sure didn't
share ideas about what should happen after the war.
But Isocrates is now inventing a history of the age of the Persian Wars as a way of telling
the Greeks, once we were united, let us unite again.
Let us put aside our petty squabbling and bickering.
Let us unite and fight the great enemy, Persia.
And in Isocrates' own lifetime, the Persians had been sort of hired guns by the Spartans,
although they very well may be the case that as often with the mercenary, the mercenary
realizes the person hiring him isn't strong enough already, or they wouldn't need them,
and so the Persians were probably in control here.
Well, realizing that the Greeks would not bow to their own.
They were not going to unify under Sparta, they had enough of that.
They were not going to unify under Athens, they'd had enough of that.
Isocrates hatches the scheme of having the Greeks unify under Philip of Macedon to go
and fight the Persians.
Isocrates has a foe, indemostanese.
The greatest of the Greek orators, indeed perhaps the greatest orator of antiquity.
You may know the stories of Domostanese as a small boy who had a speech impediment and
he went down to the sea coast and put pebbles in his mouth and shouted over the sound of
the waves, even with a mouthful of pebbles, until he learned to speak not only correctly,
but powerfully and persuasively.
Now, we can say certainly that Domostanese fits in the tradition of the Sophists, persons
who had learned to use language in elegant ways, in artful ways, but also in ways that
would be persuasive.
In any case, Domostanese raises his voice in defense of the autonomy, the independence,
the validity of the polis.
We could say, what was he thinking?
Couldn't he see what was going on in his world?
But that was his great commitment, that was his great vision.
He also would have wished for a war against Persia.
That seems pretty clear.
He would have wished for a war against Persia.
But unlike Isocrates, who would have invited the Greeks to unify under Philip of Macedon
to fight the Persians, Domostanese saw Philip as the great threat, as the greater threat
to Greek liberty.
He delivered a series of four Philippic orations, orations against Philip.
The point of these lectures, of these orations, was to warn the Greeks that the great danger
to their liberty was from Macedon.
Now, exactly what Domostanese imagined was possible is hard to say.
Did he imagine that the Greeks would somehow be able to unify under one of the Greek cities,
or in some kind of an alliance?
He even seems to have entertained the possibility that the Greeks might ally with the Persians
against the Macedonians, even though he had begun hoping for a sort of a Greek alliance
against the Persians.
But on the end, neither Domostanese nor Isocrates quite had it his own way.
Mids this welter of wars, alliances, scheming, ideal states, real states, practical ideas,
impractical ideas, Philip attacked.
Was he invited to do so by what he could see over his border, these quarrelsome, meddlesome
Greeks?
Did Isocrates encourage him to come south?
Did Domostanese simply make him mad?
It's hard to say.
It's hard to say.
What we do know is that he attacked.
And near the city of Thebes, at Carinae, in 338, he won a great victory over a combined
Greek force.
Now, Philip destroyed much of the nearby city of Thebes, but he demonstrated his sort of
cultural proclivities by leaving standing the house of the poet Pinder.
Flattened everything else.
The Battle of Carinae is interesting to us for another reason as well.
The attacking wing, the wheeling wing, the cavalry wing, the wing that delivered the
victory that day, was led by an 18-year-old boy named Alexander.
We'll hear more about him.
Well, Philip, having conquered the Greeks, really in one great battle, now created a
league, created kind of a league, these leagues and alliances and so on have been going on
in the Greek world for a long time now.
He creates a league with himself at the head.
In a sense, he creates a league where all of the Greeks have a vote and he has a vote
and he has a veto and they don't.
So Philip is basically in charge in the Greek world.
His aim, I think, was to provide peace and order in the Greek world, but I think the
kind of peace and order that meant he really didn't want to be bothered by these guys.
He wanted to sort of impose peace rather than elicit peace because eliciting it was unlikely
to work.
And then he began making preparations to attack Persia.
