Lecture 15, The Hellenistic World
Hello once again, and welcome to the 15th of our lectures in this series on the foundation's
civilization. In the previous group of lectures, we talked about the Greek polis. We talked
about it as a political and social institution, we talked about its culture, and in our last
lecture, as you may recall, we talked about its demise, its internal failure, and then
its failure in the face of Macedonian conquest, when Philip II of Macedon conquered the Greeks,
and when his son Alexander took over his father's control of the Greeks, and then went off on
these vast military campaigns into what had formerly been the Persian Empire. In doing
this, Alexander inaugurated a period of history we call the Hellenistic World. Now this is
a world that we generally date from the death of Alexander in 323 BC until the Battle of
Action when the Romans defeated the last of the great Hellenistic rulers in 31 BC. Basically,
in other words, three centuries of time, chronologically speaking, following on the classical
period of Greek history. In later lectures, we'll see that in the western Mediterranean,
during this Hellenistic period, the Romans are rising to prominence, but that's for later
lectures. Right now we want to focus on the world that Alexander made, or in any case on
the world that followed him. Now I've used the word Hellenistic. We call this world from
Alexander on Hellenistic to differentiate it from the Hellenic. Now we are inconsistent in doing
this because I was telling you a few lectures back that we don't actually refer to the Greeks as
Hellenes or their land as Hellos. We call them Greeks and we call their land Greece. We should
call them Hellenes, so the period that we have been speaking of in our previous lectures should be
the Hellenic period, but now instead of saying that we're going to talk about the Greekistic
period, we talk about the Hellenistic period. So you mustn't ever ask professors to be logical
or consistent or coherent. We just confuse those who listen to us. So Hellenistic, Greek
influenced, Greek-ish as opposed to Greek proper. Now it's a period when it's
