features, and with general sort of iconographic details of Central Asia, but the folds of
clothing and garments were Greek.
The statue was arrayed as if it was a Greek.
Somebody who made that statue had certain Greek ideas in mind and blended them with
the ideas that were native to that region.
Now there's an example that is poignant for us now because of recent events in world history,
but it's a good example of this spread of cultures that was characteristic of the Hellenistic
world.
It was a time, many think, of great cosmopolitanism, cosmos polis, of the world as a city, the
city as a world, of the spread of cultures, of people taking on the cultures of other
people, other places, other times.
Now I think that if we look for a few minutes at the city of Alexandria, we have some very
good insights into what this Hellenistic world was like.
Alexandria was really in many ways a very dynamic, very creative place during the Hellenistic
period.
We could turn to other places, but let's use Alexandria as a kind of an example, as a way
of thinking our way into this period.
The city was founded by Alexander.
He founded more than 20 cities and somewhat, immodestly, named them after himself, Alexandria.
And evidence to his overweening pride, perhaps.
This was a city that by 250 BC or thereabouts, had probably a half a million people.
By 31 BC, when the Hellenistic world was finally conquered by the Romans, probably a million.
That's a big city in antiquity.
That's a big city in the modern world.
Now it was a city known particularly for its scholarship.
It was really thought of as sort of a city of great scholars.
Most of these scholars worked in a place called the museum.
Now museum is a Latin word, mouséon is a Greek word.
The mouséon is the home of the muses.
Now the muses were the poetic names, the allegorical names assigned by the Greeks to each of the
branches of knowledge.
You think of Calliope, the muse of music, for example.
So the mouséon was the great house where the muses lived, but they lived there in the
sense that they were studied there, that they were held dear there.
You see that they were analyzed there.
Now the museum eventually became quite famous really as a place where all branches of knowledge
were studied, and this began to produce a new kind of person.
This began to produce a very different kind of intellectual tradition in the West.
Now I don't want to say we have a 180 degree turn.
What I say is we will now generate a tension, an attention that I dare say is with us still.
The people who did this study were learned, they were professional.
They were enormously scholarly.
They were no longer actually great civic figures.
One of the interesting things about the figures that we talked about in Athens, for example,
whether we're thinking of a Socrates or a Plato, whether we're thinking of the playwrights
or the historians, these were people who functioned in an urban environment, spoke to that urban
environment, absorbed that urban environment into their work, spoke back to that urban
environment in their work.
They were very much anchored in that world.
Now in the museum we have scholars, people who study without necessarily being fully
engaged with their world.
Culture was an object of study.
It wasn't a part of daily life.
Learned and elitist scholars began, for example, for the first time to deformed, to define
literary canons, to decide what criteria of excellence marked those works that should
be remembered, should be studied, should be analyzed, and those which were forgettable.
They began, for example, to study the various works that existed, to collect many manuscripts
of them, for instance, to compare the texts in order to prepare what we would call standard
editions, to begin to make definitive editions of texts.
They began to try to define taste, to define standards, to sort of say, well, this is what
you ought to think.
This is what you ought to know.
Study these kinds of things, for instance, were, again, very much more a part of civic
culture.
We could say, for instance, to take but one example, Homer's Iliad and Odyssey were in
very many ways part of the paide, paide in Greek means the leading up, the training up,
the drawing up of a youth.
All right?
Now, it wasn't as if the youth were sent home at night to memorize sort of 20 lines
of the Iliad per night, and over the course then of a few years through their adolescence
they had the whole thing memorized.
But it was something that they heard recited, they heard talked about the stories were told,
the messages were told, the morals were registered, you see, of these great books, and they simply
became a part of the patrimony of the Greeks.
In Alexandria it would be much more common to study the language, to study the diction,
to study the syntax, to study the vocabulary, you see, to look at the Iliad in a very different
kind of way.
So we're seeing, in a way, the emergence of the ivory tower intellectual, the intellectual
who in a very real way is divorced from his society, or at least is perceived that way.
This is, in a way, a world also that exemplifies the first faint beginnings of what C.P.
Snow described in his very famous book, The Two Cultures.
Snow was an Oxford done, and a generation ago, a little over that now, he wrote a book
The Two Cultures, and what he was really talking about is the culture of the arts, the humanities
and so on, on the one hand, and the culture of science on the other.
And he's talking about how in the modern world these two things have become divorced from
one another.
And there's very often a sort of an inability to study them, you see, you go to any college
or university, and if you think about liberal arts, people think, oh, that means you're
going to read English and study art and so on.
It doesn't mean you're going to study calculus and chemistry.
Now we're going to ask why that should have been the case in some later lectures.
