Now, archaeologists today, on the basis of their discoveries, would say that there seems
to begin to be a history around Rome about 800 BC.
Now, that's interesting for any number of reasons, but for one reason in particular.
The Romans remembered the date of the founding of their city as the year that we call 753
BC.
So, here again, we have one of these things a bit like, for example, the Trojan Wars and
Greek memory, Roman tradition was pretty good in terms of remembering about when things
got started.
That said, what got started was pretty small and pretty humble.
Now, Rome is well-cited, the place where Rome sits is well-cited.
It's about 15 miles inland up the river Tiber, so it's not right on the coast and vulnerable,
but the Tiber is navigable down to the coast, so that meant that it was always possible
to provision the city.
Rome was at a point where there was a good ford of the river Tiber in the sort of coastal
road that ran right up through Liguria, Tuscany, up into the Etruscan region, and then down
to the south all the way actually to Naples and beyond into Magna Graecia.
So it was an area good for commerce, good for exchange, good for the movements of peoples
and ideas.
Now, the point where Rome sort of makes its great bend, its great loop through where the
Tiber makes its great loop through the city of Rome is low and swampy and damp and fairly
nasty, but Rome, as you probably know, like Cincinnati, for example, is built on seven
hills.
And the people at Rome were always able early on to move up and live on those hill tops
where they could catch afternoon breezes and also where they didn't have to live down in
the malarial swamps, and then slowly over time the Romans began to drain those swamps
and to open up a flat area sort of between and among the seven hills.
And then broadly speaking, you have a situation where over the long course of Roman history,
those with fewer financial resources live down in the flat and those with greater financial
resources live up on the hills, up the edges of the hills or perhaps even on top of them.
So Rome was reasonably well situated from a variety of points of view.
Now as I mentioned a moment ago, Italy's best harbors are actually on the West.
They faced West and it bears repeating the action, everything we've talked about until
now in this course of lectures has been happening in the Eastern Mediterranean.
What was going on in Rome, what was going on in Italy, what is going on in the West
when all of these other issues that we have been talking about were unfolding?
Perhaps the first issue or one of the central issues that we want to talk about a little
bit in this lecture, what's happening way over here in the West.
You may have noticed and I have attempted from time to time with sort of cross references
to stitch things together a little bit that Mesopotamian Egypt are unfolding roughly contemporaneously
that we then move along and we begin to see let's say the emergence of life at an early
time on Minoan Crete and then in Mycenaean Greece and that the Greeks are moving along
as Persia is rising and as Assyria and then Persia are rising and so on.
So in the Eastern Mediterranean we've been kind of keeping several balls in the air
all at once as we've been kind of juggling these various peoples and countries and civilizations.
Now we turn to the West, we say all right what was going on over there?
Well the great threats to the Romans in a certain sense to the Romans faced threats.
Well they had more powerful neighbors, more important, more interesting neighbors in certain
ways than they.
Lation was a region of small villages, it was not yet united in any meaningful sense.
To the north there were the Etruscans, to the south there were the Greeks, in between the
Romans and the Greeks were the Samnites.
So a region of small villages that very slowly but surely began to coalesce, began in a sense
to pull together to make something like the Roman people.
Now tradition tells us that the Romans expelled their last Etruscan king Tarquin the proud
Tarquinius superbus in 509, the year we call 509 BC and created a republic.
That tradition bears a little scrutiny, we need to think about that just a little bit.
During a couple of centuries then, two and a half centuries, from 753 when tradition
says Rome was founded, down to 509 when tradition says Rome created a republic, Rome progressed.
There doesn't seem to be much question about that, from being a few small scattered settlements
into being a city of some consequences.
Though there is always a parallel with the Greek polis, do you remember Asti plus Korah
equals polis?
Well as eventually...
