They let out state contracts for such things as waterworks, for such things as road building.
Now this was an opportunity for considerable speculation, letting out public contracts
has sometimes been a bit seedy in modern times, and it was much the same in Roman times.
Quistars often were able to use their year in office as a way both to enrich themselves
and also to earn the favor of large numbers of people in Roman society, for whom they
did sometimes very large favors.
They again were elected annually, but they could also be appointed by the consuls.
When there was a need for extraordinary Quistars, the consuls could actually appoint Quistars.
As with the other officers, initially there were two, and then over time the number grew.
There was never a, after the very early days of the Republic, there was no longer a fixed
number of Quistars, there might be two or four or six or eight, it just depended a little
bit on circumstances.
And ex-Quistars, like the other ex-officers, entered the Roman Senate.
There were next, ediles.
Now the ediles had responsibility for the food supply.
That was really one of their key responsibilities.
They also had responsibilities for public buildings in Rome.
As the city of Rome grew, as it became a larger city, a more complex city, a more sophisticated
city, that was a very large responsibility.
They also had responsibility for the streets of Rome, which also meant for the sewers of
Rome.
And they also were responsible for putting on games and public entertainments.
This as Rome grew larger, as the city grew more complex, was again a very important responsibility.
Ediles did not enter the Senate automatically on the conclusion of their term of office.
Generally one would, if one held the edileship, for example, at a little bit later time, one
would move on to hold a different one of the other offices and then perhaps move on into
the Senate.
You may just remember that in our last lecture, we had talked about the tribunes.
During the times when the plebeians had seceded from the Roman state had in effect gone on
strike in order to secure their interests, on one of those occasions they were accorded
the privilege of choosing ten of their number as tribunes, who would then be sort of persons
charged with responsibility for the best interests of the ordinary people.
Remember, they had the power to veto acts of the magistrates and the assemblies.
They could, for example, sit outside the assembly halls if they were not elected members, and
if they didn't like the direction that the debate inside was taking, they could shout
veto.
I forbid.
And the discussion came to an end.
So the tribunes lacked, in a sense, under the Republican Constitution some of the reason
for being that had brought them into place in the first instance after 287, when patricians
and plebeians were essentially equal and could hold all offices.
It was a little less important for the tribunes to be there to look out for the interests
of the plebs.
But nevertheless, right through the Roman Republic, the ten tribunes continued to be
elected.
And on some occasions, late in the history of the Republic, they played a very decisive
role in Roman politics.
We'll come to that a couple of lectures down the road.
There were finally two censors.
Remember I said everybody's elected annually with one exception?
Well, here's the exception.
There's two of them, so we might say it's two exceptions, but it's only one officer.
Every five years, two censors were chosen.
They served for 18 months, and then they went out of office.
And then for three and a half years, there were no censors, and they were elected again.
They had two responsibilities.
And if you think about it, the word censor, to us, can imply two different things.
In the first place, the Roman censors fixed the census status of citizens.
Now, what that means, I'll explain in just a second.
They fixed the census status of citizens, and they issued rules on public morality.
So even today, we think of a censor as the person who every 10 years knocks on your door
and counts everybody in your house, or the censor who tells you what books you can read
or not read or what movies you should see.
So the censors at Rome had both those responsibilities, but their fundamental responsibility was to
fix the census status of Roman citizens.
Thus far then, the magistrates of the Roman state.
There were occasionally some minor officials, but that is basically the group of magistrates
who, from the earliest days of the Republic until its end, led, organized, managed, governed,
functioned as sort of the chief executive of this Roman state.
The voting assembly is that.
How did the Romans legislate?
How did the Romans come together, discuss their public business, and take action?
They have a series of different assemblies, which are related to one another in rather
complicated ways, and so it's sometimes a little hard to grasp exactly how the Roman
system worked.
I'll see if I can at least shed some light on the situation.
In very early times, there was a body called the curiate assembly.
This goes all the way back to the time when Rome had kings.
