Now, after about a hundred BC, Marius withdrew a little bit from the public scene, but he
remained a very influential Popularis leader.
He remained a very important sort of behind the scenes leader of the popular party at
Rome.
Now, in 90 BC, Rome's allies in Italy, the Sochi E, rebelled.
Rome went to war against the Sochi E, and we remember this as the social war.
This won the social war.
And one of the ways that he was able to pacify the situation relatively quickly afterwards
was that the Roman, excuse me, that the allies, the Latin allies throughout Italy, basically
were given full Roman citizenship.
Now, once again, Marius' conduct was an affront to the traditional Roman order.
They hadn't been able to deal with the crisis.
He did.
He deals with the crisis in a very traditional Roman way, be generous two year foe, remember
how we talked about that?
But here the generosity extends basically to giving the Sochi E, the allies, full citizenship.
So if you're on the opposite side of Roman politics, how do you view that?
Ah, Marius is just building another patronage machine for himself, you see?
Well, did anybody trust anybody any longer?
Did anybody believe anybody any longer?
This is the way Roman politics begins to go.
You could view Marius' activities from several different points of view, quite legitimately,
either we today looking back, or you can imagine his contemporaries.
Looking at his conduct and saying, well, it's good, and it's honest, and it's serving the
interests of the Roman people, art no, it's serving his own interests, it's all self-serving,
which way was it?
Probably a little bit of both.
Marius' successes then alarmed the optomates even more.
And then in Asia Minor, in Anatolia, a ruler, a local sort of big shot by the name of Mithridates,
attacked Roman territory, and he killed several Roman merchants and some Roman tax collectors.
Well, the Romans weren't going to stand for that.
And they assigned a military campaign against Mithridates to the optimate Sulla.
Now Sulla was born in 138 BC, died in 78.
So he was given the task of going to the east and punishing Mithridates for having the temerity
to attack the Roman people.
Marius was jealous.
Marius was jealous that this great military command had not been given to him.
Now, after all, in view of recent experiences, whether his campaigns, Italy, or whether his
victory in the social war, and so on, Marius would have been the obvious choice to be given
a great military command.
But the optomates had control of the Senate, they had the capacity to influence decisively
the Roman voting assemblies, and they weren't, by any means, going to give Marius this opportunity,
they give it to Sulla.
Well, Marius was jealous and he waged a considerable political battle back home against Sulla and
his forces.
There were all sorts of subtle things he could do to harm, to damage, to thwart Sulla's
interests.
So when Sulla returned from the east, he found, first of all, that Marius had died in the
interim.
No, it's called Dugree, he just got old and died.
But Sulla marched on Rome and massacred Marius' followers.
Now here, again, the scale of political violence is going up, up.
And you notice something interesting here.
It has been the optomates who murdered the Gracchi, who slaughtered the Gracchi's successors.
It was the optomates who slaughtered Marius' successors.
Those very people who, out of one side of their mouth, said, we must stand for the old
values, the traditional values, the old ways, the way our ancestors did it, out the other
side of their mouth, they said, let's kill these guys we don't like.
Roman politics was becoming pretty ugly business.
Sulla also issued prescription lists.
He published lists publicly in Rome.
Anybody whose name was on that list could be killed with impunity and his property taken
over.
His property taken over.
Well, what was there to stop anybody from going and killing anybody who was a personal
foe or even whose property you craved?
This was a pretty nasty business as well.
Well, the careers of Marius and Sulla taught the Romans, at least the elite among them,
one lesson in controversibly.
You want power in Rome now, you got Evan Irving.
The old traditional political base, the base in Roman families, the base in your family
having held office for a long period of time, this was no longer good to be enough.
You're going to make your way in this new Roman political world, this world that emerged
between about 130 and 80 BC over a period of, say, two generations.
You want to rise in that world, get your hands on an army.
Now the first to act on this lesson was a man by the name of Pompey.
Pompey was born in 106 BC, died in 48.
He won, in the first place, a command to clear the pirates from the Mediterranean.
