Crassus, first of all, who was a much better swindler than soldier, was killed on the battlefield
vanished from the scene.
So his particular influence is now gone.
The optimates in Rome now turn to Pompey.
They had some doubts about Pompey for a while, but now they turn to Pompey largely because
they figure they can't possibly trust Caesar.
So they turn to Pompey and they use Pompey and they use the Roman institutions to pass
a series of laws that were basically designed to ruin Julius Caesar.
I mean, they were really going after him with a vengeance.
In 49 BC, Caesar's campaign, his command, I'm sorry, in Gaul came to an end.
It returned Italy.
Now he comes back into Northern Italy.
Remember we talked several lectures back when we talked about the political geography of
Italy, about the fact that Peninsula Italy was Roman Italy and Northern Italy was Gallia
Cisalpina, Gaul on this side of the Alps.
So when Caesar came into Northern Gaul, when Caesar came into, excuse me, Northern Italy,
he was still outside Roman territory.
But then he marched down to a little river called the Rubicon.
And as Caesar camped at the Rubicon River, he was faced with a very interesting dilemma.
Dilemma was this.
If he laid down his military command and crossed the Rubicon as a private citizen, his enemies
would have destroyed him and he knew it and he knew it.
If he crossed the Rubicon with his army, he's declared war on Rome.
What's his choice?
What's his choice?
Well, Caesar's biographer tells us, Caesar, of course, one of these well educated young
Romans who was well educated in Greek ways.
His biographer tells us that he said in Greek, Alia, well, he said Hockibos Baleti and Latin
Alia Yachta S, the Diascaste.
He crossed the Rubicon, giving us a phrase in our political vocabulary.
There was no turning back now.
Well, this inaugurated a number of years of rather brutal and nasty civil war, not surprisingly.
What were Caesar's goals?
Well, people have been trying to imagine, to understand, to think about what Caesar's
goals might have been for a very long time.
First of all, of course, he had to survive.
Now this plunged Rome into a civil war.
Caesar always said this was forced on me.
I didn't ask for this.
I didn't want this.
My enemies forced this on me.
Caesar defeated, first of all, the forces of Pompey and then established himself as dictator
at Rome.
Finally, dictator was a formal office under the Roman constitutional scheme of things.
Going all the way back, in times of extreme necessity, the Roman institutions more or
less suspended themselves and appointed a dictator for six months.
Then he was supposed to return his powers.
Caesar now appointed himself dictator, but with a kind of an open-ended term.
So again, it's a bit of a manipulation of the system, and it's something ever so slightly
consistent with the system.
Many key figures of late Republican politics lost their lives in the next three or four
years.
Cicero died in this period.
Pompey died in this period.
Cato the Younger died in this period.
That's worth remembering, because as slowly but surely a new regime began creating itself,
most of the great figures of the last days of the Republic, however tortured those years
were, most of the great figures were gone, and gone before their time.
So one had in a way to reconstitute a political elite.
That's not an easy thing to do in any society.
Now, Caesar's dictatorship was reasonably enlightened.
There were many reforms passed.
I'll just mention, for example, the Julian calendar.
One of the first great calendar reforms in the 1580s, Pope Gregory XIII, revised the
calendar yet again, the Gregorian calendar, which is the one we use today.
But for a very long time, and in some places in the world still today, the Julian calendar
is still used.
Here past land laws and legal reforms and institutional reforms and a wide variety of
measures.
Scholars who have looked very closely at what Caesar did have been very much divided
in their opinion.
Was he functioning as this sort of dictatorial guy who was serving his own interests in the
interests of his party, or was he really a kind of an enlightened ruler who had a great
vision for the Roman people and was just trying to do the right thing?
Well, if we imagine those as ends of a spectrum, the truth is probably somewhere between those
two ends of the spectrum.
But the point is that Caesar's activity in this period was then and has been now controversial.
What is clear is this, everyone was looking for a solution to the increasingly inevitable
collapse of the Roman system.
The Roman system that had been there for so very long seemed to be teetering on the brink
of extinction.
What to do?
Well, in 44 BC, on the Ides of March, a group of disgruntled senators murdered Caesar.
