is that Julius Caesar was the first ruler, Augustus Caesar, the second, and then
10 more followed as members of this Julio-Claudian family or Julio-Claudian
dynasty. They are all people who have direct or indirect succession to Julius
and Augustus Caesar. Now, the Julio-Claudians are in a variety of ways,
an odd lot. Tiberius, for example, was an old, an old Julius Caesar.
Caesar was an old rather suspicious man who was probably a Peterast.
Coligula was crazy. There's just no question about that.
Claudius was physically handicapped and paranoid.
Nero was an unbalanced genius. He's the one who fiddled while Rome burned.
This was also a time in some ways of intense political strife and political
controversy too. Coligula, for example, was assassinated.
Claudius was poisoned. Nero committed suicide.
So we might say, if we're going to think about these Julio-Claudian rulers,
is it the case that the Augustan Principate held, that the Augustan settlement
persisted, or had Rome, in fact, descended once again into the anarchy of the
first century BC? Well, the paradox is deep indeed. One way I suppose of getting
a feel for it would be to say, let's imagine two space travelers to the
United States. They can come now, if you please. And one of them lands in
Washington, and one of them lands anywhere else you like in the country,
really, maybe somewhere out in the Midwest. And they stay for a few months,
and then they go back to wherever it was they came from and have a conversation.
Would they not suppose that they had landed in two different worlds?
The world of Washington, the world of government, of gossip, of busybodies,
of all of the activity, all the self-serving activity, all the self-important
activity that goes on. And most of the rest of the country, people peacefully
going about their lives in business, without much reference actually to what
goes on in the middle. Well, now let's imagine two comparable visitors,
two comparable travelers, in the first century AD. And one landed in Rome
when there was all this strife and controversy and oddball rulers and
political assassinations, and another landed almost anywhere in the
provinces of the Roman Empire. And then we'll send them back where they came
and we'll have a conversation between them. And they too would imagine
themselves to have visited two completely different places.
Here again is a tribute to the remarkable success of the Augustan
achievement. The Augustan principate, the Roman Empire, the regime
Augustus created went chugging along its way, working
remarkably well, even though there was a certain amount of
difficulty, stress, chaos, crisis, and odd goings on at the very
heart of that regime. Something sufficiently stable had been produced
that it didn't absolutely depend on the character or the
ability of the ruler himself. This is also a time when new territories
are added to the realm, for example, the British Isles. Excuse me, Britain.
Romans didn't conquer Ireland. When Britain was conquered by the Romans,
this was a time when the Roman world was extremely well governed.
It was a time when Roman finances were put on very sound footings.
In other words, in a whole variety of areas of public life and public
administration, this was, in fact, a very successful period indeed.
So let me just repeat, it was a tribute to the genius of
Augustus' settlement that the Julio-Claudian period
was so stable and effective and well governed when
if we only looked at the capital or we only looked at the emperors, we would
conclude, uh oh, things are in big trouble once again.
Now, a year of civil war in 68-69 did not return
Rome to the turbulence of the late Republic. Again, a test of the system.
Four generals in succession competed for the imperial office,
three of them fell away, and finally one of them, Vespasian,
was his name, succeeded in making good his claim, and he ruled for a decade
from 69 until 79. Now, Vespasian
inaugurates what we call the Flavian dynasty of rulers.
A little bit later in Roman history, Flavius actually becomes one of the
honorific titles for an emperor, but now this is the Flavian dynasty, they're members
of the Flavian family. And Vespasian is succeeded by his son
Titus, and then by his son Domitian. Titus ruled from 79 to 81,
Domitian from 81 to 96, and he ruled really quite
effectively until Domitian's sort of growing autocracy
eventually earned him assassination. But then, as we'll see in just a moment,
there was another peaceful transition of power.
