Welcome again to our series of lectures on the Foundations of Western Civilization.
This time, lecture number 22 on Rome's Golden and Silver Ages, that is, on the cultural life
of the Augustan Principate, to which we addressed ourselves in our last lecture.
Now let's say, by way of beginning, that the inception of the Principate provided for
several crucial conditions that were conducive to a high level of cultural achievement, peace
and security after a century of disturbances.
We don't want to push that point too far.
We certainly know of moments in human history when tremendous cultural achievements have
been associated with times of great instability in war and violence and famine and other things.
But this was nevertheless not the case in the first two centuries AD.
This was a time of peace, stability, order, good government, and in that climate, culture
flourished.
It was a time of great wealth.
It was a time when the Roman state was wealthy, when the Mediterranean basin was wealthy,
and when particular individuals, yes, the imperial family at Rome, but individuals throughout
the empire were wealthy, and more importantly, were willing to spend their money on great
cultural achievements, financing great buildings, supporting great writers, and so on.
It was finally a time when reflection on Rome's past, reflection on Rome's character, reflection
on what Rome had once been, was really quite natural because that world of older Rome,
as we saw in our last lecture, was gone.
And although there were people who were nostalgic about it, there were no longer people who
were actually willing to lay down their lives to try to recreate it.
In a very real way, the effort and energy that was spent recreating that world was spent
by authors, was spent by people who wrote about that older time.
Now, the reign of Augustus has often been called the Golden Age.
This was the age of perhaps, well, indeed, of many of Rome's greatest cultural achievements.
It was also one of the great ages of poetry in all of Western history, but a remarkable
array of gifted poets at this time.
Let's begin then with these poets.
Let's take them as our entree to the Golden Age.
We'll come to the Silver Age, the rest of the first and the early second century a little
bit later.
So let's use these poets as our entree to the Golden Age.
And let's begin with the greatest of them, Publius Virgilius Maro, Virgil.
Born in 70 BC, died in 19, called by no less than a thorn heathen Tennyson, wielder of
the stateliest measure ever formed by the mouth of man.
Virgil is one of the true immortals, one of those poets who was read in antiquity and
who has been read ever since, who has always been known by educated persons.
He is best known, of course, for his great epic, his composed epic.
I'll explain what I mean by that in just a second.
And this is the Aeneid, the story of Aeneas, the founder of Rome.
Now you'll remember, perhaps, a couple of lectures back, I talked a little bit about
Aeneas, whom I called the dullest character in epic literature, by way of simply eliciting
some of the values that the Romans wished to hold up to themselves, what the Romans
wanted to see when they looked in the mirror.
Well, there's a great stock of stories and of traditions and of legends and of word
of mouth and of probably urban legends as well that hide behind the Aeneid.
But where this great poem was concerned, the first thing we need to say about it is
that Virgil wrote it from the first word to the last.
Now, actually, when Virgil died, about two dozen lines of this poem were incomplete and
he wanted it destroyed.
The Emperor Augustus, we are very grateful, violated Virgil's will and he saved the Aeneid
for us.
And we don't mind those few lines that are incomplete out of his 12 books and many thousands
of lines.
