No less epic in scale, no less uncommonly beautiful in language, but all in prose was
the great Roman history of Livy.
Titus Livius was born in 59 BC, he died in 17 AD.
We may say in a very real way that Livy did in prose what Virgil had done in verse.
He told the Romans the tale they wanted to hear about themselves.
Livy's history is, again, virtue on display.
It's a long parade of remarkable characters.
The chances are very good that if anyone listening to my words is familiar with any
stories from early Roman history, one has probably got them from Livy, though possibly
also from Virgil.
It's not unlike the situation now where if you hear a familiar quotation, you know, if
you wager that it came either from the Bible or Shakespeare, you win your wager more often
than not.
Well, if we were playing that game with Roman texts, you'd wager Livy or Virgil, and you'd
usually win your wager.
Now, it's also important to say with respect to Livy that he was a very earnest historian.
He did an enormous amount of research.
He consulted a great many records.
And in the process, he tells us a very great deal of what we actually know about early
Rome and about how the Romans in the time of Augustus constructed their own past.
Now I draw out the word constructed there because this implies an issue that is very,
very important to certain critics of literature and of history in our own times.
That is the idea that there may be an objective reality out there, but that if I write about
that reality, I'm going to project myself on it.
I'm going to construct a reality.
I'm going to make a history that I need, a history that talks to me, a history that
is useful to me.
I may, along the way, say a lot of things that are quite true, but I may also put, as
we would say, a certain spin on them.
Well, in many respects, Livy spun early Roman history.
And it is he who then gives us all of these remarkable tales about those noble Romans of
all.
Well, the period after the death of Augustus, down really to the very first years of the
second century, produced another literary outpouring, which scholars have generally referred to
as the Silver Age.
This was a time when history was written, but also philosophy, rhetoric, satire.
In other words, literature in a variety of genre.
And the variety is interesting and is also revealing of, I think, the creative tensions
and the creative capacities of this age.
Now, it's also true that silver is imagined to be a bit less precious than gold.
So the idea is that the world of Virgil and Ovid and Horace and of Livy is somehow superior
to the world of the people about whom we shall speak now.
Making such cultural judgments is tricky business at the very best.
But in any case, we refer then to the writers who come after Augustus as having lived in
the Silver Age.
We ended with Livy.
When we talked about the Golden Age, let's begin the Silver Age and talk about some historians.
Tacitus, first of all.
Cornelius Tacitus, 55 to about 117 A.D. is when he lived.
You may just recall that we talked about Tacitus as having been the person who understood the
Roman Principate very well, who had said the Romans made a great desert and cold at peace
and who had said it is the army that can make and un-make the emperor real powers in the
hands of the army.
Tacitus was incomparably the greatest of Rome's imperial historians.
Now he wrote a couple of short books.
He wrote a book on Britain, for example, which remember had been conquered in the first century.
He wrote a book on Germany.
Really it's the Rhineland.
It's the frontier between the Roman province of Gaul and what we would think of as Germany
today, which the Romans never conquered.
But he wrote a monograph on the peoples who lived along the frontier there.
But he wrote two larger works, The Histories and the Annals, which went back early into
Roman history and brought the story down to his own times.
Now he created very fine pen portraits of individuals.
He had a very cunning and discerning judgment of individuals, but like so many Roman writers
before him, he took as part of his task, he took perhaps as one of his greatest responsibilities
to put virtue and vice on display and to make very, very clear what he thought about each.
Fundamentally, Tacitus was faced with an interesting problem.
He was faced with the problem of describing an imperial regime, some of whose benefits
and advantages and good qualities he saw, and yet at the same time he was a man, I suppose
we might say, Republican to his core.
He hated tyranny and he hated tyrants and he had to write about a world ruled by tyrants.
Some of whom, however, he found, at least in some circumstances, sometimes to be admirable.
