Juvenal was born in about 60 AD, lived to 136.
He wrote 16 verse satires.
And what he does here, it's a little bit like the cast of characters that we talked about
as having been characteristic of Plotus's plays, a variety of kind of social misfits
of one kind or another.
But in particular, in particular, Juvenal wrote about the travails of the poor, especially
poor writers like himself.
He was always concerned of why don't people give me more money and help me out more.
But in the process, he exposed ambition, pretentiousness, and really with great feeling and with great
bitterness, I think it's fair to say, he excoriated people's despicable treatment of each other.
His language is rhetorically sophisticated.
His message is unsparing.
Juvenal is tough.
You read Juvenal, you know exactly what, like the best editorial writers today, you know
exactly what's on his mind.
Marshall is different.
I'll conclude this discussion of these writers with Marshall.
Marshall was born in about 40 and died in 104, another Spaniard.
He composed about 1500 mostly satirical epigrams.
He could be crude.
He could be rough for a fact.
He could be vulgar.
He was, however, also a very polished stylist, and it is very best.
He was really quite funny.
Let me quote for just a few of his very brief epigrams.
If you disappoint no creditor, you say, true, no one ever thought that you would pay.
Or again, you blame my verse to publish, you decline, show us your own, or cease to carp
at mine.
Another, the verse is mine, but friend, when you reclaim it, it seems like yours.
So grievously you maim it.
Or finally, why don't I send my book to you, although you often ask me to?
The reason's good, for if I did, you'd send me yours, which God forbid.
Now, the print your paint was also a time of stunning architectural achievements.
Let's conclude our reflections on the golden and silver ages, with just a few words about
some of the most remarkable of these buildings.
We may regard Roman architectural achievements as sort of triumphs of civil engineering.
The Romans were masters at using, adapting, adopting, extending architectural forms.
Remember we stressed the practical genius of the Romans, borrow things and make them
your own and find uses for them that others had never dreamed of before?
No, often it's the case, whether we're talking about literature or philosophy or architecture.
The Romans are not innovators.
The Romans are not innovators.
Roman creativity rests in finding uses and applications for things designed by others.
So we might think, for example, of something like the great aqueduct, the Pont du Gard.
Now the city of Rome, of course, was fed by a series of aqueducts that had to be tended
very carefully, but the Pont du Gard in the south of France, one of really the most remarkable
of all of Rome's civil achievements, is part of a long aqueduct complex that brought water
from the hills near Uzes in the south of France to neem some 50 miles away.
Very characteristic of the Romans.
We need water there.
It's 50 miles.
All right, fine.
We'll do the aqueduct.
Romans don't say, oh gee, we can't do that.
Hadrian's Wall built right across the north of Britain.
Now, could Hadrian's Wall impressive in its ruins even today?
Hadrian's Wall actually have served as a circular frontier between the Scottish hills
to the south and England, the Scottish hills to the north, I'm sorry, and England to the
south.
No, of course not.
It was a triumph of Roman engineering.
The Romans came in and said, you mess with us.
Look what we can do.
Can you do this?
It was an ideological statement in brick and mortar, not really a barrier.
The city of Rome itself.
We see examples of the urban amenities that I referred to when I talked about the Romans
building cities around the empire and building great buildings there to, again, project their
power to portray their power, but also to make the cities more pleasant places to be.
We might think, for example, in the city of Rome itself of a building like the Pantheon.
The Pantheon, a round building built between 27 and 25 BC initially with an arched roof
and architectural details on the outside.
Very interesting.
The Romans were among the first to use architectural details as a way to decorate a building and
not to serve functional purposes.
Now, with its arches, with its relieving arches, with its supporting elements, the Pantheon
was in many respects a very bold and creative building, but every element in it was older.
Similarly, for example, the Flavian amphitheater or the so-called Colosseum in Rome built late
in the first century AD.
Once again, a building with architectural elements as decorations, a building that would
seat 80,000 people for spectacles, a building that put arches on display in a way that is
quite pleasing to the eye, and yet for all of that, a building all of whose elements
were older.
These traveler to the Mediterranean world will bump again and again and again into the
buildings of the Roman Principate.
Today's students will still read the literature of the Roman Principate.
This was a period that marked Western civilization as before it, only Peraklian Athens had done,
and as after it, perhaps only Voltaire's Paris would do, although possibly Medici and
Florence would be a competitor.
