There was a person called Jesus, and he was born in Bethlehem in Judea, but he grew up in Nazareth in Galilee, quite far to the north.
He was presented in the temple for his circumcision a few days, presumably after his birth.
He then vanishes from us.
He then appears in the temple teaching at about the age of 12. That's it.
That's what we know about Jesus' youth.
When already a man, Jesus went down to the Jordan River and was baptized by a man named John.
This becomes to call John the Baptist.
Jesus then began to preach publicly throughout Galilee.
And eventually, after a time period whose length is traditionally three years, but which cannot be fixed precisely,
there is actually not in the Synoptic Gospels a clear chronology, Jesus went down to Jerusalem.
In Jerusalem, Jesus' teachings aroused the ire of various factions who denounced him to the Romans.
To maintain peace, the Romans acquiesced in Jesus' public execution on a Friday.
In the firm belief of his followers, Jesus rose from the dead on the following Sunday.
For a few weeks more, he appeared from time to time to various groups of people before he ascended into heaven.
Now, the narrative that I have just given is sort of the essential minimum.
That's basically what we can say the story had come to believe as the basic definitive facts.
But even in giving you that brief narrative, I have patched it together from the four Gospels.
Because no one of them gives us that whole story absolutely straight through in all those details.
The account moreover is riddled with historical puzzles.
Let me just mention a few of these by way of example, not by way of calling into question the validity or importance of these texts.
But I do want to say that in viewing these texts, they have somewhat different standing if one views them as a Christian believer,
or if one views them as an historian.
So for the moment, I'm really looking at them as historical documents as if they were like any other kinds of historical documents.
Luke says that when Jesus was born, Quirinius was governor of Syria.
And he says that Jesus was born in Bethlehem, where his parents had gone to register for a census.
Okay.
Inscriptions prove that there was a man by the name of Quirinius, who was governor of Syria, and indeed there was a census taken under Quirinius's authority.
But that census happened in the year we call 6 or 7 AD.
There was another census in the Roman world.
Fixing the tax records actually is what these censuses were not counting people.
But anyway, in the year we call 8 BC.
But as yet there was no Quirinius in Syria.
Matthew and Luke both mentioned King Herod.
He died in what we call 4 BC.
So we can either have a census in Herod and no Quirinius, or we can have Quirinius in the census and no Herod, but we can't have the ball.
Well, most historians have said that Jesus is probably born between about 8 and 4 BC, perhaps a bit closer to the second of those years.
Luke says, chapter 3 verse 1, that John the Baptist began preaching in the 15th year of the reign of the emperor Tiberius.
Now, if they were using Syrian reckoning, that would be the year 26-27 AD.
If they were using Roman reckoning, 28-29 AD.
Now, did Jesus beat John immediately after he began preaching?
Sometime later on?
A year, two years, three years, four years?
We don't know. We're not actually told.
We're not actually told that.
Our way of patching these stories together tends to link them all very closely.
Tradition, an only tradition, says that Jesus was 30 when he began his ministry, and that he preached for three years.
Much later, much, much later, the fifth century actually, early sixth century, Christian chronographers decided that he began his public ministry in what we call 30 AD.
Well, then they reckoned back and got their zero point because they assumed traditionally that he began preaching when he was 30, and that he preached for three years, therefore he died in the year 33.
Well, you know, it's a question, when did he actually meet John the Baptist and then begin his public ministry?
How long did he actually preach in public? We don't really know.
When was he actually born?
Well, at least four, five, six, seven years earlier than the traditional chronology fixed in the fifth and sixth century AD actually had it.
So Jesus must have been somewhere between 30 and 36 when he began his ministry, and somewhere between his mid-30s and about 40 when he died.
Well,
