These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by The Teaching Company.
These lectures are titled,
Foundations of Western Civilization, Part 3.
Lecture 25, Late Antiquity, Crisis and Response.
Hello, and welcome to lecture 25 in our series on the foundations of Western Civilization.
This lecture opens a series of four in which we're going to look at the Roman world,
at the Mediterranean world, roughly in the period from about 300 to about 700 AD,
a period that scholars now call late antiquity.
That's during this period that the Roman Empire fell in the traditional telling of the story,
or perhaps as we'll tell the story when the Roman Empire was transformed in fundamental ways.
So one of the things we're going to do in this lecture and in the three that follow
is ask what fell or what changed.
How did the Roman world look different in about 700 than it had looked in perhaps about 300?
What were the decisive actors? What are the decisive themes? What are the major forces?
We'll talk about barbarians. We'll talk about Romans.
We'll talk about the rise, spread, and eventual triumph of Christianity,
of the Christian church, and also of the Christian faith and of Christian culture.
So essentially our focus will rest on processes of change, processes of transformation
as we explore this world of late antiquity.
Now in this lecture we're going to talk in particular about problems in the Roman Empire itself.
The crisis of the third century will be our starting point.
Then we'll move on to a series of reforms undertaken by two great emperors,
Diocletian and then Constantine.
Then we'll have a little bit to say about the successors of Diocletian and Constantine
during the course of the fourth century.
We'll turn in the next lecture to the barbarian invasions.
We'll turn the two lectures after that to the Catholic church in the first place
and Christian culture in the second place.
All along we'll be challenging an old view.
The old view is essentially this, that at some point during this period
that we're going to be talking about, the Roman Empire fell,
and the glorious civilizations of classical antiquity succumbed to the forces
of barbarism and chaos and became the Dark Ages.
Well, I hope that when these four lectures are concluded,
none of you thinks that way any longer.
Now it's perfectly true that Hollywood and journalists and high school history books
and other sources of fiction still speak that way.
They still talk about the fall of the Roman Empire.
You'll hear people occasionally make speeches and so on.
Old things now are just like they were when the Roman Empire fell.
Well, things now aren't like they were when the Roman Empire was changing,
was evolving.
Over about two generations now, historians who focus on,
scholars who focus on this period from about 300 to 700,
I'll use those dates referentially as we go along here through this series of lectures,
but there's nothing sacred.
I don't want to leave the impression that something decisive happened in 300
and something else in 700.
They're notional dates.
Anyway, scholars who focus on this particular period have been speaking
for a long time of late antiquity.
Now we've talked about classical antiquity, for example,
with the Greeks and the Romans.
Now we talk about late antiquity and the term is you'll see something very neutral.
It doesn't, well, I suppose late maybe carries just a slight negative connotation,
but it isn't meant to.
It is meant simply to be a label, to mark off this period
as one that we can explore on its own terms.
Now you may ask, well, how is it then that people for such a very long time
seem to have had it so wrong?
Well, there's a couple of different ways to answer that question.
We can say, first of all, that the traditional view is not one born in this world
of late antiquity.
It is not one born into so-called dark ages.
It was one born in the 14th and 15th centuries among the scholars of the Italian Renaissance
who imagined themselves as looking back to the world
which they thought of then as classical antiquity.
Imagine themselves as being more like those people
than like the people of the middle ages, the pit in the middle,
the part that came between themselves in antiquity.
And in the sense what they did is invented by thinking this way,
by talking this way, by writing this way,
they invented a tripartite division of history, ancient medieval modern.
Of course they were the moderns, modern is good, you see.
And then in this curious calculus, ancient was good too.
It was the bit in the middle that was bad.
