Now, in all of that, please find me the barbarian invasions, you see, this whole situation is
a little more curious, a little more peculiar than we might otherwise think.
In the year 476, a barbarian general entered Italy, where the rather pathetic Romulus Augustulus
was then ruling.
It's interesting, isn't it?
Romulus Augustulus, little Romulus, little Augustus, those are Latin diminutives.
So the last Roman emperor in the West bears the name of the founder of Rome and the founder
of Rome's empire.
It's almost too good to be true, but it does seem not to be a fiction, it seems to be the case.
Anyway, a barbarian general enters Italy, chases out Romulus Augustulus, he actually
lives on for a few years after this, and sends his imperial insignia to Constantinople,
saying to the West, no longer needed an emperor, but that he and others like him in the West
would carry on ruling under the orders of the emperor at Constantinople.
That happened in August of 476, the traditional date for the fall of the Roman empire.
But that is all that happened.
If we want to look for a moment, a fact, a time, when the Roman empire fell, it's when
this barbarian general sent Romulus Augustulus's imperial insignia to Constantinople in August
of 476.
Now, in light of the experience of the Visigoths that I've been describing or Isis's experiences
in Gaul, I hope it'll become clear that 476 really doesn't matter very much.
And not surprisingly, contemporaries didn't notice it as a significant moment.
Now, by about 500, plus or minus a bit, the western provinces of the Roman empire, as
a result of dynamics very much like the ones that I have been explaining up to now, had
changed into a series of kingdoms, from provinces to kingdoms.
All right?
So for example, in much of northern Gaul, Gaul, north, roughly from Paris north, a Frankish
kingdom had emerged.
Slowly, the Franks began to expand to the south until they reached about the Loire River,
sort of into central Gaul.
The Visigothic kingdom, remember, we put the Visigoths into southern Gaul, in the kingdom
of their own, round about 418.
Now, they had begun expanding north and then would, in the year 507, be dealt a decisive
military defeat by the Franks, and slowly, but surely, would be shoved over the Pyrenees
into Spain, where they carried on for some two centuries, until they were overrun by
Berber tribes, with Arab generals leading them in the year 711.
We'll come back to that issue in a later lecture, but the point is that a Visigothic
kingdom existed in Gaul, then in Spain, and then was finally defeated.
A Burgundian kingdom, remember our Burgundians from just a moment ago?
A Burgundian kingdom emerged in east central Gaul, but slowly, already early in the sixth
century, it was swallowed up by the Franks.
This expanding Frankish juggernaut in central Gaul.
There were other kingdoms as well.
There was, for example, an Ostrogothic kingdom in Italy, but this Ostrogothic kingdom in
Italy was eventually overrun by Roman forces sent from Constantinople.
There was a Vandal kingdom.
They gave their name to Andaluthia in Spain, and they gave their name to Vandalism.
There was a Vandal kingdom in North Africa for a brief period of time.
It lasted about a century, and it too was overrun by Roman forces in the sixth century.
So that by the time the sixth century began drawing to a close, the west of the Roman
Empire had gone through a period of many provinces, many small kingdoms, and then one large and
prominent Frankish kingdom.
The British Isles represent a slightly different case.
One withdrew troops from the British Isles beginning in about 370, definitively abandoned
Britain by about 410, simply putting those troops to work elsewhere.
We cannot out of the context of the late antique world, as I've been describing it, well predict
exactly what was going to happen in Britain in, let's say, the year 500, or even easily
in the year 600.
Now, at the end of the last lecture, I quoted two historians.
I'm going to quote them again by way of emphasis to see if you agree with me that they have
captured something very important about what went on in this world.
Historian Walter Gofford said that Rome's experience of accommodating the barbarians
was an imaginative experiment that got a little out of hand.
I think there is much truth in that.
And Patrick Geary has called the barbarian kingdoms Rome's last creative act.
Again we see this long process of transformation with Romans playing an important, though not
always predictable and not always desirable role in managing their own transformation.
As far as barbarism, next superstition.
