So these are some of the kinds of issues to which the Church Fathers addressed themselves
and some of the Church Fathers themselves.
What about those who opted out?
In an era of great intellectual achievement, a time when the Church was gaining power and
status, there were those who turned their back on intellectual achievement, on power,
on status, on wealth, on importance.
These were the monks.
Now there had always been ascetics, asceticism practice, exercise.
Generally speaking, the notion of some kind of self-denial.
There had always been an ascetic tradition in Judaism.
There was an ascetic tradition in early Christianity.
There have been ascetic traditions in most religious traditions around the world.
We're interested here in the ascetic tradition as it embedded itself in Christianity.
There are always those, in other words, who believe that rigorous self-denial and discipline
might make it possible to gain something like union with God.
If I deny myself food, if I deny myself companionship of other people, if I deny myself sex, if
I deny myself power, I may be able to purify myself.
Now sometimes these people lived as solitaries.
Sometimes they lived as communities.
Christian monasticism as a blending of these various traditions emerged in Egypt in the
fourth century.
It rises in the first instance with a man by the name of Anthony.
Now Anthony was a solitary who established the Aromitic ideal in Christian monasticism.
This comes from the Greek word haremos, which means desert.
So Aromitic monks are basically solitaries.
They are persons who live as far as possible all alone.
Anthony's successor, Pacomius, who lived from 290 to about 346, began as a solitary.
He kept having people come out to kind of learn from him, to study from him, and finally
he decides, all right, look, we've got to get
these guys organized.
And he creates the first formal communities for men, and then a bit later, but not much
later, for women.
Living what we call the cenobitic life.
Now this comes from two Greek words, koinos bios, meaning common life.
So we can have Aromitic monks living essentially as hermits, or we can have cenobitic monks
leading a common life together.
Monks are therefore monacoi, lone ones, who live in a monastarion, a house of lone ones.
There's a wonderful paradox there, isn't it?
A monastery is a community of large numbers of people living alone together.
Now especially after Pacomius, the persons who are cenobitic follow a rule, a regula.
And so they come to be called eventually, in the Catholic tradition, regular clergy,
because they follow a regula.
Now from Egypt monasticism spread, it spread for a number of reasons.
A life of St. Anthony was written, for example, it was written in Greek, very quickly translated
into Latin.
It was widely circulated, widely disseminated, and was a real sort of late antique best seller
that helped to propagate this life.
Collections of the wise sayings of the so-called Desert Fathers began to circulate.
These also were widely influential.
King Jerome took a particular fancy to the monastic life, and indeed eventually in Bethlehem
formed a monastic community himself.
He popularized monasticism, and as I suggested a moment ago, through his letters he was in
contact with large numbers of people.
People who traveled to Egypt sat at the feet of the great religious masters, and then went
back once they had come, and taught what they themselves had learned.
So one way or another, this Egyptian phenomenon began to be universalized in the late antique
world.
Aromatic monasticism spread particularly in the Eastern Mediterranean, through the work
of St. Basil, whose rule for monks was normative for centuries in the Eastern Catholic Church,
or eventually, as we will call it in later lectures, in the Orthodox Church.
Aromatic monasticism sort of got a foothold in the West in the first place, in Gaul, through
the work of St. Martin at Tours, Martin lives from 336 to 397, and then St. Honoratus, who
lived at Lera in the south of France from 350 to about 429, and it spread also in Ireland
through the work of St. Patrick, whom we may date between about 390 and 462, although
fixing Patrick's dates is pretty tricky business.
But in the West, the future really belonged to Senevitic monasticism, and thus to the
work to the heritage of Benedict of Nersia.
Benedict born about 480 dies in about 550.
He came from a modest Roman family, then he abandoned secular studies to pursue a life
of Christian retreat.
Eventually, he gathered a community around himself at Monte Cassino, about 80 miles south
of Rome, and there, in about 540, he wrote what has become the most famous and the widely
adopted rule in all of monastic history.
