Now, it's important to say, Benedict composed this rule for his own monastery.
Gregory I admired it and popularized it with his biography of Benedict, and therefore it
began to spread and spread and spread and spread.
We'll encounter it in later lectures.
It was particularly prized in early England, and English missionaries promoted it on the
continent.
Anglo-Saxons influenced the Franks, whose greatest king, Charlemagne, imposed the Benedictine
rule on monasteries all over Europe.
So gradually, the humble effects of Benedict in central Italy were quite accidentally and
quite without his having intended this to be the case, spread throughout much of Western
Europe and then even to the world beyond.
So we have church fathers who deal with great intellectual issues.
We have monks who in some way opt out.
Let's conclude with some reflections on the final question I posed at the beginning of
the lecture.
So, what?
How does Christianity affect culture and life?
Well, we might notice, for example, that Christians continue to use Greek and Latin,
thus assuring their preservation, and enriching them with new vocabulary, with new conceptual
frameworks, with new things to talk about.
Christians added much to the vocabulary of both Greek and Latin.
Now, what should I think signal and then not press too hard, the old thesis of the very
famous German scholar Adolf von Harnock, that classical culture captured Christianity?
Dr. Horace's great remark about Greece, that captive Greece took her captor captive in
a certain way, von Harnock saw classical culture having done that to Christianity.
The fact of the matter is, and I've signaled this in connection with Augustine's book on
Christian doctrine, that the Christians knew how to spoil the Egyptians.
Yes, they took much from the classical world around them, but I think they did not succumb
to it and I think they did not compromise with it over much.
Let's emphasize, for example, a slightly different kind of issue, Christian patronage.
Remember I signaled the end of the great Roman building boom during the third century, during
the period of crisis?
When we come to the fourth century, remember I signaled that Constantine gave the money
to build St. Peter's in Rome, to build St. Paul's in Rome, that he donated the land on
which the latter in Basilica eventually rose with, again, his support?
This began to happen all over the Roman world.
Christian patronage put an end to the building bust of the third century, and over the fourth
and on into the fifth, the most splendid edifices built around the Christian world in city after
city after city after city were their cathedral churches.
Now, gradually these churches and other public spaces, and sometimes even domestic spaces
in homes, that might once have been decorated with sort of floral scenes, or might have
been decorated with pictures of classical motifs, stories from the Iliad, stories from
the Iliad, wherever the stories might have come from, now began to be depicted with scenes
from the scriptures, with traditional scenes, or sometimes even legendary scenes.
In other words, a Christian art began to emerge.
Yes, it used certain classical artistic motifs.
Yes, it continued to use mosaic setting tiles in wet plaster.
Yes, it continued to use fresco painting on wet plaster so that the painting became part
of the wall.
Yes, some of the figures look much like the figures in classical pictures.
But the fundamental themes were different, and gradually a Christian art that was something
old at once, old and new, began to arrive.
Christian poets carried on the classical tradition, indeed in the fourth, and the fifth, and the
sixth, and the seventh, and the eighth, and in the twentieth century.
Christian poets have written poetry that can stand comparison to the best that was written
in the ancient world.
I signaled this a few minutes ago, and connection was St. Ambrose.
Christian did other things, too.
It took the very curious step of assigning enormous power to celibate men, but it did
this at the same time in a world where it said all were equal because all were sinners.
So in a democracy of sin, celibate men were accorded great power.
Here is a fascinating paradox, something old and something new.
Christian martyrs and saints created new kinds of hero figures.
Heroes, of course, famous for how they died.
After Christianity was granted toleration, saints famous for how they lived.
But here were new heroes, not the heroes of the Iliad, not the heroes of the Aeneid,
but new and different kinds of heroes.
A new morality assured women, a more secure place in society.
The morality that applied to men was applied to them as well.
Slowly, but surely, Christian ethics pervaded secular law.
We'll see some examples of this in later lectures in more concrete terms, but suffice
it to say that secular law began to be marked by Christianity.
So the lands that had been the western provinces of the Roman Empire had evolved into a series
of kingdoms, often enough as a result of Roman policies.
A church that was barely visible in 180 at the end of the Pax Romana has become regnant
triumphant in the Roman world.
A culture that had produced a small number of writings about which there were deep controversies
at the end of the Pax Romana has become the dominant culture of the Roman world.
These are the paradoxes of continuity and change in the world of late antiquity.
