There's another critical element to the Islamic faith, as it was taught by Muhammad and picked
up by his successors.
And this is the notion of the Umma Muslima, the community of all those who had made Islam.
Now, what's interesting about this idea, well, many things are, but fundamentally what's
interesting here is that this is a community which transcends national borders, political
borders, social borders, ethnic borders, deed all borders.
So that even today we will occasionally hear hints of this, when Islamic leaders in one
part of the world speak as if all Muslims on the planet are to rise up as one in answer
to their call.
Well, as in the dawning 21st century, the likelihood of such a call being answered all
over the world, I think, is small.
But the notion is there, and the notion is there from the very beginning.
Well, at the very end of his life, Muhammad was able finally to return, actually not without
some violence and bloodshed, but he was able to return to the city of Mecca and sort of
in triumph.
He then returned to Medina and died there.
What would happen next?
How is there to be a successor to Muhammad?
He has been the prophet of God, and indeed in the Islamic tradition, the last prophet.
The first prophet had been the patriarch Abraham.
Jesus had been a prophet.
To Muslims, Christians made this mistake.
They assigned partners to Allah.
They imagined Jesus to be divine.
Jesus in the Islamic tradition is a prophet, a holy and revered prophet, but a prophet
just the same.
And Muhammad is the last prophet.
Well, on Muhammad's death, an old associate by the name of Abu Bakr became Caliph, successor
to the prophet.
Now in the first place, presumably, this would have implied only successor to the prophet's
political, social, military leadership.
In other words, no one could exactly succeed to his religious role.
Over time, the Caliphs would gradually begin to assume responsibility for sort of the custodianship
of the faith, and then perhaps gradually begin to have some religious significance ascribed
to them.
But initially, and in theory, they succeed only to the temporal dimensions, not to the
spiritual dimensions of the prophet's rules.
Now when Muhammad died, a number of these tribes, clans, groups called them what you
will, the Arabian Peninsula fell away.
They felt they'd made a bargain with Muhammad, and they were not about to carry this bargain
on with anybody else.
Abu Bakr therefore fought a series of lightning campaigns against the apostates, those who
fell away as they were called by the Muslims, and they were eventually sort of brought back
between 632 and 634.
Abu Bakr and his successors then launched a series of lightning campaigns, which ingest
over a century.
Now compare this to the Roman Empire, which expanded for some five centuries.
The Islamic Caliphate, as a political entity, was built in just about one century.
Muslim armies went right across North Africa, crossed the Straits of Gibraltar into Spain
and into Central Gaul.
Muslim armies went to the frontiers of India and China.
Tremendous expansion.
Now we can identify, I think, some reasons for this dynamic and remarkable success.
Some of it probably eludes us, but we can, I think, identify at least a few basic reasons
for this success.
Just before the Islamic armies launched these campaigns, Constantinople and Persia had
warned themselves out in a long, brutal series of wars.
There was an opportunity.
There were deep religious divisions among Eastern Christians.
Going back, of course, as we have seen to the patristic era, there were large numbers
of Christian communities who, in those Trinitarian and Christological controversies that we talked
about in earlier lectures, had come down on one or the other side of these issues.
Islamic armies, in other words, did not attack a world that was unified against them.
Rating and plundering had been a way of life in Arabia for centuries.
Then Islam prohibited Muslims from raiding each other.
So now they began to raid others.
And finally, the Prophet himself had taught the need to expand the faith.
He taught the need for jihad, holy war.
Now this is a term about which there has been a great deal of confusion.
In traditional Islamic teaching, the world is divided into two.
How many people divide the world into two?
The world is divided into two.
There is the Dar al-Islam, the house of surrender, and the Dar al-Harb, the house of war.
Now initially, and this is of course similar in many ways to the Christian experience,
the war is to be inside the heart of the individual believer.
It is here that one must conquer.
