Well, welcome yet again to our series of lectures on the Foundations of Western Civilization.
This is lecture number 30 and in this lecture we're going to talk about the Byzantine Empire.
Now you may recall that at the beginning of the previous lecture I had said that we would
give three lectures to the heirs of the Roman Empire.
We spoke in the last lecture of what I called the least predictable, perhaps the most surprising
of these heirs, the Islamic people, the Arab peoples, the prophet Muhammad and the Islamic
faith.
Today we turn our attention to the eastern end of the Mediterranean, to the Byzantine
Empire, the heir of the Eastern Roman Empire, and in our next lecture we'll turn to the
kingdoms of the Germanic West.
Now as the kingdoms of the Germanic West were evolving over the course of the 5th century,
the Eastern Empire persisted.
And again if we were to go back to some point in the late 4th, the 5th, maybe in the very
early 6th century, we would probably predict that well this Roman Empire is going to continue
having some kind of existence.
That it did so would not surprise us that we might very well have that little unclear
what its future would be.
Why then in the 4th and across the 5th, maybe the very early years of the 6th century, did
the Eastern Roman Empire seem to be a bit more successful than its western counterpart
which after all disappeared?
Well I think we can identify some very basic reasons.
For example, in the East there were fewer and less acute frontier problems.
In the West the long Rhine and Danube frontiers were threatened again and again and again.
We saw how the Visigoths settled in the Balkans first and then went to the West.
Now there were some serious challenges in the East but they were less acute, less persistent
and less contemporaneous.
They didn't happen all at the same time as happened more or less in the West.
Generally the Eastern rulers were more skillful and competent.
Now this is just a piece of historical dumb luck.
There's no theory, there's no great thesis that will explain this.
The East had a series of quite effective capable rulers at a time when on the whole the West
did not.
The East was more prosperous, it was more urbanized, it was more intellectually cultivated.
In many ways the Romans chose to take their stand in the East and this is important to
remember because they chose to take their stand in the East and they stood as we'll see
as we move along for a thousand years.
So last we regard the Romans as somehow helpless victims of all of these complex forces of
late antiquity.
Let's remember that the Eastern half of the Roman Empire in a sense addressed its problems
or continued to do so and persisted.
The East however also had very, very deep religious divisions.
Primarily these religious divisions were between those who called themselves Orthodox
right believers and those who were Monophysite.
Now you'll remember perhaps the Monophysites were back in the Christological controversies
of late antiquity, the persons who emphasized one nature, monophysis, one nature, the divine
nature in Jesus Christ.
We had talked about the Trinitarian problems, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit and the Christological
problems Jesus, his man, and God.
In the East there were acute tensions generated by the fact that there were large numbers
of Monophysite Christian communities alongside Orthodox Christian communities.
So all was not rosy in the East but things were rosier in the East than they were in
the West.
Now when we come then to look in on this Eastern Roman Empire we must say right away that no
one in the 5th century thought of the Empire based on Constantinople as anything but Roman.
In hindsight, and of course again I've emphasized many, many times, historians are very good
at hindsight.
Our hindsight is always 2020.
Historians predict the past.
We don't predict the future very well at all.
We can see that gradually two great cultural realms, East and West, or Byzantine, Orthodox
Christian, and Western Latin Christian, were going to move apart, were going to drift apart.
But in the East they never saw themselves as something new or something different.
They thought of themselves as Romans.
Now what I want to do over the next few minutes is take a series of vantage points on this
evolving Eastern Empire or eventually as we'll come to call it Byzantine, but when we start
to call it Byzantine, we'll see exactly why we call it that, we want to take a series
of vantage points and see if we can observe this slow but steady evolution, this slow
but steady transformation of the Empire of East Rome into something that it's legitimate
to call Byzantine if only by way of putting a title on it that marks that it is something
new and different even if those people never thought of themselves as anything other than
Roman.
