The first vantage point then, the middle of the sixth century, the reign of the emperor
Justinian.
He reigned from 527 until 565, a long reign to be sure, and one I think which will provide
us with some initial hints about the way things were developing in the East Roman Empire.
First of all, we can say that Justinian waged a series of wars against the Vandals, against
the Ostrogoths, against the Visigoths, particularly those Visigoths in Spain, peoples whom we
met in one of our lectures on Maid Antiquity, to whom we'll return in our next lecture.
So we needn't tarry over them now, but Spicer to say, Justinian, not personally, but through
his generals, waged a series of campaigns against the peoples who had taken North Africa, Italy
and Spain, in an attempt, a vain attempt in the end, but an attempt all the same to
recover Rome's lost western provinces.
We can see very clearly that in so far as these campaigns were not fully successful,
Constantinople's sphere of influence was being effectively reduced to the Eastern Mediterranean.
But the very fact that Justinian waged these campaigns in the West indicates that to him
it was desirable and perhaps attainable to recover Rome's lost imperial glory.
The imperial administration and finances were massively reformed in Justinian's time.
The first major reforms of this kind since the days of Diocletian and Constantine, in
other words, since about two centuries.
We can see, in retrospect, that a new kind of regime with a less civilian character with
a more military character was emerging.
Put in slightly different terms, Rome had always attempted to maintain the notion of
a very strict separation between civilian and military power.
Now we saw that the late Roman Empire was in many respects an armed camp.
We saw that the early Roman Empire, the Augustan Principate, was in some ways a paradox at
its very heart because it was a magistracy and at the same time it was a military dictatorship.
But in theory, in theory, the Romans sharply differentiated between civilian and military
power.
We can see again, in retrospect, that beginning in the time of Justinian that separation is
being eroded and perhaps indeed eroded permanently.
And it's being eroded not on the side of traditional civilian rule, but on the side of military
rule.
Just to be an issue between the years 529 and 533, in a series of different books and
a series of different collections, the corpus urus chivalis, the body of civil law.
A man by the name of Trebonian was the chief legist, was the chief jurist, the chief sort
of a lawyer who worked on putting this massive legal collection together.
Now there had been in the time of the emperor Theodosius in the fourth century, excuse me,
in the fifth century, a substantial revision of Roman law, which we call the Theodosian
Code.
From one point of view, we can put Justinian into a longer tradition of reforms of collecting,
reforming, studying, analyzing, streamlining Roman law.
But Justinians was the last great ancient collection and analysis of Roman law.
Now he issued it in a whole series of different collections, the codex, the body of the law
as a whole, digest the books for the law schools effectively, the novella, which were the collections
of new laws being issued and so on.
So it was issued, it wasn't simply one big book, it was a series of different items with
slightly different intentions, slightly different focus.
We can say of this that it has actually been perhaps, perhaps, the most influential legal
collection in human history.
That's a bold claim, but it is indeed, I think, a fair one.
There are some ironies in the Corpus Eurus Cibulus.
It was issued in Latin and had almost immediately to be translated into Greek in order to be
useful in the Eastern Roman world.
So even as Justinian was looking back, looking back to the wellsprings of Roman law and what
is more Roman than law, what more traditional than Roman law, he is preparing a collection
in Latin which has to be turned into Greek in order to be useful.
We can see, in other words, that his world is becoming increasingly a Greek world and
not a Latin world.
So if Latin means Roman or Roman means Latin, something is indeed changing.
