Lecture 32, The World of Charlemagne
Welcome back to our series of lectures on the foundations of Western civilization.
This time, lecture number 32, The World of Charlemagne.
The last three lectures, we talked about the heirs of the Roman Empire, after in the
four before that, we watched the Roman Empire change before our eyes.
In this lecture, and to a degree in the next one, we'll be taking up the question of what
happened in Western Europe when, in a certain sense, the wheels stopped turning and things
settled down a little bit.
And it was time for a bit of consolidation, a bit of order, perhaps indeed for civilization
to sort of catch its breath.
Now, to say that we're going to talk about the world of Charlemagne means that we're
going to talk about a world built by the Franks in the eighth and in the ninth centuries.
Charlemagne, Carolis Magnus, Charles the Great in Latin, was the greatest member of the Carolingian
Carolus, Carolingian family, which arose in the early seventh century in the northeastern
region of the Frankish world, an area we call Austrasia.
You may just remember that last time I had talked about the fact that the Merovingians,
although they had built firm foundations, nevertheless eventually saw their power seep
away and pass into the hands of great aristocratic families.
It's now time to pick up that thread.
Among these aristocratic families, not the only, but the greatest was the Carolingian.
Now, their power was based on a certain set of foundations that we can explain pretty easily.
In the first place, land.
They controlled vast, landed patrimonies.
That is the first and fundamental source of their power, of their influence.
Now, in the second place, these Carolingians practiced over a very long time, very creative
marriage policies, which enabled them to connect their own family to other powerful families,
sometimes to bring additional lands, additional landed patrimonies into their family, sometimes
to gain at least some influence over the landed patrimonies of other families.
So a very effective marriage policy was a key prop of Carolingian power.
They long controlled, from the early seventh century right through to the middle of the
eighth century, they usually controlled the office of mayor of the palace.
Now, the mayor of the palace was an officer under the Merovingian kings, who was in a sense
a kind of a prime minister.
I mean, he had a wide array of administrative and executive responsibilities under the Merovingian
kings.
But this was an office with an enormous amount of power, an enormous amount of influence,
an enormous amount of opportunity to influence development.
And this office was controlled for a very long time by the Carolingian family.
The Carolingians also built up very close relations to leading members of the clergy,
both bishops and abbots.
They got on the good side of some of the most important bishops in the Carolingian world.
They got on the good side of abbots of some great monasteries, but they themselves also
founded monasteries.
And a number of prominent women of the Carolingian family entered convents and became nuns, and
in a few cases became abbesses, the heads of monastic establishments.
So very close relations with the church from a very early time.
The Carolingians were also great soldiers.
They were also great military leaders.
At a time when the Merovingian kings themselves lacked power, lacked influence, lacked perhaps
the capacity to influence events in a decisive way, the Carolingians very often led the
Frankish armies in campaigns along the frontiers which maintained the integrity of the kingdom.
In a very real way it was the Carolingians who were fighting for the Franks in the name
of the Frankish kings, but of course in the process exposing the Frankish kings as perhaps
less powerful than themselves.
Charles Martel indeed, Charlemagne's grandfather, won a tremendous victory over a Muslim army
near Poitiers in 733.
Now this is smack in the middle of what we call France.
Remember the Muslims had conquered Iberia in 711, or they'd entered Iberia in 711.
It took them maybe four or five years really to consolidate their conquest of the Iberian
peninsula, and then they began raiding over the Pyrenees into southern Gaul, and then
raiding further and further and further to the north.
Finally Charles Martel confronted them near Poitiers in the year 732 and won a very great
victory.
It resonated really all over the western world, it resonated in Europe, it was noted
in Rome, it was noted indeed in the Byzantine world as well.
This was a very significant military victory, and it dramatically enhanced the prestige
of the Carolingian family.
