His long reign, it must be said, 46 years, just under 46 years, provided him with a great
many opportunities.
When you reign for a long time, you have a chance to do things.
Now, you can do good things or bad things.
You can begin well and then sort of ease off into oblivion.
But the fact is that a long reign does provide opportunities.
He sees them.
Charles sees them.
His immense patronage, for example, brought key people to his court.
One of the greatest of these was an Anglo-Saxon scholar by the name of Alquin.
We'll talk about him in considerably more detail in our next lecture, but here I'll
just make the point that one of the greatest students of Alquin's life and career and
works says, if we want to really understand Charlemagne's magnetism, the way he attracted
people to himself, we think of Alquin, who landed on the continent with a bag of books
and died the Lord of 20,000 men.
Charlemagne could attract and he could reward in ways really that none of his contemporaries
could possibly do.
He was a keen judge of people.
He was willing to spend and he spent well, he spent intelligently.
He was also a ruler who had a vision, a real sense of vision.
He had and formulated eventually a plan and he began then to implement that plan.
He had a sense of where he wanted to go and what he wanted to do.
Now, it's interesting to note that he comes to the throne as I mentioned a moment ago
in the year 768.
We don't really begin to see his plan taking shape and beginning to be visible and beginning
to be coherent and beginning to be implemented until the middle of the 780s, some 15, 16,
17 years into his reign.
And then over a period of about a decade from the mid-780s to the mid-790s, we see a remarkable
series of developments that taken together show us really what Charlemagne was trying
to do but also show us that if a person has the means, has the resources, has the will
and has the vision and then above all else perhaps has the time he can get a very great
deal done indeed.
What kinds of things?
Well, for example, military campaigns.
He fought a large number of campaigns to maintain his realm.
He waged 53 campaigns in 46 years.
But there are some ironies in Charlemagne's military activities.
He's not to this day studied in the war colleges.
He was not a great charismatic leader.
He wasn't a brilliant strategist.
He wasn't a great battlefield tactician.
What he did quite simply was out-organize everybody and then he entrusted very often
the leadership of his armies to trusted soldiers or even to his sons eventually as they grew
somewhat older.
His great talent was organization, not generalship.
Now we may think of Charles as one of the great sort of conquering warriors, but we'd
have to qualify that judgment.
In fundamental respects, his aim was really to restore the largest, the maximum boundaries
of the Merovingian kingdom that had preceded him.
Remember the Merovingians, the family of rulers of the kings of the Franks before the Carlingians
came on the scene.
Now in several places he rounded off frontiers.
For example, let's say along the Pyrenees where there was a frontier with Spain.
For example at the base of the Danish peninsula.
For example in the Danube Valley.
For example in Italy.
These are to be sure four places, and one could mention one or two others.
These are four places where on Charles's death the Franks ruled more territory than
they had ruled when he became king.
But in each of these cases what he was really doing was sort of building a big insulator
we might say along a threatened frontier of the kingdom.
He was not an indiscriminate warrior who just conquered and conquered and marched and marched
and moved ever forward.
Fundamentally his military activity was interesting enough conservative.
In the area of institutional reforms, Charles's activities involved both reform and innovation.
Reform taking certain things that existed in his time and improving on them and innovation
doing new things.
It is in the area of his institutional reforms and then to a degree in the area of cultural
activity but cultural activity will be the subject of our next lecture so I'm not going
to bring it up here in much detail at all.
It's in the area of institutional activity that we can really begin to see the fruits
of this great decade I mentioned a moment ago between about 785 and 795 let's say.
In this period Charles for example made the royal court and courtiers key players in both
government and politics.
He had an ability and a will to attract elites to attract powerful people to attract important
persons from all around his vast realm to his court.
