He created the impression, he created the impression of wide consultation, of building
consensus, of hearing many points of view, and then implementing, as it were, the common
vision.
But, by the fact, he was very clever in these regards, because I think there cannot be much
doubt that the vision was always basically his, he was getting people to sign on to his
vision.
But he did this in a way that made it look as if the vision were being somehow commonly
jointly forged.
Now, every year there was an annual assembly of the Franks.
In principle, every free Frankish warrior, every free Frankish male could come to the
assembly.
Over the course of Carolinian history, those assemblies became more and more aristocratic
and it tended to be more and more the elite who came, but in principle it was all free
Franks.
Now, the Franks came together, they came together, there to debate, there to deliberate, there
to discuss, perhaps plans that the king had to put before them, perhaps ideas for a military
campaign, perhaps ideas for institutional reforms, perhaps ideas for legal reforms.
And we have, in some of our sources, a depiction of the way these kind of annual assemblies
took place.
Large numbers of people would assemble and then there would be a period of, in a sense,
socializing before the assembly got down to its business.
Small groups of people would go and attend upon the king, the king would go and visit
certain groups of people, aristocratic males would bring their sons, particularly their
teenage sons, to meet the king, and also there, of course, they would meet other powerful
people.
In other words, there was a great deal of politicking and a great deal of schmoozing
that went on before these assemblies ever got down to the serious business of passing laws.
So that again, by the time those laws passed, they had the appearance of, and maybe to,
the substance of, consensus.
The kind of laws they issued came in what are called capitularies.
It is to say, documents in capitula, Latin, chapters, so capitulary is a chapterary.
There are documents that are sometimes a few chapters long and sometimes dozens upon dozens
upon dozens of chapters long.
Virtually every assembly issued one of these and was then to be taken out to the regions
of the empire and there, of the realm, I'm sorry, empire a little while, taken out to
the various regions of the realm and there implemented by the key local officers.
The key local officers were called counts, counts.
Now the Latin word that hides behind the English word count is revealing, it is comays.
The word comays means companion, more strictly, more particularly, table companion.
So the idea is that the realm is being ruled by the king and his companions.
Now they aren't all equally his companions.
There would be some with whom he was very familiar and some with whom perhaps he had
very tenuous relationships, but the fact is that the idea existed that the king and
his companions rule the realm jointly.
Now the key members of the Frankish people, the key members of the elite were made royal
vassals.
They thus entered into very deep, very important, very reciprocal personal relationships with
the king.
They were persons who were bound to him with a very, very special bond, a very personal
bond, though a bond that might very well imply then that they were going to undertake certain
important responsibilities on the king's behalf.
Now there were also officials called the misi dominici, the envoys of the Lord King.
These were wandering envoys who were sent out throughout the realm to inspect the work
of all the others.
You may just recall way back in lecture five, I think it was, when we talked about the Persians,
we talked about the eyes and ears of the king, the spies that the Persian monarch sent out.
I'm sure we can safely say that this didn't influence Charlemagne.
And it's also important to say, though, by way of comparison, that whereas the spies of
the Persian king were just that, spies, you didn't know who they were.
The Carolingian misi dominici were known to everybody.
They were prominent individuals who went round the realm to check up on the work of the other
officials of the king.
To make sure that the poor were not depressed, oppressed, they may very well have been depressed,
I don't know about that.
The point is the poor were not to be oppressed, that the officers were not to be taking bribes,
the officers were not to be sort of entering fishy judgments and courts of law because
somebody had slipped them a little money, basically to make sure that the system was
functioning honestly.
Now I've stressed that the Carolingians from earliest times had very important, very close
connections with the church, perfectly true.
The ecclesiastical developments took place along several fronts.
For example, a very close connection with the papacy.
These were the great hallmarks of Carolingian history.
It was after all, Zachary, who had given Pippin his answer that indeed the situation
in Gaul warranted his being the king.
It was Pope Stephen II who visited the Frankish world in 754 and before the assembled Franks
crowned an anointed Pippin.
Charles went to Rome in 773-4 during his campaign when he ended the Lombard Kingdom.
Charles as we'll see in a few minutes was crowned emperor in Rome by a pope.
So there was always a very close bond, an institutional bond and also a very warm personal bond between
the Carolingian rulers and the popes in Rome.
