Now, these families that were now creating lineages tended to try more and more to create
compact blocks of land for themselves.
Great families in the Carolinian period were prominent landowners, yes, but they might own
land in several places all over Europe.
Now these families began to try to put their land together in single places, and the families
now begin to build a large residence on that land and then to take a name, a surname, from
the land or perhaps from the castle, which they built on this land, showing, in other
words, a certain self-consciousness of belonging to a family, of the distinction of a particular
family by taking on a specific name.
Now, it's important to say there were always several levels in the nobility.
There were the truly great at the top, the kings right at the very top and the royal
families, people who could operate on a kingdom-wide scale, only the kings and a small number
of very close associates.
Then there were families that were largely local in their power and in their influence.
Last were ordinary knights who had to struggle to find a lord, somebody who would take them
on and support them, to find a bride to establish, to be able to establish a household and establish
a family of his own, to find an office, to get someone who would grant him a public office,
to find an estate somewhere, again, these younger sons to whom I was referring a moment
ago.
The only thing with some of these younger sons is that they may come from very high
status families, but their older brother may have gotten all the status, you see, and they
were then left rather to fend for themselves.
Fundamentally, the nobility was the governing class of Europe.
The nobility was the governing class of Europe that bears repeating.
These were the people who ran the show.
Now, we can think of medieval nobles as sort of all off going to parties and having tournaments
and doing things like that, and that's true.
But essentially, these are the people who were in charge.
They monopolized office holding.
They monopolized office holding in both church and state.
We'll talk more about the church in a few minutes.
They served under kings.
They served as a bridge between, for example, royal families and other people in the kingdom.
The nobility of Europe had a specific ethos.
We call that ethos chivalry.
Now they called it something like chivalry.
So once again, we're using at least authentic medieval terms.
The word comes from the French chival for horse.
And by extension, the word is chivalry.
Now, we're inclined to think of chivalry as being an exaggerated code of conduct regulating
relations between men and women.
In part of fact, in the later lecture, we'll see where that idea of chivalry came from.
Chivalry, chivalry, in a strict sense of the term means horsiness.
It is a code of conduct appropriate to men who ride and fight on horseback.
That is what chivalry is.
Chivalry in the first place is about men, not about relations between men and women.
Now the chivalric code has a code of conduct then for a warrior aristocracy and not upset
of rules governing relations between the sexes laid stress on certain very basic qualities,
a prowess, a warrior who was not a good soldier was useless.
It didn't matter if you were a nice guy, it didn't matter if you came from a good family.
You were expected to be a great soldier, courage.
You were expected to be brave, not foolhardy, not reckless, but brave, loyal.
A chivalrous knight was expected to be loyal to his lord.
Now we can find plenty of cases in medieval literature of knights who were conspicuously
disloyal, but the ideal was loyalty.
And then finally, generous.
The truly chivalrous person is not so attached to the things of this world that he would
hoard them.
He gives them away freely.
He entertains people at table.
He gives them fine food, he gives them fine drink, he takes good care of his friends.
Now we can see this code of conduct articulated very clearly in, for example, literary works
such as The Song of Roland.
The Song of Roland, La Chanson de Hollande, written about 1100, is in some ways the great
French national epic.
It's an interesting epic for a number of reasons, not the least of which is that we
actually know the event that stands behind it.
Charlemagne in the year 778, as he was sort of rounding off the southern frontier of his
realm where there had been over a long period of time over several generations, Muslim raids
into the south of Gaul, had raided across the Pyrenees to sort of try to put a stop to
this raiding.
On the way back over the Pyrenees into what we would call France, basque terrorists in
effect stole his baggage.
