The Henry was succeeded by his sons, Richard Lionheart and John, John called by some of
his contemporaries soft sword or lackland because he wasn't a very good warrior and
he wound up lacking an awful lot of land like all of that land that belonged to his father.
But we'll have more to say about that in just a second.
The point is that John provoked foolishly a quarrel with the king of France who was actually
kind of laying in wait for him.
And as a result, the king of France went to war against John, against John's continental
possessions and swallowed up sort of at one gulp a great portion of England's continental
holdings.
Well, from one point of view that clarified the situation for England, England didn't
have this vast swath of territories in France to worry about anymore.
From another point of view, however, this actually produced a situation where the English felt
aggrieved and over much of the next several centuries would continuously feel that they
had a right to vindicate their old claims to various bits of French territory.
Through all of this, however, the basic shape of England didn't change very much.
Now it's true that in this period, the English kings began to claim overlordship in Wales
and Scotland.
But it's also true that they never exerted full authority in either of those regions
in the period that we're concerned with here today.
So in the first place then, this little kingdom of England basically held its shape despite
being attacked again and again and again and despite this rather long and curious dalliance
with France.
The situation in France itself is much easier to describe, fortunately.
The last Carolingians and after 987, their Capetian successors had controlled not much
more than the Île de France, the island of France.
The little area in the center of France focused on the city of Paris.
Now, that area is strategically situated on the Sainte-River, it's near trading areas,
it's near great religious establishments, and so it brought some advantages with it.
It did this strategic point in the Île de France.
But the Capetians were particularly gifted at governing it well and using it as a basis
to expand their authority elsewhere in France.
Now when French princes started involving themselves in English affairs, the Capetian
kings learned how to meddle in the continental holdings of those English kings.
Louis VII and Philip II of France, for example, were absolute masters at driving Henry II
of England crazy by interfering with his sons who were in service to their father, supposed
to be helping him to govern the Angioban holdings in France.
The French created all sorts of distractions for the English.
Then, as I mentioned a moment ago, King Philip II, who rules in France from 1180 until 1223,
defeated John and secured an enormous portion of France for the French monarchy.
Just a 13th century war on, the French monarchy extended its authority in the southeast by
leading or by promoting campaigns against religious heretics in that part of France
who lived in areas centering on the town of Albi.
So the point is that the eventual emergence of a French territorial state is also visible
across the period that we're talking about.
But it's important to emphasize what a complex thing France is.
The great French political leader, Charles de Gaulle, once said it's impossible to govern
a country with 325 kinds of cheese, and he was pointing simply to the enormous complexity
of this thing that is France.
Well, despite military and dynastic turmoil, the core of England was well and remarkably
consistently governed.
The conquerors didn't come to plunder and destroy, but to rule, and perhaps indeed to
profit from ruling, perhaps indeed even to rule.
Because Anglo-Saxon kings already had some very important centralizing tools at their
disposal, for example, key nobles, whom they called feigns, came to court, provided service
to the king, received appointments for the king, provided advice to the king.
Local officials, the Shire Reeves, which passed through Norm and French as sheriff, the Shire
Reeves were royal appointees, represented the kings well in the Shires of England, the
division of England into Shires took place basically in the 10th century, sort of administrative
districts.
The king could summon all three men to serve in his militia.
He didn't always summon them all, but he had the right to summon all three men.
The king could always collect some taxes in England, and during the Viking period they
extended this prerogative with Dane guilds, that literally means Dane money, taxes or
protection money, if you will, that was collected to buy off the Vikings when it was an inopportune
to fight them.
Well, once the English kings got the habit of collecting Dane guilds, occasionally they
began to collect Dane guilds regularly, and they began to collect Dane guilds even after
there weren't any Danish problems.
They simply turned it into a regular tax.
