This is what the texts of the time say.
Now, advice suit the court, that they could come to court to advise the king to serve
as the king's natural advisors, or indeed, whoever the feudal lord might be, and service.
Generally speaking, generally speaking, military service, but not always.
People provided a wide array of different kinds of service.
Now, in return for their advice and assistance, vassals were often given something of value,
called a fief, in Latin a feudum, which is where the word feudalism comes from in the
first lesson.
And a vassal was also provided sometimes with moral and legal protection by a more powerful
person.
In this way it's a patron-client system like many another that we have seen, for example
like the one that obtained among the Romans.
It's also true that feudalism played a certain role in royal governance.
We've seen all the way back to the Carolingians, that royal vassals performed important government
jobs.
John had outrageously abused his feudal prerogatives.
What does this mean?
Well, concretely, if, for example, your vassal died, and his son was a child, you had a right
to take over those lands until the son came of age, and then you invested him with him.
Well, John had a bad habit of just not investing those sons with the lands, of just keeping
the lands in his own hands.
If your vassal died and had only a daughter, you had the right to arrange a suitable marriage
for that daughter so that there would be a vassal on those lands who could perform service.
John had a habit, again, of holding those lands in his hands, and thereby manipulating
the system.
So it was a system they all understood, but John was sort of tinkering with it a bit.
So the Barons, when they forced John to sign Magna Carta, wanted him, in a sense, to play
by the rules, wanted all of them to have to play by the same rules, wanted the king to
agree that there were rules and that he was no less bound by them than anyone else.
But the objection that I have, that most historians have to talking about feudalism, is that if
we think of the several centuries of medieval history, and if we think of a geographical
range running from sort of Ireland to Moscow and running from Scandinavia to the south
of Italy, there was never a feudal system.
There was never a thing called feudalism.
The word itself is invented in the 17th century, it's not a medieval word.
There was never a system that all medieval people would have understood, and it was never
the only way that relationships between powerful men of the ruling class were regulated, nor
was it ever the only way in which governmental services were provided.
It was an element of medieval life.
That's true, but it was not medieval government.
One cannot therefore generalize it the way it sometimes has been in the past.
Now, 13th century England posed a couple of pretty great political and institutional
questions.
Fundamentally, how can political decisions be made without recourse to violence?
Donovan forced to sign the Magna Carta.
Who gets to participate in decision-making processes?
Now, it was always assumed that the king would take advice in his council, that there were
persons who would come to advise him, persons he wanted to advise him.
We talked about the Carolingians creating the appearance of consensus.
Great Barons obviously wanted to control the royal council and threw it to king.
The king, of course, wanted to stack the great council and through it managed the country.
In 1265 and then again in 1295, there were meetings in which powerful nobles plus higher
members of the clergy, plus prominent but not necessarily aristocratic local men and
some burgers from the greater towns of England, came together to talk, parlement in the then
dominant French, and they gave their name to an institution, a place where people talked
together, parliament.
The English parliament existed by the end of the 13th century, to be sure, but it had
been born accidentally.
And as an institution, it was not yet clear what its powers would be, who would attend
it, how often it would meet.
But the point had been made that there was a community of the realm, Comunitas Regni
in Latin, a group of people who imagined themselves to represent the country naturally to the
king.
Now, this is not democratic yet by any stretch of the imagination, but there is a notion
then that there is a natural group of people who advised the king.
Now, if we looked a little bit more closely at the household of the English kings, we
would have detected the extension of personal domestic responsibilities to the kingdom as
a whole.
How do you get a government?
Well, this is also true of France.
Let's just take a few examples drawn from the royal household.
There was an officer who kept the king's treasure, and initially it was a chest that was kept
in his bed chamber, perhaps the foot of his bed.
