Now, in spite of all of this turmoil, Southern Italy is an interesting region to us because
it's enormously prosperous, it's a very rich region, particularly because it has a number
of very significant port cities that engaged in far-flung trade, but it's also an area
that is, in a way, a kind of a miniaturized version of Iberia from the cultural point
of view.
Here is a place where the Latin Christian, the Muslim, and to a degree, the Jewish worlds
met and encountered one another.
So not surprisingly, Southern Italy and Sicily were culturally precocious even at a time
when they were rarely able to manage their own internal political affairs.
Moving northward in the Italian peninsula, we come to the central regions.
Now, broadly speaking, one can always say that the region focused on Rome and extending
a bit to the north and a bit to the south of Rome was the Papal States, and we can say
that the Popes dominated those Papal States.
We saw in an earlier lecture that they emerged, indeed, in the eighth century, largely with
Carolingian assistance.
But the Popes faced the problem that absent protection, absent great clients who had helped
them out, they weren't able effectively to maintain their power in central Italy consistently
over long periods of time.
Put it differently, the Papal State expanded and contracted, expanded and contracted, expanded
and contracted over long periods of time so that to talk about the Papal State is not
so much to talk about the coherent history of a single entity as it is to sort of try
to make some sense out of an entity which changed again and again and again.
The north of Italy was again dominated by outside powers.
You'll recall, perhaps, that the Carolingians had come in and put an end to Lombard control
in northern Italy.
The Lombards had been attacking Rome, the Carolingians agreed to protect the Popes,
the Carolingians put an end to the Lombards.
Carolingian authority in northern Italy lasted, though rather weakly at the end, but lasted
into the early years of the 10th century, thereafter the Carolingians were replaced
in northern Italy by the Germans.
Now, German domination in northern Italy was resisted, sometimes effectively, by various
leagues and coalitions of north Italian towns, but on the whole, this German incursion in
northern Italy and various Italian attempts, not unified attempts, but attempt by this
town, that town, the other town, a particular league of towns, to throw off German rule
produced a situation where, to put it quite simply, northern Italy did not develop a coherent
unitary political growth.
There was no sort of state here in any meaningful sense of the term.
The dominant development in Italy actually has to do with those towns.
It has to do with the emergence of the communes, which is one of the most creative of all medieval
political experiments.
Now the roots of the Italian communes, several dozen of which emerged in the years between
the 11th century and the 13th, the roots of the communes were in the rising agricultural
prosperity of the Italian countryside.
Italy was sharing in this expansion of Europe to which we referred in an earlier lecture.
The burgeoning wealth of the towns was increasingly producing a volatile political situation,
volatile in a couple of ways.
Internally, we'll come to externally, these towns were beginning to be jealous of their
own position.
They wanted to avoid the domination of the popes.
They wanted to avoid the domination of local bishops.
They wanted to avoid the domination of German introduced counts, for example.
As a result, groups of prominent laymen, groups of townsmen, began to form sworn associations
called communes, quite literally the common thing, the common affair.
The point being to find some means, to find some mechanism for the leading elements in
the town to act together to represent their common interests effectively against popes,
bishops, counts, whomever it might be.
Now these leaders called themselves the pope below, the people.
It was very important to say, and particularly important to say in this early period, these
communes were not democratic.
In fact, they were intensely volatile little creatures, with large numbers of competing
groups inside the towns wishing some share in this power.
Who were some of the players in the game?
Well, repeated and sometimes violent civil disturbances led gradually to the initial
elites, elites who often had wealth based in the countryside, which they had taken into
town, to have to start sharing power with, for example, leading members of the manufacturers,
where there were important cloth industries, for example, or glass industries, as at Venice.
Artisans, the people who made ordinary daily products, the butcher, the baker, and the
candlestick maker, if you like, the upper echelons of the workers in the towns.
In other words, all of these groups began competing for some opportunities to participate
in the commune to become, as it were, part of the pope below, of the people.
Now, ironically, these Italian towns began as communities dominated by Germans, or perhaps
by ecclesiastical lords.
Over a long period of time, they shifted power to local economic elites.
