The Italian entanglements brought some financial resources.
They could tax the North Italian cities.
It brought considerable prestige, but also these Italian entanglements were costly.
The Germans were constantly being bogged down by their Italian concerns, and perhaps then
diverted from paying attention to Germany itself.
The gravest problem, though, perhaps was the struggle with the popes, which is generally
referred to as the investiture controversy.
The controversy over lay investiture.
That means the investing of ecclesiastical offices by laymen.
Spoken differently, it means a king, a duke, a count, whomever you please, names, habits,
names, bishops, invests, religious officials with their office.
In the middle of the 11th century, the German kings or emperors ran into a reformed papacy
that had come to believe, perhaps on the basis of all of that monastic reform that we talked
about in an earlier lecture, those who pray.
They ran into a reformed papacy, which had really taken on board the idea that lay control
of lay involvement in church affairs was the chief impediment to moral reform in Europe.
They wanted an end to German imperial interference in the church.
Now, German rulers, of course, from their point of view, in the Carolingian tradition,
believed that they themselves, and not the popes, were the head of the earthly hierarchy,
a reflection of the heavenly realm.
What's the constitution of heaven?
Well, it's a monarchy, of course.
If earth is supposed to reflect heaven, earth should be a monarchy too.
Who is the monarch?
Well, it might be the pope, or it might be the German emperor.
The German emperors felt themselves divinely appointed to this task.
Suffice it to say that the battle, this investiture controversy, went on over two generations,
and finally the ecclesiastical authorities won out.
We may very well say that in a society that defined its ends and purposes in essentially
religious terms, ecclesiastical authorities were bound to win any great ideological battle
over authority.
So, my point is quite simply that that wonderfully promising Atonian system put in place in the
10th century saw, over the course of the 11th and the early 12th, each one of its key props
kicked out from under it, and as a result, Germany then began to pass into the direction
of small, disunited, ineffective, centralized control.
Now we've mentioned the Roman Church.
Let's just lay one or two words on that particular subject as well.
The Roman Church developed in the High Middle Ages, the most sophisticated legal system
in all of Europe.
We'll return to that in our next lecture.
The Curia, the central court of the Church expanded significantly.
The College of Cardinals, for example, emerged as a kind of a Senate for the Church as a
whole.
Lateran councils, the Lateran Basilica, of course, is Rome's Cathedral Church.
Lateran councils became sort of church-wide, but increasingly almost Europe-wide parliaments.
The Fourth Lateran Council in 1215, for example, exerted more influence on the lives of ordinary
people than any church council since antiquity or than any council to come until Trent in
the 16th century.
The legal and the financial machinery of the Roman Church was elaborated to collect fees
and revenues from all over Europe, to adjudicate controversies that came to the Church from
all over Europe.
The Pope's system of legates, we might say envoys, ambassadors almost, he could send
them ad hoc for a particular reason or he could make them resident in particular areas.
The papal system of legates brought more people into regular contact with ecclesiastical government
than had ever been the case before.
The Roman Church in the High Middle Ages developed highly its disciplinary mechanisms.
Excommunication, for example, now this has existed since antiquity, the exclusion of
an individual from the sacraments of the Church, a form of social death.
No one could talk to, no one could eat with, no one could have sex with an excommunicated
person.
This was a very powerful corrective measure.
The interdict was a tool that allowed the Church to deny sacramental services in a specified
region.
Now, the point here, of course, was to bend someone to the Church's will to make them
behave themselves from the Church's point of view.
But by suppressing sacramental services, people were left bereft of the ordinary kinds of
sacramental services they were accustomed to and they were to bring pressure to bear
on their rulers.
Finally, of course, the Inquisition, the famous Inquisition, a formal judicial procedure designed
to identify and correct heresy, a set of procedures that operated according to Roman
law and that was devastatingly effective in at least some parts of Europe.
Scholars speak of a papal monarchy, and certainly the Popes were now leading the Church more
fully and more effectively than ever before.
But even so, we know in retrospect that the authority of the Popes was on the verge of
severe political challenges.
The great lessons, therefore, it seems to me of medieval political development in the
high Middle Ages, is that an astonishing array of entities, which drew upon Roman, which
drew upon Christian, and which drew upon local ethnic traditions, emerged.
Rather than looking for a single ordering principle, we ought to stand gape-jawed in
respect at the immense creativity of these peoples.
Territorial states grew in some places, failed to grow elsewhere, powerful central governments
emerged in some places, failed to emerge elsewhere.
But forms of government differed a great deal, from one part of Europe to another.
In this age of expansion, governmental activity was itself expanding as well, and was no
less creative than the cultural expressions of Europe in the high Middle Ages, to which
we shall turn in our next two lectures.
