For example, between about 750 and 900, way off in Persia, Christians translated a great
portion of Aristotle as well as many of the ancient commentaries on Aristotle into Arabic.
And these then began to circulate in the Islamic world.
This led to a number of brilliant thinkers in the Islamic world, such as, for instance,
let's just have a few examples.
Ibn Sunnah lived from 980 until 1037, familiarly called Avicenna in the West.
Avicenna turned himself to old questions about the relationships between things that actually
exist in the world and things that exist only in the mind.
These were the old and great Platonic questions of antiquity, but also, of course, the great
Aristotelian questions.
Ibn Rusht, 1126 to 1198, called Averoese in the West, tried to understand the kinds
of truths that could be acquired by human reason and those that depended upon divine revelation.
Quite quite simply, is that for Islamic thinkers, as indeed for Jewish thinkers, as indeed for
Christian thinkers, Aristotle posed a bit of a problem.
Knowledge was a good thing.
Good things come by the grace of God.
Aristotle knew a great deal, but Aristotle was a pagan.
So is it possible to know many things without necessarily having to depend upon divine reason?
And how does one draw distinctions between what one knows by reason and what one knows
by divine revelation?
Now Averoese, for example, wrote more than 38 commentaries on Aristotle's writings.
Some of these were translated into Latin in Spain, and then began to circulate very widely
in Northern Europe.
Now there were also Jewish scholars who were asking fundamental questions along very much
the same lines.
Solomon ibn Ghebiro, for example, 1021 to 1070, called Avissa-Bron in the West, also
set himself the task of trying to find ways to reconcile Aristotle with the Jewish faith.
Moses ben Mimeon, 1135 to 1234, called Maimonides, rather like Averoese, tried to find ways to
reconcile the competing claims of faith and of reason.
Another Jewish scholar, Solomon ibn Isaac, 1040 to 1105, called Rashi in the West, was
one of the greatest Talmudic scholars of all time.
Now the Talmud is a commentary on the scriptural studies of the ancient rabbis who themselves
commented on the Hebrew scriptures.
There were two great versions of the Talmud that circulated.
One prepared in Babylon, one prepared in Palestine.
And these were and are very important sources of learning and of spiritual inspiration in
the Jewish world.
Well, Rashi and then his sons taught in the city of Tois in France, and sometimes they
were consulted by Christian scholars who were interested in understanding certain very complex
points in the Hebrew scriptures or in the Old Testament, as Christian scholars referred
to the Hebrew scriptures.
So the first point then is to see this enormous array of cultural context, unthinkable in the
earlier Middle Ages, and now not only thinkable, but omnipresent in the world of the High Middle
Ages.
Now a first great change in Western intellectual life in the High Middle Ages, in the scholastic
world, has to do with the elevation of logic to paramount status among the intellectual
disciplines.
You'll recall perhaps that in the Carolingian period grammar, the teaching of basic Latin
was the key discipline.
We're going to see later that in the Renaissance we'll move to rhetoric, but now logic has
its day.
Why?
Why did people begin to focus particularly on the study of the application of logic?
Well, some writers began to use logic quite effectively, quite successfully, to deal with
to understand certain controverted issues.
Let's give just a couple of examples.
Lanfrank, for example, an Italian who eventually migrated to the north, became Archbishop of
Canterbury, born in 1010, died in 1089, began by using patristic authorities and biblical
statements, and then gradually turned to the use of dialectic, to the use of logic, to
rebut the teachings of a man by the name of Beringar.
Now, Beringar had challenged the then reigning doctrine in the church that the Eucharist,
the Communion, was truly the body and blood of Christ, the doctrine of the real presence
as the Catholic Church speaks of it.
Beringar said, no, this is really just symbolic.
Now, in the past, before Lanfrank, what one would have done is quoted papal letters to
such a person, one would have quoted church counsel decrees to such a person, one would
have quoted the writings of a church father to such a person, one would have quoted passages
of scripture to such a person, one would have heaped up authorities.
Lanfrank changed and rebutted Beringar by the use of extremely precisely wrought dialectical
reasoning.
And some of Canterbury, another Italian who migrated to the north and who became Archbishop
of Canterbury after Lanfrank, born in 1033, died in 1109, probably the most gifted logician
since antiquity, certainly one of the most gifted logicians in all of human history.
