What was student life like?
Well, pretty tough in lots of ways.
Students were always technically foreigners.
They'd come from someplace else to go to the universities.
They were preyed upon by unscrupulous landlords, by in-keepers, by prostitutes, and sometimes
even by their teachers themselves.
The period of study was very long, the precise length, at least in the arts, depending somewhat
on a student's preparation.
As few as three or four years, as many as eight, to take the first degree.
These were awarded by public examination, before the faculty, and they could just fire
questions at you, instead of as today by the accumulation of credits, a very different
system.
Many evil students actually had to demonstrate that they knew something.
The university has proved to be one of the most flexible and durable of all Western institutions.
This really is quite an important legacy of the Middle Ages to the modern world.
Now, to get a sharper sense of the Latin learning in the Age of Scholasticism, let's use some
examples that we'll perhaps bring this forward in a more concrete way.
Let's mention, for example, Thomas Aquinas, and we referred to him a moment ago for his
Sumas.
Born again, 1225, died in 1274.
He was born in a small town south of Rome, and sent it about the age of five to Montecassino,
Benedict's great monastery, where his noble father expected him one day to become the
abbot.
But in 1240, Thomas was sent off to Naples to study arts.
While he was there, he was attracted by the intellectual apostolate of the Dominicans.
Remember one of those new mendicant orders we spoke of in an earlier lecture?
His parents strongly opposed this, but nevertheless, in 1244, Thomas joined the Dominican Order.
In 1245, he went to Paris.
He studied there for about three years, and then he came under the influence of Albert
the Great and of the newly emerging texts of Aristotle.
Albert then transported himself to Cologne, and Thomas went with him, stayed there for
a few years.
In 1252, he came back to Paris.
He taught there until 1259.
He then departed partly on the business of his order, the Dominicans, and partly for
other academic responsibilities to Italy.
He stayed there until 1269, when he returned to Paris, and taught until 1274, when he died
at the relatively young age of 49.
This was a prolific writer, first of all, to stand in the library in front of the collected
works of Thomas Aquinas is to be humbled.
He made contributions to many of the great philosophical and theological problems of
his days.
His ideas were formed by his travels.
They were formed by his experience in several schools.
They were formed by the burgeoning contemporary interest at Aristotle, as well as in the
Arab and Jewish commentators on Aristotle.
They were formed by the practical needs of teaching, and they were formed by the increasing
dominance of logic in the schools.
Central to Thomas's thought was the problem of the relation between faith and reason.
On the one hand, Thomas explored the respective roles of the will and of the intellect.
Faith, for example, is a matter of the will.
In consciously granting a scent to something, I do not commit an act that is contrary to
reason.
Nevertheless, I may agree to something that is not demonstrable by reason.
On the other hand, Thomas spoke of natural and revealed truths.
Many things can be known by the unaided use of human reason.
Two and two is four.
Some religious things can be known by reason, too.
Thomas thought, for instance, I can't tell, the existence of God.
But there are some things that can only be known by faith, that can only be known by
revelation.
The Trinity, for example, the doctrine of the Trinity is not something to which reason
will bring you.
The doctrine of the Incarnation, God made man, is not something that reason will bring
you to.
Or, in a much more Aristotelian vein, creation out of nothing.
Thomas's systematic exposition of Catholic teaching was always influential to a degree.
But in the 19th century, it was made the basis for official Catholic teaching, official Catholic
theology, and given the name Thomism, and it held that position until the Second Vatican
Council between 1962 and 1965.
Thomas's career then illustrates for us in a number of ways some of the fundamental cross-currents
of this age.
Yes, this is an urbanized world.
It is a world of great wealth.
It is a world of vast resources.
It is a world where ideas are circulating more widely than ever before.
It is a world where Latin learning is still dominant.
It is still regnant, though as we'll see in our next lecture, it's beginning to be
challenged by vernacular learning.
It's a world where a series of great intellectual traditions are encountering one another seriously
and for the first time.
The scholastic culture of high medieval Europe is one, only one, but one of that remarkable
periods, most important achievements and legacies to the tradition of Western civilization.
