Now, of Irish material, other form of Celtic material, there is an abundance.
It comes in profusion, it comes in long and short poems, it comes in the lives of saints,
it comes in law codes, it comes in fantasies.
It is almost impossible to capture the full sense of this Irish material.
Here is a short little poem from the 9th century that gives us a wonderful sense, I think,
of the Irish feel for nature.
I have news for you, the stag bell winter snows summer has gone.
Wind high and cold, the sun low, short its course, the sea running high.
Deep red, the bracken, its shape is lost, the wild goose, goose has raised its accustomed cry.
Cold has seized the bird's wings, season of ice.
This is my news.
Now, Anglo-Saxon England produced a substantial corpus of poetry, but also sermon literature
and histories and laws and documents, indeed, matters of all different kinds.
The most famous Anglo-Saxon works, one of the famous works from the early Middle Ages,
generally, of course, is the poem Beowulf, composed probably around the year 900.
Yet for the immediacy, simplicity, and vigor of the Saxon world, we might turn to a 7th
century poem, a short little poem, Cadman's hymn.
Now this is written in Old English, in Anglo-Saxon.
What does that sound like?
Nu shulon heria, hefer ritchus wair, mixte dismocte, disbode ye thunk?
Well, in our English, now we must praise the guardian of heaven, the might of the Lord
in his purpose of mind.
The work of the glorious Father, for he got eternal, established each wonder.
He holy creator, first fashioned heaven, as a roof for the sons of men.
Then the guardian of mankind adorned this Middle Earth below, the world for men, everlasting
Lord, Almighty King.
Now the German-speaking lands produced, once again, a large amount of poetry, but also
chronicles, legal materials, and so on.
By the 13th century, German could produce a masterpiece, such as the Nibelungen lead,
a romantic retelling of the myths about the origins of the Germanic peoples.
Among other interesting things about this poem, we actually encounter in it some real
people, such as Attila the Hun and the great Ostrogothic King Theodoric.
But we can go back a little before the Nibelungen lead, to the murders of the Minisanger.
Now the Minisanger were German-style troubadours, love singers, is what the name means, who
wrote love poems influenced by the current fashions in French poetry at that time.
We'll turn to the French in a few minutes.
We can go back to the 9th century to glimpse the origins in Saxony of Germanic literary
creation.
Someone, we don't know who, created a powerful German retelling of the life of Christ, a
sort of a blending of the four gospels.
The poem is called the Halion, which means the Saviour.
Now here we can really see the blending of a Christian culture and a Germanic ethnic culture
at the same time.
Jerusalem becomes a hill fort.
Christ turns into the leader of a war band made up of his apostles.
The details of this poetry, in other words, are those of the Nordic North, and not of
the Mediterranean.
As for the Slavic world, the earliest materials committed to writing in Slavic languages date
from the 9th and 10th centuries, and they're connected with the 9th century missions of
St. Cyril in Methodius, to the region that we know of as Bohemia.
Initially, Christian texts were translated into Slavic languages, and then slowly but
surely original works were actually composed in Slavic.
Scandinavia produced its vernacular literature in two waves and in two different kinds.
First, there are narratives of the settlement of Iceland, beginning late in the 9th century
considerable numbers of Scandinavians, largely Norwegians at first and then others, began
settling Iceland.
So the earliest Scandinavian literature are accounts of the settlement of Iceland and
then also the law books written for the people who went there.
Then in the 12th and 13th century we begin to have the sagas, that means the things said.
We're treated in wonderfully artful blends of fact and fantasy.
The early history of the settlements, sort of historical sagas, and the great families,
the great heroes, the great figures from the past, dynastic or family sagas who were responsible
for that early settlement of Iceland.
The largest outpouring by far of vernacular material came from France, beginning in the
12th century.
Now the oldest single work is the anonymous song of Roland.
Now this poem was assembled in its present form about 1100.
You may recall we mentioned it in connection with chivalry.
Only there is oral material that goes back a long time before this.
