Now, where courtly love is concerned, nobody argues about the first definition, that it's
the poetry of court, about the second definition, that it bears some relationship to courtly
love as a series of love conventions.
On this, scholars argue hotly.
Some say it's actually a modern invention that's sort of been imposed on the Middle
Ages.
Others say, no, it's there in the Middle Ages, and we're to take it seriously, or, well,
it's there in the Middle Ages, but we are to take it as ironic.
Well, I leave you simply with the notion that there are controversies over how we are to
understand courtly love.
But that there was distinguished love poetry is not a point on which there is any dispute.
The greatest vernacular writer of the Middle Ages, one of the greatest of all Western
writers was Dante Alegieri, 1265 to 1321.
No lesson authority than T. S. Eliot once said that Dante and Shakespeare defied the
world between them.
There is no third.
He's best known, of course, for his comedia.
But this was his last work, and he wrote many others along the course of his life.
His Vita Nuova, 1290 to 94, is a series of 31 love poems woven together by a prose narrative.
Again, an ancient form mixing poetry and prose in a single work.
Anyway, it's a narrative woven together that treats love allegorically as the force that
brought Dante spiritual salvation.
His book The De vulgaria eloquencia is a learned book in Latin that explores the suitability
of the vernacular as a vehicle for poetic composition.
It's a very early and masterful essay in literary theory.
The De monarchia is a Latin treatise on the struggles between the popes and the emperors
—the emperor's side, by the way— that upholds the independence and the legitimacy
of the medieval empire against the popes and against the church.
But we come to the comedia, called in English the divine comedy.
Divine not because it's heavenly in a literal sense, but heavenly in a figurative sense.
It is a masterpiece.
Now, its greatness cannot be taken for granted, and in some respects even, is a little difficult
to understand.
This is a very long poem, 14,000 lines.
It's arranged into a hundred canti.
We say cantoes in English, a canto is a song, or canto in Italian.
Its structure is difficult.
It is tazzarima.
Now, this is a rhyme scheme that works like this, a, b, a, b, c, b, c, d, c.
You notice the rhymes on the third verse each time.
This is difficult to achieve in a long poem like this in English, and very hard to render
in English translation.
There have been English translators who have attempted the tazzarima with more or less
success, but it's tough.
Now the poem deals with numerous of Dante's contemporaries.
These again are figures with whom we are mostly not familiar today.
It deals with elaborate issues then current in legal, in illegal circles, elaborate issues
then current in politics, elaborate issues then current in theology.
Dante was, in his way, a scholastic.
The poem then, in a way, is much like Milton's Paradise Lost later on.
It's full of literary allusions that can allude almost any reader or listener if you're
hearing the poem.
Essentially, at bottom, to the degree that one can do violence to something like this
by generalizing about it, the poem is a tale of a journey.
The travelers are Dante himself, the reader or the hearer, all the figures mentioned in
the poem, all the cultural artifacts and phenomena alluded to in the poem, and finally, in truth,
the whole human race.
It is a universalizing tale.
It's an exploration of morality and religion.
We begin in the inferno.
We begin in hell.
We begin with the punishment of those who have failed.
It's an exploration of religion.
It's an exploration of morality and religion and the roles they play in the forming of
the human character.
In the failure of individual humans to rise to the challenge of humanity's possible greatness,
there is in Dante always an optimism.
He shows us people again and again who failed, but there is still in him something optimistic.
There is hope.
Hope does not vanish, even though, as we enter the mouth of hell, we are told to abandon
hope, all you who enter here.
That is ironic.
Finally, the poem returns to themes opened up in the Vita Nuova.
Love becomes the central metaphor in the poem.
Now the reference of the metaphor are the love that humans feel or fail to feel for
each other.
