Inside the Islamic world, there were two forces, at least that bear some emphasis here.
On the one hand, and we've referred to this in an earlier lecture,
the caliphate was beginning to crack apart.
It was beginning to break down into smaller parts.
These parts were often contesting with one another, authority over one zone or another.
But on the other hand, this created opportunity to sort of fish in troubled waters.
But it was also the case that in the 11th century, the whole Islamic world
was faced with a new threat, a new challenge from the outside.
And these were the Seljuk Turks.
People who came in from Central Asia marched into the eastern frontiers of the caliphate
and began then causing grave difficulties.
Indeed, they defeated that Byzantine army, as we mentioned just a moment ago,
but also they produced problems for local Muslim authorities.
Moreover, and finally, these Turks were particularly hostile to Christian pilgrims
traveling to the Holy Land.
And as a result, stories began to circulate about pilgrims, individuals,
and groups who had been abused on their trips to Jerusalem.
Now, we might also point to the fact that Europe had already seen
Muslim Christian violence, particularly in Spain,
to a degree in southern Italy and Sicily as well, but particularly in Spain,
during the course of that phenomenon that we call the Re Conquista.
We've also talked about how in this expanding Europe,
commerce had brought renewed contacts across the Mediterranean world.
What this means in certain respects is that people in Western Europe
knew more than they had known previously of the Islamic world,
of its political possibilities, of its economic possibilities,
of its divisions, of its differences, of its problems.
Knowledge does not necessarily generate action, but it can.
Chivalry, the Chivalric ideal, fired the ideal of the Christian knight,
the knight who struggled against God's enemies.
Rather than fighting other Christians, he went off to struggle against God's enemies.
And we have seen how, in a chivalrous society,
there was made available, with the increasing development of lineages,
primogeniture and all of that,
there was made available large numbers of younger sons,
trained to the warrior class, to be sure,
and now available to go off to the frontiers in Spain to fight there,
and eventually to go off to try to liberate the Holy Land.
Well, in 1095, Pope Urban II traveled in France at Clermont.
He gave a very famous speech.
He said it was God's will that Christian soldiers from the west would march to the east
and liberate the Holy Land from the grips of God's enemies, the infidel, the Muslim.
This army then assembled and marched across southern Europe
and marched across the Balkans and marched into the Byzantine Empire,
much to the distress and surprise of the Byzantine Emperor,
who thought he was getting mercenaries to help him seize Anatolia back from Muslims,
and instead he's got an army of armed pilgrims off to liberate Jerusalem from the infidel.
Well, this movement was sustained for some two centuries,
as ordinary soldiers and great nobles, the vast majority of them all the way along French.
There was royal participation in the Second Crusade,
there was royal participation in the Third Crusade,
but essentially this was an aristocratic phenomenon,
though all the levels of the aristocracy present in it.
Mostly, as I said, and I'll repeat, the Crusades were a French phenomenon.
Eventually, they wore out for a lot of reasons.
People weren't more inclined to stay home, political circumstances settled.
There was some fear, some hesitation, some reservations
about whether the Crusades could in the long run be successful
in sort of putting outposts in the Islamic world.
We may say certainly, and this has been the case in retrospect,
that the Crusades poisoned relations across that Mediterranean world,
where ever since the heirs of the Roman Empire set up shop,
there was the possibility of volatility,
but now that possibility was translated into a certainty.
For our purposes, however, the novelty in the heretical movement
and in the crusading movement, the novelty of drawing a parallel between them,
is that this represents the first instances in European history
of the mobilization of vast numbers of lay people.
Now, to take one step back from that, I think you would agree with me perhaps
that the various manifestations of lay culture in high medieval Europe
reveal the same kinds of growing complexity and sophistication
that we saw in the scholastic culture of high medieval Europe
and that we saw in the flourishing political culture of high medieval Europe
and that we saw in the expanding economic material realms of life in high medieval Europe.
This was in many ways a creative and dynamic period
to be succeeded by one that we call the Renaissance.
No less complex and dynamic, no less interesting,
and no less worthy of our attention as we reflect on Western civilization.
Thank you.
