The south was hotly contested after the failure of German interest in southern Italy by French
princes, and then French interests in southern Italy were contested by Aragonese, Spanish
we might say, but by Aragonese princes.
Now nobody, I think we could probably say, really effectively, thoroughly controlled
southern Italy, but the realm continued to be impacted by outsiders.
Southern development is riddled with paradoxes.
The Golden Bull of 1356, for example, might have created a stable, sort of, we might say
federal regime among the various conflicting and competing parties in Germany, and indeed
a regime which had got itself out from under the thumb of the popes who always claimed that
they had a right to name the German emperors.
But instead what the Golden Bull really did was create a kind of a stable framework for
the continuing fragmentation of Germany.
You know, if we think back to that Atonian kingdom that was the most powerful in 10th
century Europe, and fast forward to the 17th century, when there were something more than
300 independent political entities of one kind or another existing in the German lands, we
have some sense of the degree of fragmentation in Germany.
Now the individual German regions were often prosperous, they were often peaceful, they
were often well-governed.
There were lots of miniature Germanes, but there was no Germany.
There was no single German state, there was no effective central government.
Yes, there were holy Roman emperors right through this period, and yes, some of them
exerted a lot of influence in the German lands, and yes, some of them were able to exert
virtually no influence.
But a German state, per se, did not coalesce.
Along Europe's Eastern frontier, there were three major developments, though we can point
to, Lithuania and Poland, for example, coalesced into a powerful stable kingdom on the shore
of the Baltic, and this would be, right on into the 18th and very early 19th century,
a considerable player in European politics.
The Russians, centered on the Grand Duchy of Moscow, finally in the 14th century, overthrew
the Mongols, actually by the early 15th century, they began the process in the 14th, by the
15th century, they were able to throw off Mongol authority, and then they began to unite
a huge swathe of lands that would become the Russian Empire.
Those very Mongols, who in the 13th century had put an end to the state of Kiev and Rus',
the earliest state on Russian soil.
In 1453, come to our third development in the East, the Ottoman Turks captured Constantinople.
Finally the East Roman, the Byzantine Empire, fell.
After trials and tribulations aplenty during its thousand year course, this empire now
fell.
Well, it fell to the Turks, who were then able to consolidate a dominant position in the
Eastern Mediterranean region, and of course the Turks would hold that position until,
as the sick man of Europe, they were finally put to a decent death after the First World
War in the 20th century.
The first faint stirrings of the modern state system are there in the 15th century.
Atheistical affairs can be summarized a bit more briefly.
In the year 1305, a Frenchman by the name of Clement V, a Frenchman was elected Pope,
and took the name Clement V.
In the hope that he might be able to settle some long running disputes with the King of
France.
Now, in the last years of the 13th century, there had been some really intense disputes
between the Kings of France and the Pope, between King Philip IV of France and Pope
Boniface VIII, turning fundamentally on two questions.
Could the King of France tax the clergy?
Could the King of France haul members of the clergy into his courts of law to answer
for what was perceived as criminal conduct, or in one case treasonous conduct?
The Church, of course, said no, can't tax the Church, can't mess with the clergy.
The King said, I am sovereign in my realm.
I cannot tolerate competing jurisdictions.
Well, when Pope Boniface VIII died and King Philip IV was still on the throne, the Cardinals
thought, if we elect a Frenchman.
And if that Frenchman settles temporarily on papal property in the south of France near
the city of Avignon, then perhaps he will be able to compose his problems with the King
of France.
Well, much, I think, to everyone's surprise, the Popes wound up staying at Avignon until
1378.
