He said, where was the painter's art, until Giotto restored it, a caricature of the art
of human delineation?
Sculpture and architecture for long years, sunk to the mere travesty of art, are only
today in the process of rescue from obscurity.
Only now are they being brought to a new pitch of perfection by men of genius and erudition.
Of letters and liberal studies it would be better to be silent altogether, for these
the real guides to distinction in all the arts, the solid foundation of all civilization
have been lost to mankind for eight hundred years and more.
It is but in our own day that men dare to boast that they see the dawn of better things.
For example, we owe it to our Leonardo Bruni that Latin, so long a byword for its uncoothness,
has begun to shine forth in its ancient purity, its beauty, its majestic rhythm.
Now indeed may every thoughtful spirit thank God that it has been permitted to him to be
born in this new age, so full of hope and promise, which already rejoices in a greater
array of nobly gifted souls than the world has seen in the thousand years that have preceded
it.
That way up in the north, and a little bit later in France, the great writer Francois
Rabelet agreed, out of the thick gothic night, he says, our eyes were awakened to the glorious
light of the sun.
Now what I would suggest, at least as a preliminary observation, and we'll test this from one
or another point of view as we move along, is that these views tell us a very great deal
indeed about the men who held them.
But they don't necessarily tell us much at all about history.
There is no reason why we need to take these people as having offered us the complete and
unvarnished truth about that period of darkness, that period of gloom that had preceded them.
They clearly thought of themselves as embarked on something new, on something original, on
something important, on something creative.
Note again, in this new age, this dawning age, they used this language.
So they clearly had a very sharp sense that there was something different.
Our job is to understand how different was it, why did they talk that way, and how do
we understand this period that we call the Renaissance.
Now one way in is to follow the great art historian Erwin Panofsky.
Panofsky wrote a book, well, he actually wrote a very long essay, which was then published
as a short book, called Renaissance and Renaissance in Western Art.
But he was talking particularly about art, and he acknowledged the fact that really from
late antiquity down to the 14th century, there had been a number of moments, the Carolingian
period, Ahtoni in Germany, for example, 12th century France, for example, there had been
a number of periods when there had been truly distinguished achievements in art, yes, but
in the arts more generally.
But Panofsky thought that what happened in the late Middle Ages was different from and
superior to those earlier movements.
So he wished to reserve the word renaissance for them, for these earlier movements, and
renaissance for the phenomenon in the late Middle Ages.
Now we could say, gee, that's just a semantic game.
But Panofsky was trying to make a very serious point.
What was it that was different?
Above all else, Panofsky said, it was in the 14th and 15th centuries that people looked
back as from a fixed point in time to quote him.
Now, when I quoted Alquent a few minutes ago about this new Rome in Francia, when I quoted
Bernard of Schartz about being dwarves on the shoulders of giants, I emphasized the
sense of continuity, the sense of continuity that medieval people felt.
So Panofsky's point and thinking again of the quotations from Matthew Palmieri and
François Rabbalet, Panofsky's point is that in the renaissance, people did start to feel
that they were different.
Now you see, very importantly, this doesn't mean they were different, but they certainly
started to think of themselves as different.
That's Panofsky's point.
So that's one marker that we can attach to this period.
This was a time when people genuinely, at least some of them, certainly some of the
cultured elites thought of themselves as different.
Now what's in a word?
We customarily use the word renaissance.
That's a French word, renaissance.
Comes from the French verb renaître, to be reborn.
But even though the French form renaissance has become customary in English, the term
itself in any language first appeared in the 16th century.
Re-na-chita.
And it was used by Giorgio Vasari in his history of painting, in his history of painting.
Now there's any number of interesting and ironic things about the way that Vasari used
the term.
He began, for example, in the 13th century with figures like Giotto and Chimabue in Duccio,
painters that art historians would not now call renaissance painters.
