After securing his sort of early education, he went on and studied law, studied for about
seven years, but subsequently claimed that this was a wasted period of his life.
He said, I could not face basic making a merchandise of my mind.
Now, I would take as a professor some grim satisfaction in imagining that carved over
the front doors of law schools, except for the fact, of course, that I'd be a little
guilty of hypocrisy.
Wouldn't I?
Anyway.
In 1327, he caught sight of a woman named Laura, the mysterious woman who inspired
366 poems, were we Freudians?
I'm sure we could go to work on that.
These poems were written in an absolutely exquisite Italian.
Dante and Patriarch, between them, really create literary Italian.
In 1341, he was named Port Laureate in Rome.
It was his Italian poetry that had, in the first place, won him wide renown, won him
wide praise.
The death of his brother, with whom he was close, he wrote his secret book, which was
the most profound work of introspection in the Western tradition since Augustine's confessions
early in the fifth century.
The book is, interestingly, cast as a dialogue between Patriarch and Augustine.
And in the course of the dialogue between these two great figures, Augustine exposes
all of the flaws in Patriarch's character.
He holds himself up to quite rigorous scrutiny.
Now, after the plague, Patriarch returned to Florence, though in about 1353 he went
to Milan and did a little bit of work there for the Sforza family.
Patriarch's achievements went across a wide array of fronts.
He found, for example, lost works of Cicero, works that had not really been known or circulated
for a very long time.
He got Homer translated into Latin.
He realized at this early stage of the Renaissance that relatively few people, including himself,
actually would know very much Greek, but he wanted people to be able to read Homer.
So he got Homer translated into Latin.
He died with an unfinished life of Julius Caesar on his desk.
He was friends with many of the great intellectual figures of the day.
I mentioned, for example, his great friend of Boccaccio's.
They admired him for his interest in classical literature, just as larger publics admired
him for his gorgeous Latin, excuse me, Italian poetry.
His attitude towards books, I think, is charming and also, in many ways, revealing of his character.
Here's what he said about books.
Books are welcome assiduous companions, always ready to appear in public or to go back in
their box at your command, always disposed to speak or be silent, to stay at home or
to make a visit to the woods, to travel or to abide in the country, to gossip, to joke,
to encourage you, comfort you, advise you, reprove you and take care of you, to teach
you the world's secrets, the records of great deeds, the rules of life, the scorn of death,
moderation in good fortune, fortitude and ill, calmness and constancy and behavior.
These are learned, happy, useful and ready-spoken companions who will never bring you tegem,
expense, lamentations, jealous murmurs or deception.
How many of us would, standing before our bookshelf, look at our books and speak in
that way of what we see before us?
He once said this of himself, what am I, a scholar?
No, hardly that, a lover of woodlands, a solitary, in the habit of uttering disjointed words
in the shadow of a beech tree, used to scribbling presumptuously under an immature, laurel tree,
fervent in toil, but not happy with the results.
A lover of letters, but not fully versed in them, an adherent of no sect, but very eager
for truth, and because I am a clumsy searcher often out of self-distrust, I flee error and
fall into doubt, which I hold in lieu of truth, thus I have finally joined that humble band
that knows nothing, holds nothing certain, doubts everything, outside of the things that
it is sacrilege to doubt.
