Lorenzo, of course, was sustaining the Florentine achievements of recent decades.
He was promoting what we could call what we've been calling civic humanism in all its respects.
But through his princely patronage, we can say that he was, in a way, inaugurating the
courtly phase of the Renaissance.
So that brings us to our third period.
Let's look at some examples of individuals from this period who also reveal then this
third phase of the Renaissance and, more broadly, the Renaissance movement.
We might begin with Enneas sulvia sulvio piccolomini.
He was born in 1405.
He died in 1464.
He eventually Latinized his name to Enneas sulvious, from Enneas sulvio, which was a
very common phenomenon in Renaissance times.
He himself was a Tuscan, the son of an impoverished country nobleman, didn't come from a distinguished
background.
He went off to Siena to study law, but was soon attracted back to Florence to classical
studies.
He went off to the Council of Basel, one of those councils called for in the conciliar
epic that we spoke of in an earlier lecture.
He went off to Basel in the entourage of a cardinal.
Now, this was a typical career path for a young, ambitious, but not wealthy young man.
If you could attach yourself to the household of some very important person, you would,
well, of course, secure your living for a little while, but also you'd make contact,
you'd make connections, and perhaps open some possibilities for yourself.
Well, after the Council of Basel, Enneas sulvio spent about 20 years wandering all over Europe.
Now he wrote poetry.
He wrote scurrilous tales.
He wrote satires, but he also wrote learned treatises on education and histories.
Again, we see this combination of popular writings in the vernacular and then learned
writings in Latin.
Now, after this period of time sort of wandering around Europe, he returned to Rome in 1445.
In 1447, he took holy orders.
He was ordained a priest.
1448, now this guy's rising fast.
He was consecrated a bishop.
He became a cardinal in 1456, and in 1458, he was elected Pope.
Pope Pius II, a rather meteoric career.
Now, of himself, he told a little Renaissance joke.
Now, I'll tell you the joke, and you won't laugh, because it actually isn't very funny
now.
You had to be there.
He said of himself, I neam reikite pium sushtipite.
Well, what's that mean right off the bat?
He says, I cast aside Enneas, and I took up Pius.
Well, do you remember all those lectures back when we talked about Virgil's Ennead, and
we talked about Pius Enneas?
So here we have Enneas Silvius casting aside his Enneas and taking up Pius.
In other words, it's an obvious direct play on Virgil.
Well, he gave up his sort of wild and randy younger life for a life of sober living, for
a life of industry, for a life of scholarship.
He said of himself, my spirit is an inquiring one.
He spent much of his papal career, however, trying to launch a crusade.
He failed, and he wrote a comprehensive refutation of the Quran.
So we find in him a figure who is at once a medieval figure and a Renaissance figure,
showing again how hard it is to draw sharp lines.
Let's talk about Leonardo da Vinci, 1452 to 1519.
Now, he was the illegitimate son of a lawyer and a servant.
He was apprenticed at about the age of 14 to an accomplished artist, Verocchio, his
name.
He stayed with him for about six years or so, before going on to owe some nine or ten years
of study and early work in Florence.
Leonardo was quite an interesting figure in lots of ways.
He was handsome.
He was versatile.
He was graceful.
He was a fine singer.
And he seems to have been interested in everything, but he didn't have, for instance, the kind
of humanist education that many of his contemporaries did.
His Latin was imperfect, for example, and he had no Greek at all.
In 1482, he went to Milan to work as a military engineer for the Sforza family.
Now, while he was there, just think of the range of things that he did.
He painted portraits.
He designed stage sets and costumes.
He drew maps.
He proposed irrigation plans for a portion of the Po Valley, and he installed a heating
system in the Sforza Palace.
But beyond this, he drew more than 5,000 sketches, which survived today in his notebooks.
Many of them written, of course, in mirror image.
Some of them written in a kind of a code.
Quite remarkable drawings.
