Lecture 43, The Northern Renaissance
Welcome once again to our series of lectures on the foundations of Western civilization.
This time, lecture number 43.
In this lecture, we're going to look at the Northern Renaissance, as it's often called.
Basically, we'll be asking ourselves questions about why the Renaissance traveled to Northern
Europe and with what consequences.
Now, there's at least two fundamental reasons for exploring the Northern Renaissance.
First of all, it's a matter of considerable interest to see what happened to the Renaissance
but across the Alps.
It moved into a different cultural, a different political, a different social environment.
So what happened there?
The second place, however, the Northern Renaissance is, for reasons that will become clear very
shortly here, crucial background, crucial intellectual background to the religious reformations
of the 16th century.
Now those are the subjects to which we will address the next several lectures.
So in a certain sense, this lecture is a kind of a bridge on the one hand.
One end of that bridge, I should say, perhaps is built in the Italian Renaissance.
The other end of that bridge is built in the reformations of the 16th century.
But for the moment, let's concentrate then on what is traditionally called the Northern
Renaissance.
Now, the so-called new learning, generally speaking, these intellectual phenomena that
we have referred to in the last couple of lectures were broadly speaking widely across
Europe called the new learning.
Now the new learning struck deep roots in the north of Europe.
But when it did so, it looked rather different from its Italian manifestations.
Why?
Well, you might notice that the lay culture was different in the north.
It was less urban.
It was less literate.
It was less affluent.
It's important to see too that in northern Europe the church was considerably more influential
in intellectual life and the scholastic tradition was more deeply rooted and persistent than
was ever the case in Italy.
So it's not surprising that we would find that the new learning had somewhat different
resonances in the north than in Italy.
In the north it's customary to speak of Christian humanism.
Now, Christian humanism is a movement which had much in common with Italian humanism, but
there were also some interesting and important differences.
For instance, as in Italy, the clarion cry was ad fontes to the sources, back to the
sources, back to the original sources.
But whereas in Italy those sources were more likely to be the Greek and Latin classics,
in northern Europe those sources were more likely to be the Bible and the church fathers.
So the study of languages, the careful collection of texts, the close analysis of documents
and so on, common to both places, but they addressed themselves to slightly different
bodies of material.
Northern or Christian humanists shared the Italians' conviction that reading and study
were paths to improvement, the sorts of things that we attached to Guarino of Verona in our
last lecture, that one could somehow become more like the persons that one read or read
about.
Now this was something that the two movements, broadly speaking, had in common, though of
course the one pursuing biblical and patristic exemplars, the other classical one.
There was a psychological parallel, I think it's fair to say, between north and south.
Then was a flawed creature, but perfectible by effort.
By struggling, by working, by studying, by learning, man could improve himself.
Now we'll have occasion to hint at in this lecture and pick up in more detail in the
next couple of lectures the important point that Catholics and Protestants would eventually
divide on that point on the degree to which people could improve themselves.
