What is different now is the penetrating scholarship that is being applied, not obviously
the project of understanding the Bible itself.
He brought out in stages over a period of years a French translation of the whole Bible.
Now in 1521, some of his teachings were actually condemned by the Sorbonne, and he fled for
a while to Strasbourg.
It was not so terribly difficult actually in those days to run afoul of ecclesiastical
authorities because of one's teachings.
Now later, the Protestant reformers claimed him as one of their own, but he never accepted
their central doctrines.
He never himself abandoned the Catholic Church.
So the new learning did not lead him, did not lead him to new forms of religious experience
as indeed would be the case with some of the thinkers who we'll encounter in the next
couple of lectures.
Let's cross the channel and go to England.
Don Collett.
Collett was born in 1466.
He died in 1519.
He came from a wealthy London family.
He received a fairly traditional education at Oxford, unless he's much like Jacques Lefebvre.
What was rather unusual in his day for having spent a period of time in Italy, and indeed
in Florence.
And not unlike Jacques Lefebvre, he was in Florence just at the time when Pico della
Merandola and Marsilio Ficino, the great Platonists, were teaching there.
Now, there's a number of interesting things going on here.
Collett is one of a new generation in the North who know Greek as well as Latin.
Latin learning, of course, had been common for a long, long time.
Greek learning was comparatively rare.
We've also had occasion to see that the scholastic tradition of the North was deeply rooted in
the philosophy of Aristotle, and more particularly the logic of Aristotle.
Now we're beginning to see a Platonic turn.
People are beginning to turn to Plato.
And of course, this can imply many, many things.
But among others, it's going to imply that the world as we see it around us may be deceptive,
may not reveal all its secrets to our immediate sense perception.
There may be more here than meets the eye, to put it most simply.
In 1496 to 1504, he lectured on St. Paul's Epistles in Oxford, and he began applying to
the text of Paul's Epistles, the kind of textual, critical, and philosophical tools of the humanists.
In the process, he cultivated a very deep dislike for medieval scholasticism.
This was something which he shared with a number of his contemporaries.
And now instead of working within the scholastic mode, within the dialectical mode, solving
problems by the application of logic, no, now what will happen with writers, thinkers
like John Collett, is one will work in a more scholarly mode.
That is to say, collect, understand languages, understand history, understand philosophical
backgrounds, understand literary conventions.
So the learning and program of the Italian Renaissance again, typically there applied
to the literary monuments of antiquity now being applied by John Collett, for example,
to St. Paul's Epistles.
In 1505, he founded St. Paul's School in London, which quickly became a very important
and influential school.
It remains to this day a very, very good school in the city of London.
Now, Collett was not only a devotee of the new learning, he was also, and he shared this
with a number of his contemporaries, deeply and bitterly critical of the abuses and the
corruption of the church in his time.
He spoke out on a wide variety of issues.
He made churchmen uneasy, though they never threw him overboard, nor was he tempted to
jump.
But the point is that a considerable amount of his scholarly work led him also to criticize
the behavior of the conduct, the practices of the church in his time.
Now, having discussed an English figure like John Collett, we might turn to others, for
example, his friends, Thomas More and Desiderius Erasmus.
Let's, in the first place, talk a little about Thomas More.
