Now, his early and very serious work was on the Greek text of the New Testament.
Now, he worked on this in a couple of different ways.
First of all, he prepared a new Latin translation.
The Latin translation that had been almost universally used since antiquity was the Vulgate
translation.
Remember the Vulgate translation prepared by one of the Church Fathers by Saint Jerome
on the commission of Pope Damasus?
Well, it was recognized by some scholars over time that there were some problems with
Jerome's translation, but now Erasmus really sets himself the task of going back, starting
with the Greek text and executing a new Latin text.
But then he took another step.
He prepared and published in 1516 a Greek edition of the New Testament.
For the first time, for the first time, a critical edition of the Greek text of the
New Testament.
Now, this actually earned him some suspicion from the ecclesiastical authorities.
They had been perfectly happy to stick with the Vulgate text.
They weren't too happy about new Latin translations, and they weren't real happy about getting
back to this Greek original.
Just like those who had opposed the teaching of Hebrew, there are also people who opposed
going back to the original Greek text.
Now, like Jacques Lefebvre de Taube, he wished to make the Church Fathers more widely known,
and he also worked to prepare editions of a number of the key Church Fathers.
He edited works of Jerome.
He edited works of Ambrose.
He edited works of John Chrysostom, among others.
So like Lefebvre, he also is very much interested in getting critical texts of the writings
of the Church Fathers and then disseminating these more widely as it became possible to
do so.
How did it become possible to do so?
Let's pick up a point we made in an earlier lecture, the printing press.
Printing with movable block type, we associate with the House of Gutenberg, Johann Gutenberg,
in Germany, 1453, 1454, perhaps when the Gutenberg Bibles are first printed and disseminated.
But by the time that, for example, a figure like Erasmus is at the full flush of his career,
there's a number of printing houses, and indeed, there is a very important printing
house in the Netherlands.
And through that printing house, a number of Erasmus's works were issued.
Now early printed books weren't cheap, but they were cheaper than manuscripts.
You could make a lot more copies of them, and ideas could circulate much more rapidly.
Now Erasmus's humanist leanings are very clear in his ad-dages.
This is a book he published in 1503, though it went through a series of editions of new
editions later in his life.
There's a collection of Greek and Latin proverbs and pithy sayings that are basically desired
to serve as kind of little potted pieces of wisdom, but as guides to living well, as guides
to right conduct.
Now I hope you'll hear there an echo of Guarino ebarona, and the whole idea that you should
read and read and read and reread classical works in such a way that you just become like
the people in those works.
In 1503, Erasmus published his N. Caridian, that is a Greek word that literally means
a handbook, which was for persons in power to tell them how to reconcile Christian ethics
and the exigencies of office.
Now this was then a challenging proposition.
That had always been a challenging proposition, I dare say it still is now.
How can one exercise public office, put people to death, fight wars, do all manner of things?
And live according to the ethics of Christian teaching.
Well, Erasmus prepared his N. Caridian, his handbook, to help people with those difficult
issues.
He became a master of satire.
His two greatest works, of course, are the Praise of Folly and Julius Excluded.
Now, the Praise of Folly is just worth reflecting for a moment or two on its title.
Its title is Greek again, Encomium Maureae.
That means the Praise of Folly in Greek, translated into English.
But of course, Thomas Maure was his great friend.
So at the same time, the title is a double entendre, it means the Praise of Maureae.
So there's a kind of a joke hiding in the title of the Praise of Folly.
Now what the book is, is this, Lady Folly, this utterly innocent young thing, sort of
goes all over Europe and speaks in defense of the worst and silliest and most abusive
practices of church and state everywhere.
And of course, we're in on the joke, so we know that poor Lady Folly has just always
got it wrong.
So the Praise of Folly is actually not the Praise of Folly at all, it's the Criticism
of Folly.
Julius Excluded is another bitter satire addressed to the abuses of the church in Erasmus' day.
Julius the Second, the very pope who commissioned Michelangelo to do those tomb sculptures for
him, of which only bits and fragments remain to this day.
Julius the Second dies, he arrives at the pearly gates, there of course he is greeted
by Peter, who is his predecessor in office, and Peter doesn't recognize him and won't
let him in.
Well, Erasmus is really having a little fun with the church in his day.
Again, like Colette, like more, a distinguished social critic.
Now, in his later years, Erasmus had a battle with Martin Luther on the human will.
We'll talk about that in our next lecture.
Erasmus held to the freedom of the will.
Erasmus held to the Christian, to the Renaissance, to the humanist ideal of improvement.
One can say that through his scholarship, interestingly enough, Erasmus contributed in various ways
to the emerging Protestant movement.
But Erasmus, like more, like Lefebvre de Toppe, like Colette, would not join it.
Even so, the Catholic Church, for a period of time, suspected some of his teachings and
rejected others.
Now we've seen already that there were men like John Wycliffe and John Huss who had challenged
church teachings.
We have seen that the Babylonian captivity in the Great Sism had damaged the papacy's
reputation.
It seemed that conciliarism had emerged as a new form of ecclesiastical organization.
Now we can see how the Northern Renaissance not only brought the new learning of Italy
to Northern Europe, but helped to pave the way for the religious upheaval of the 16th
century that we call the Reformation.
And to that we turn in our next lectures.
