Many, many thinkers in the history of Christianity had had individual theses condemned.
Remember Lefebvre, they top it.
Recently he got in trouble with the authority.
Thomas Aquinas for heaven's sake had had some of his teachings condemned.
So Rome was proceeding carefully, in other words.
They condemned 41 things that Luther taught.
They didn't yet condemn Luther himself.
But they could not bend Luther to their will, and in 1521 Pope Leo X excommunicated Martin
Luther.
Was then perhaps definitive.
Now the imperial diet in Vorm in 1521, the diet was kind of the big assembly of the of
the Holy Roman Empire.
Luther came before the emperor.
The emperor said to you, the only one around here who knows anything, this dual line, Clug,
and Luther made his famous statement here I stand.
I cannot do other than what I'm doing.
Well he refused to recant.
He refused to give up his teachings.
His safe conduct was honored.
He was permitted to go back to Saxony.
And there the the elector, Frederick III, protected him.
Now Frederick seems to have had some genuine affection for Luther and some sympathy with
Luther's teachings and his cause.
Frederick also, as was true of a number of North German princes, was always looking for
ways to sort of get out from under the thumb of the Holy Roman emperor in the South.
Obviously the emperor, the very Catholic Habsburg emperor, was not best pleased with Martin Luther.
So there was political circumstances here as well as religious ones.
Now before looking a little bit more closely at some of Luther's key teachings, let's
note just a few more significant dates in his life.
In 1522, he intervened in Wittenberg to control what he saw as the damage that persons much
more radical than himself were causing.
In other words, Luther did not think he had sort of unleashed the whirlwind of religious
reform.
He believed that he had gone about as far as it was right to go and he wants to stop
there.
By 1529, at the colloquy of Marburg, for example, Luther and his supporters made some modest
overtures to Rome.
Well, it turned out they were in vain.
But what was very interesting was that in making these overtures to Rome, Luther was
effectively slamming the back door against the Swiss reform, the reform to which we'll
turn in our next lecture.
But Luther was not prepared to go where they had gone.
In 1524, Luther married a former Cistercian nun, Catherine von Borup.
They had a wonderful and warm and loving relationship over the next 20 years, revealed
to us by a variety of quite intimate portraits, particularly in Luther's tabletop.
And Luther also provided at this time support for the destruction of the German peasants.
The German peasants rose up.
The German nobility, of course, was shocked by this.
Luther, remember, in his address to the German nobility of 1520, had called on them to reform.
Now, Luther didn't tell the German nobility to go slaughter peasants, but he made it pretty
clear that he thought it was not wrong for them to do so.
Now, one of the interesting things here, of course, is that much of rural Germany and
particularly southern Germany, where these peasants were suppressed so violently, remained
Catholic.
These years also saw Luther's magnificent translation of the Bible into German.
Luther's translation of the Bible into German did for the German language what eventually
the authorized version, usually called the King James Version, did for the English language.
This was a time when Luther wrote his greater and lesser catechisms.
His lesser catechism for the instruction of ordinary people, his greater catechism,
a little bit more sophisticated presentation of some of his teachings.
He also wrote theological treatises.
He also wrote biblical commentaries.
He also wrote polemical works on a wide variety of reference.
He wrote works in Latin.
He wrote works in German.
He wrote a great deal of poetry.
Some of this poetry was set to music and became among the most famous hymns and most favored
hymns.
A mighty fortress is our God, is perhaps the most familiar of the great Lutheran hymns.
Now, Luther laid down a number of basic doctrines of what came to be called Protestantism.
Now the word protestant is a very simple Latin verb, third person plural, present tense.
It means they protest.
It was the first word of a remonstrance issued in 1529 where the word came from.
So it's kind of an accidental word, an accidental label.
The core of Luther's teachings, which come to be seen to some degree at least as the
core of Protestant teachings more generally, turn around the three alones or the three
omelies.
Salvation is by faith alone, sola fide.
Faith is a free, mysterious and unmerited, that means unearned gift of God.
One of such as Erasmus said that humans could exercise their will, could choose to believe.
Luther believed that man was too corrupted by sin to make this choice.
Therefore, the presence of faith is attributable to God alone and people cannot take credit
for it.
