Salvation depends on grace alone, sola grazia.
The grace of God that makes man just in God's eyes is a free gift, wholly independent of human actions.
Grace was made available once and for all in the sacrificial death of Jesus Christ on the cross.
Grace is not something continuously over the course of one's life earned by good works.
The Bible alone, sola scriptura, teaches what many need to know.
And it is the single source of authority in matters of religion.
Popes, councils, traditions, all these things were sinful human inventions.
Now as we'll have occasion to see as we move through some of the subsequent reformers,
these three onelies by faith alone, by grace alone, by scripture alone,
do form a fundamental core for the body of religious doctrines that we can label Protestant
and that we can mark off therefore as different from as distinct from Catholic.
And much turns on this old question, and we repeatedly addressed this issue when we were talking about the Renaissance,
so let's bring it back now and put emphasis on it once more,
turns on this old question of human free will.
The Catholic position was and remained that humans had been endowed with free will.
That in this will they could call upon God's aid and in doing so earn merit in God's eyes
and then be supplied with divine grace to accomplish whatever it was that they had been seeking.
For Luther and for the other reformers who come after him, man is in the first place,
too burdened by sin, too flawed in character, to be able to have the capacity to call upon God.
God's aid and assistance therefore is a free gift and not one for which people can take credit
and not one which any human actions will bring.
So the nature of humanity is at stake in this debate.
The nature of the relationship between man and the deity is at stake in this debate.
Now Luther's teachings eventually took hold in most of northern Germany.
The Rhineland of Germany was largely divided between Lutheran and Catholic allegiances.
Southern Germany remained fundamentally Catholic.
Luther's teachings spread quite clearly and directly to Scandinavia,
where the forms of Protestant experience are overwhelmingly Lutheran.
They spread indirectly to England through some of the key reformers there.
And they spread to North America with German immigrants.
Indeed, one of the most flourishing Lutheran communities in the world today is in fact in the United States.
Question arises, why was Luther successful?
That is to say, why wasn't he just burned to the stake like some of those medieval heretics?
Well, after all, some of what he taught had been anticipated by earlier thinkers,
Wycliffe, Huss and others, by high medieval heretics.
So some of what he was saying was not by any means new.
Luther was very much in step with his time on scholarly grounds.
He was very much in step with his time on the need for church reform.
But as we have seen, Erasmus, Lefebvre and the others stayed with Rome.
What Luther presented for the first time and in somewhat favorable circumstances
was a more comprehensive alternative to Catholicism than anyone before him had ever offered.
He prepared crucial texts in German.
The new printing technology helped him.
He was a forceful writer, a gifted writer, a powerful writer.
He was a German patriot.
Luther was protected politically by the elector of Saxony.
The Holy Roman Emperor simply was not going to risk civil war in Germany by trying to suppress Luther and his movement.
So again, none of these, I would suggest, is an absolute cause for Luther's success.
But I think these factors taken together at least help us to understand the environment in which he was successful.
But the point that we really want to draw at this moment in our reflections on the Reformation,
which again we will carry on for the next two lectures,
is that for the first time in nearly a millennium, Christendom, always, of course, more of an ideal than a reality,
had then riven down the middle.
Europe was still now Christian.
But at least two forms of Christianity would exist.
How many more would there be and what form would they take?
This one could not have seen at the moment of Luther's death in 1546.
We will turn to those questions in our next lecture.
