Welcome back once again to our series of lectures on the foundations of western civilization.
This time, lecture number 46, we're going to continue our discussion of the religious
history of the 16th century in Europe, the period that we have called the Reformation
or the Reformations.
Now in our last lecture, we left off at the end with a question.
What was the Catholic Church doing while the Magisterial Reformers were offering their
teachings and offering their particular forms of ecclesiastical organization to the European
world?
And we'll turn to that question, and then we'll also turn at the end of this lecture
to a sort of a general panoramic view of the religious situation in Europe in the last
decades of the 16th century.
Now I hope by now it's become clear that from one point of view, the older polemical tradition
to which I referred at the very beginning, not of the last lecture, but of the one before
that.
That the 16th century was somehow a sports field on which there were Catholics over here
and Protestants over there is a terribly superficial and inadequate view, not least because there
were indeed, as we've seen, a variety of different forms of Protestantism.
Now in this lecture, we're also going to notice that there were a variety of forms of Catholicism
as well.
But there's another problem with the older polemical view, as I called it, the Catholic
versus Protestant view, and that is that there was long a tendency to talk about the
religious history of the 16th century as if one had a Reformation and a Counter-Reformation.
First you have the Protestant Reformers, then the Catholics responded to them.
Well, in fact, that view warps our perspective badly.
It simply bends it out of all recognizable shape.
The Catholic Church began a very wide-ranging program of reform before the Magisterial
Reformers had begun their work, or even as the early Magisterial Reformers were setting
to work.
That's part of the reason that over the last two or three lectures, I've asked you to remark
closely the dates of people's lives so that we can see in what generation they fit and
who was contemporary with whom, and when these people were working at the same time, and then
indeed Catholic and Protestant Reforms both drew on humanist scholarship.
So not only were these people working at the same time, they were often working on many
of the same questions.
They were inspired by many of the same intellectual issues.
They were encouraged to work by the same kinds of new intellectual methods, close textual
studies, study of languages, and so on.
We also have noticed that there was a very widespread tradition of critique of the late
medieval church.
None of the Protestants was really any tougher, I suppose we might say, than someone like
Erasmus had been.
And yet, of course, some stayed on the Catholic side of the line, whereas others eventually
crossed the line into one or another forms of the Protestant or the Reformed tradition.
Now, there was a counter-reformation.
But the counter-reformation was a relatively limited project, as we'll see as we go along
here, and its heyday really fell in the period from about 1550 to 1650.
So we want to do, for the next few minutes here, is build our way back to about the year
1550.
Again, nothing sacred about that year, it's notional.
We have built our way to that year with Luther and Swingley and Calvin.
So now we want to kind of go back and build our way to that year, asking questions about
what was going on in Roman Catholic Europe during this same period of time.
Then we'll have something to say about the period after 1550 in our concluding remarks
to this lecture.
All right.
Now we have encountered the humanist element in the Catholic reforms in Desiderias Erasmus
and Thomas Moore.
Another very good example, who brings out a number of the elements, the dimensions of
this age, is the Spanish Cardinal Francisco Cardinal Jiménez de Cisneros.
In 1436, he died in 1517.
