Now, he had an interesting career with several quite remarkable turns in it.
He studied in Rome.
He received a very good education, an education that was at once traditionally Catholic and
influenced, tinged by the new learning by humanist studies.
He then returned to Spain.
He served in a series of ecclesiastical posts.
He then entered a very strict monastery and won a reputation for great sanctity.
In 1492, he was quite reluctantly called out of his monastery to become confessor, personal
confessor to Queen Isabella.
Now, it's always the case that the confessor to a monarch is a person who is able to influence
that monarch in important ways.
And there certainly was healthy collaboration between Cardinal Jimenez and Queen Isabella
in the years thereafter.
Isabella charged him to reform the monastic order in Spain, particularly the Franciscans.
Subsequently, she appointed him Archbishop of Toledo and Chancellor of Castile.
This gave him a really broad array of platforms, we might say, on which to base himself, on
which to undertake reforms in church and in state.
Now, our concern is really with his work in the church.
In the year 1500, very largely out of his own funds, Cardinal Jimenez was a man of some
means.
He founded the University of Alcala to promote the new learning in Spain, in other words,
to bring the humanist learning, the Christian humanism, to be sure, of the Northern Reformation,
although of course the Iberian Peninsula is in a sense Southern, but the idea of the Renaissance
or the Italian Renaissance is always set against a Northern Renaissance.
There's a certain anomaly then in Spain being South, but actually it's Renaissance experience
being in a way Northern.
Anyway, so he found Alcala to bring the new learning to Spain and to use it as the basis
for reform in the clergy and in the church.
Now, he invited scholars to come from all over Europe to join his new university.
He attracted quite a number of interesting and important people.
And one of the great projects of this new university was the Complutensian Polyglot Bible.
Now, that's a mouthful.
Complutum is Latin for Alcala, or actually Alcala is the Spanish form of the Latin Complutum,
and polyglot means multi-tongue, multi-language.
This was a Bible produced in six large volumes, each volume printed in parallel columns with
Hebrew, Greek, and Latin texts, with then a very elaborate scholarly apparatus at the
foot of the page.
As we've seen with, for example, Erasmus's edition of the Greek New Testament and so
on, biblical studies were at the very heart of the earliest stages of the Catholic reform.
Luther may have believed in Sola, Scriptura, Scripture alone, Calvin may have followed him
in that, but the Bible was not uniquely the province of the Protestant reformer.
Now, the work of Himene shows also the characteristic Catholic confidence that personal sanctity and
great learning can join to produce genuine improvement.
With that occasion to see that for Luther to a degree and Calvin to an even larger degree,
that formula doesn't work.
That principle is rejected, but here we see this very clearly with Himene's.
Let's move on a little bit to reformers who are more strictly contemporary with Luther
and Calvin.
The Catholic Church's fundamental belief that reform within the institutional church
would lead inevitably to reforms within the wider society, produced a number of new religious
orders and also some quite interesting and important and influential individuals.
But again, let's bear in mind this notion that the Catholic Church has that if it can
put its own house in order, sort of the whole neighborhood will get better as it were.
Again, something which the Protestant reformers rejected, but which was a quite traditional
Catholic position.
All right, some examples then of putting the Catholic house in order.
St. Philip O'Neary, born in 1515, died in 1595, is a good example of a reformer who
worked from the church to the wider world.
He himself was a Florentine who moved to Rome, studied there, and then adopted a deeply austere
form of religious life.
He was ordained a priest and served in 1551, and he served at the Church of San Giordano
in Rome, where he began to gather a community of young men, began gathering a community
of young men whom he hoped he would be able to influence by his own example of really
a blameless spiritual life.
