In 1564, the men who had been praying and studying together formed themselves as the
congregation of the oratory.
Henceforth they were, right till now, called oratorians.
They were dedicated to good preaching.
They were dedicated to inspiring worship, to worship that would really draw people in.
They were dedicated to the use of particularly beautiful music in worship.
They owe to them the oratorio, and they were devoted to service to ordinary lay people.
The ideal then, and this will remind us, doesn't it, of St. Dominic, the 13th century, persons
of blameless life and of authentic service to the people will be able to serve like a
kind of a yeast within the bread of society.
The oratorians spread all over Europe, and then eventually began to spread into the
overseas Spanish Empire, where they had a fairly prominent role in Central and in South America.
The most famous of all the new orders formed in the Reformation period was the Society
of Jesus, commonly called the Jesuits, but strictly speaking, the Society of Jesus, founded
by St. Ignatius Loyola, who lived from 1491 until 1556.
Now Ignatius was a Spanish nobleman who had been wounded in battle, and while he was in
hospital recovering from his wounds, he read the Bible repeatedly, and he also read Lives
of the Saints.
As a result of his reading, he resolved to take on a new life for himself.
Now for a time after his recuperation, he lived the life of a virtual hermit, and he began
to write a book, a book that became very influential in the Society of Jesus, and to a limited
degree, even outside the society, the book was called the Spiritual Exercises.
Now what it is, is a series of daily meditations and exercises patterned on the life of Christ.
It's designed to make a person more Christ-like.
Now this was not the first such book of this kind, remember we talked about coming out
of the movement of the brethren of the common life and the religious sentiments of the 15th
century, Thomas A. Kempis, and his imitation of Christ, again an opportunity for ordinary
lay people to read this book and model their lives, model their experience on that of Jesus.
Well Ignatius then went on and studied for a period of years at Alcala, and then for
about seven years in Paris.
In some respects, he's a bit like his Spanish predecessor, Saint Dominic, again and not
unlike Philippo Neri.
He believes that a holy life and deep learning, now Philippo Neri never really placed a great
stress on learning, but he certainly placed a great stress on a holy life and service
to others.
In Dominic's case, a holy life and learning would counter the Albigensian heretics in France.
In Ignatius' life, great learning and a holy life might combat the new religious divisions
in Europe.
In 1534, he and a number of companions, including notably Francis Xavier, most of the early ones
were Spanish, but not all of them.
Francis Xavier was born in 1536, died in 1552, along with Ignatius, they formed themselves
into the Society of Jesus.
They formed a traditional religious order, or they formed a religious order on traditional
grounds, and they dedicated themselves to poverty, chastity, and pilgrimage to Jerusalem.
Now, as you heard me saying poverty, chastity, you expected me to say obedience.
Well, originally their third vow was pilgrimage to Jerusalem, and then gradually that was
changed to obedience to the Pope.
It was changed within just a very few years.
Ignatius and his followers went to Rome, where their devotion and their loyalty to the church
overcame papal suspicions of new religious ideas.
This is when we're into the 1530s, if somebody showed up in Rome and said to the Pope, Holy
Father, I've got a whole new religious idea, what do you think?
This was not a time when the Pope was likely to say, oh great, that's what we need is new
religious ideas, but there was something authentic about the life, about the experience of Ignatius
Loyola, Francis Xavier, and their companions, and in 1540, Pope Paul III approved the new
order.
Now, Ignatius spent most of the rest of his life developing and improving the constitutions
of the order, developing the Jesuit order, which became relatively popular, which spread
rather widely across Europe.
The Jesuits, of course, became renowned for their austere lives, for great learning, and
for missionary work far beyond the confines of Europe.
Francis Xavier, for example, went off and worked in India, and then even in Japan, Didi died
in the Orient.
