Well, perhaps those examples will illustrate a little bit the kinds of things that were
going on in Catholic Europe at the time when Luther and Calvin, for instance, were undertaking
their work in Germany and Switzerland, respectively.
We must ask, why didn't the Catholic Church as a central institution respond earlier to
the age's calls to reform, or why didn't they respond to the specific challenge posed
by the Protestants?
We've seen with Loyola, with Cardinal Jiménez, with Filippo Neri, with the others, that there
was no lack of reform momentum in the Catholic Church.
Well, there was a natural hesitation to discern among the various calls for reform those that
seemed most salutary.
The late 15th and the early 16th century was a time when there were so many calls for
reform of so many kinds by so many people in so many places that, in a way, one could
say that the central government of the Church was either paralyzed or prudent, and perhaps
a little of both.
Paralysed because they just didn't know how to act in the face of all of this activity,
prudent because they thought, well, let's just wait and see how things work out.
Popes had been stung by the challenges to their authority during the Conciliar Epic.
Not surprisingly, they were leery to new calls to curtail papal power.
What might all of these challenges to the authority of the Popes mean?
What about a good, loyal Catholic like Erasmus, who writes the viciously critical Julius Exclusus,
Julius excluded from Heaven, Pope Julius II?
Now, let's remember, Paul III did sanction the Jesuits.
He did approve the Ursulins.
There were also, in his time, some attempts at dialogue with Protestants, more particularly
with Lutherans than with others, and in the end, these didn't prove fruitful, but there
was some attempt.
We may also say that the political situation in Europe in the early and central decades
of the 16th century was fraught, was contentious, and would have made agreements along religious
lines or European-wide, continent-wide reforms very, very difficult.
Now, when a program of reform finally began to emerge, it took the traditional form of
a great church council.
One of the things the Catholic Church had done over the long course of its history was
periodically call church councils.
The Council of Trent meant, in three great sessions, altogether the Council sat from
1545 until 1563, but it met in three great sessions.
That was always complicated by the political situation in Europe.
The number of people attending Trent from one place or the other varied a great deal
over the course of the years.
Trent was largely, but not wholly, dominated by Italian clergy who were able to get there.
There was also, of course, rivalry among various groups in Europe.
So Trent was hamstrung, in a way, from the beginning.
There were things it just couldn't do.
Still, it accomplished a great deal.
It responded to the Protestant Reformation in a certain way, and it set an agenda for
the Catholic Church that, mildly influenced by Vatican I in the 19th century, persisted
until the Second Vatican Council, which sat between 1962 and 1965.
Essentially, Trent affirmed older teachings.
Some were refined, some were streamlined.
The Office of the Sale of Indulgences was abolished, for example.
Trent affirmed traditional Catholic teaching on the Nicene Creed, for example.
It affirmed the equality of Scripture and tradition.
To the Catholic Church, the Bible is the Church's book.
It lives in dialogue with the Church.
It does not make the Church.
It affirmed traditional Catholic teaching on sacraments.
It affirmed many traditional Catholic practices in the areas of pilgrimage, the relics of
the saints, prayers to the saints, the cult of the saints, and so on.
The Council also laid the foundations for the much better training of priests.
It recognized that this was something that had, perhaps, broadly speaking, been lacking.
I mean, it's interesting that these new religious orders that we talked about addressed themselves
most particularly to forming better priests.
It created new catechisms based on, quite interestingly, the Ten Commandments, the Lord's Prayer,
and the Apostles' Creed.
That sounds familiar, doesn't it, Luther and Calvin doing much the same thing?
It reformed the liturgy of the Church, indeed the liturgy that followed from the Council
of Trent, the way of public worship, is very much that which the Catholic Church used again
until really the liturgical reforms of the 1970s.
