Well, hello once again, and welcome to the last of our lectures on the foundations of
Western Civilization, number 48. In this lecture, what we're going to do is perch
ourselves in a way sort of in the early 17th century. We're going to look around, see what
we notice, and we're going to look back, and we're going to look forward. We'll try in
a sense to draw together some of the themes and issues that we've encountered throughout
these lectures. We'll try to suggest one or two things about the directions that things
might be expected to take in the centuries that would come after. You'll perhaps recall
that on many occasions I've said, well, what if we played the time traveler game and we
could stop the clock at certain points and visit there and ask ourselves, well, what
do we think is going to happen next? Well, we'll kind of do that again, and in slightly
larger terms, perhaps, in this very last lecture.
Well, first of all, let's sketch in what we might call the geopolitical background.
How did this world shape up politically in the late 16th to 17th centuries? Across the
course of the 16th century, we can see the emergence of the kind of great power politics
and diplomacy that would actually dominate the West until the collapse of the Soviet
Empire in 1989. The collapse of the Soviet Empire, of course, left us with a unipolar
world. I mean, in a certain sense, the entire political and diplomatic heritage, military
heritage to a degree was sort of left in the hands of the United States, which is obviously
not yet a player in the 16th century. But this process, what we see around us in the
world today is the culmination of a rather coherent process that reaches back a long
time. Now, if I call it a system, a great power system, let's be very clear, it was
not a system in the sense that someone sat down and fought it up. But the diplomatic and
political, the international system, if you like, from the 16th century until the late
20th, was one that consisted basically of a series of shifting patterns of alliances
among the greatest European powers with the smaller powers aligning themselves or perhaps
being forced to align themselves with their more powerful neighbors. Now, in the context
of Europe, the first fundamental aspect of this system was the Hapsburg-Valois rivalry.
That is, the struggle between the Valois rulers, the rulers of the Valois dynasty in France
and the Hapsburg rulers of the Spanish Empire and the Holy Roman Empire. Now, how had this
come about? Well, it had come about in a way that would be sort of impossible in the modern
world but was still very much a part of this early modern world that we have been talking
about. It was a series of dynastic marriages effecting actually two great unions that then
culminated in one stupendous dynastic arrangement. Okay, very quickly, here's what happened.
Next million of Austria, the Holy Roman Emperor, married Mary of Burgundy. Now, Mary of Burgundy
was the heiress to both Burgundy, a substantial chunk of Eastern France, and the Netherlands.
They had a son, Philip. Ferdinand of Aragon and Isabella of Castile, married, as we have
seen, and unified the Spanish crowns, the crowns of Castile de Aragon. They had a daughter,
Johanna. Johanna and Philip married, creating a Hapsburg sphere of influence that reached
all over Europe and owing to the Spanish conquest in the New World, extended to the Americas
as well. Thus far, the Hapsburg situation. Now, under Philip II of Spain, a huge imperial
realm existed, but eventually, as he approached his own death, came in 1556, he divided his
realms such that his brother Ferdinand took the Austrian lands while Charles V took Spain,
its overseas possessions, and to a degree, its interests in the Italian peninsula as
well. These Hapsburg lands, one has only to think about it for a moment, surrounded France.
So, a great deal of French policy was addressed to eluding domination by this sort of massive
Hapsburg monster that had him surrounded.
