Well, that was an argument much heard in the 17th century.
I dare say not an argument much heard in our own time.
Though do we hear of an echo of it in the idea that a responsible, dedicated, and submitted
citizenry is a happy one?
There was already in the time of the Renaissance, we spoke of Renaissance civic humanism.
Today there was time in, there was occasion in the writing of some great 17th century
political thinkers to turn to what comes to be called the liberal tradition.
The liberal tradition says that man is endowed with rights and that he needed to use those
rights to their fullest in free and open societies in order to be fully human.
Now, this line of thinking reaches right back over the Renaissance.
It reaches right back to Cicero.
It reaches right back to Aristotle.
We've encountered it again and again.
The interesting problem with this theory is that however lofty it is in articulation,
however attractive it is in theory, it has been immensely difficult to implement in practice
in how many societies have free people that able freely to govern themselves.
An ideal long called for, but not one widely accepted or used.
Western civilization seems to me, and finally, has been one long test of human ingenuity
in the face of the natural world.
Mesopotamians and Egyptians, for example, learned to harness the power of rivers to tame
the challenges of the desert, to feed themselves quite simply.
For millennia, the Mediterranean provided food.
It linked peoples and it transmitted ideas.
Our sea, Mare Nostrum, as the Romans called it, was the center of the earth as far as
people were concerned.
Naval technologies, commercial technologies, we might say, were elaborated and developed
to profit from the inland sea.
Naval Europeans and their island neighbors spread in every direction as we've had occasion
to see.
First of all, of course, spreading out on the European continent itself, remember our
expanding Europe of the high Middle Ages, and then spread, well, yes, in the first
place to places like Iceland and then eventually almost all the globe.
They applied ever new technologies from such humble things, remember, in the early Middle
Ages as iron plows and three-field systems and better water wheels, to the more elaborate
technologies of modern times.
But we have here again a long continuity.
We will speak, we will not speak in this course, but we would be able to speak if we were looking
into the future, of this so-called agricultural revolution of the 18th century.
That is to say, another moment in the history of the West when agricultural technology grew
and expanded as almost never before, indeed an important background to the slightly later
industrial revolution.
So conquering the natural world, solving its problems, learning how to cope with it, has
been a continuous story.
Those technologies that Europeans developed for their sailing, better maps, yes, but also
better ships, yes, but also better navigational instruments, yes, better rigging for ships,
yes, all of these things, plus a bit of ingenuity and a bit of incentive, made Europeans cross
the oceans.
Now in doing so, to be sure, they wreaked a certain amount of havoc, they mistreated
large numbers of people, they deprived people of many of their own possessions and resources
and opportunities, but in the process as well, they initiated the making of our world, smaller,
but also a more interesting and interdependent place, to walk down a street and to see a
string of foreign restaurants.
It's something we take very much for granted, and it's a very small manifestation of the
consequences of European expansion, and it is not something that would have been met
in the Europe of the 16th century.
One great scholar once said, the history is a process of challenge and response.
One very interesting way of thinking back through the history of Western civilization
is to list the challenges and list the responses.
It is to notice, I think, an engaging, sometimes a surprising similarity in the challenges,
and then to notice a most satisfying and curious dissimilarity in responses.
Here, I think, is where we see creativity and ingenuity.
This is why, it seems to me, we can think of Western civilization, not something fixed,
done, and final, but as a great experiment, and as a great experiment that goes on.
What challenges remain?
I think they will be many of the same ones that have existed in the past.
How may we live in peace with one another?
How may we live on this planet without destroying it?
How may we understand ourselves?
But what responses will those challenges evoke?
These are new, and they are unforeseen as of now.
One last time, I invite you to stop the clock and think, on the basis of what you now know
of Western civilization, what do you think is going to happen next?
Next can mean the period from, let us say, 1600 until the dawning third millennium, or
next can mean the third millennium looming before us.
We genuinely hope you've enjoyed these lectures from our great courses series.
Our courses are now available to order online.
Visit our website at www.teach12.com, or call our customer service representatives at 1-800-TEACH-12.
That's 1-800-TEACH-12.
Thank you very much.
