In the early 500s, Japan was little more than a loose confederation of clans.
Japan was an emperor who was merely the nominal chief of the chieftains who led those various clans.
But beginning in the late 500s, leaders in Japan embarked on an unprecedented project
of state building.
And by the late 700s, Japan was a highly centralized state with an emperor who claimed
direct authority over all Japanese territory.
This was also an ambitious state that described itself as equal to the Chinese empire.
Today we'll talk about the how and the why of this remarkable change.
But before we dive into those details, let me make an important note about periodization.
In most encyclopedia entries or in textbooks on Japan, you will probably find ancient Japanese
history broken into three distinct periods.
First is the Asuka period, which runs from 538 to 710 CE.
Then comes the Nara period, which runs from 710 to 794 CE.
And that's followed by the Heian period, which runs from 794 to 1185 CE.
Each of those names, Asuka, Nara, and Heian, are place names, based on the site of the
imperial capital during the period in question.
And all three sites are in the same general region.
Heian today is known as Kyoto, and the older capital of Nara is just 25 miles to the south,
and the still older capital of Asuka is another 18 miles to the south.
So today we'll be talking about politics in the Asuka, the Nara, and the early Heian periods.
And by way of introduction, let's imagine a set of before and after shots for different
aspects of Japan, and let's start with a snapshot of politics and economics.
So in the 500s, each clan leader governed his own people under his own rules.
Commoners paid tribute to local clan leaders.
Taxes and ritual offerings were likely fused into one form of tribute.
Local lords and local gods were connected, so taxes and tithing were the same.
That's our before picture.
Now for the after picture.
By the end of the 8th century, Japan had a single monarch in Kyoto whose laws applied
throughout Japan.
This new state wiped out clan boundaries, and at least in theory, the new state counted
every person in Japan.
It conducted a census that listed the family status of every person and measured all the
land in Japan.
The new state tried to fit all the arable land in Japan into a neat rectangular grid.
Moreover, the central government tried to redistribute all the land in Japan every six
years so that every adult male commoner had the exact same parcel as every other adult
male commoner.
And every adult male servant had the exact same size parcel as every other adult male
servant.
And every adult female commoner had the exact same parcel size as every other adult female
commoner.
And so on.
This was based loosely on Chinese practices, but in Japan it was an unprecedented new level
of national power.
Historians call this new centralized monarchy the Ritsuryō state.
The term Ritsuryō refers to a system of imperial law that, in theory, applied to every village
in Japan.
The system was comprised of two main components, the criminal law, or Ritsu, and the administrative
laws, or Ryō.
OK, let's move from political and economic questions to military affairs.
In the 500s, armies consisted of small bands of Klan leaders and their followers.
In the 700s, by contrast, the centralized government tried to draw conscripts from every
village in Japan and to create a large national army.
How about cities?
In the 500s, there were no cities worth mentioning in Japan.
The capital cities in the Oskar region were a little more than clusters of official buildings.
But by the 700s, Japan began building major cities.
First, the imperial seat was established in the capital of Nara, and then to an even larger
city in Kyoto, also known as Heiankyō, and that became the official capital in 794.
Both of these were carefully planned, neat rectangular cities, with a tidy grid of streets
running north-south and east-west.
Kyoto was based closely on Chang'an, the ancient capital of several Chinese dynasties
today known as Xi'an, and it was more massive than anything before in Japan, measuring roughly
three miles on each side.
And even today, the layout of Kyoto reflects that old grid.
And it's worth noting, as an aside, that the layout of Kyoto is in striking contrast
to Tokyo.
There is no clear grid in Tokyo.
Instead, streets in Tokyo form a spider web pattern around the imperial palace, and that
reflects the origins of Tokyo as a samurai castle town.
If you're lost in Tokyo, that's kind of the plan.
Think of yourself as part of an attacking army.
The more lost you are, the better.
In fact, the current imperial palace at the center of Tokyo was until 1868, the Shogun's
castle.
And you can still see traces today of the old moat.
By contrast, it's almost impossible to get lost in Kyoto since the city is in such a
neat grid.
The streets are even numbered.
After First Avenue comes Second Avenue, and then Third Avenue.
It's a very different sense of power.
Nice straight lines show how the emperor can impose order and structure on the universe.
Okay, how about a before and after shot of religion?
Well, in the 500s, Buddhism was virtually unknown in Japan.
But in the 700s, the state actively embraced and promoted Buddhism, which had reached the
country via Chinese monks.
In fact, the imperial government built a monastery in every provincial capital.
And in the 750s, the state completed one of the largest Buddhist temples in the world,
Todaiji and Nara.
Even today, the main hall at Todaiji, the Great Buddha Hall, is one of the largest wooden
structures in the world.
And what's inside the Great Buddha Hall is even more impressive, the world's largest
bronze statue of the Buddha, known in Japan as the Daibutsu.
The creation of that Buddha statue was a massive technological feat.
It's nearly 50 feet tall and weighs 500 tons.
The feat itself points to the central government's new ability to gather and deploy prodigious
resources, both human and economic.
Okay, we've looked at several before and after snapshots in ancient Japan.
And they all show a dramatic change that occurred in the space of a mere 200 years
from the 500s to the 700s CE.
So here's the big question, why?
What prompted Japanese leaders to undertake these massive political, military and religious
projects, most of which were inspired by foreign models?
Well to answer that question, we first have to grasp one fundamental point.
The transformation of ancient Japan only makes sense in a broader international context.
Because Japanese centralization was part of a bigger transnational process, the rise of
powerful states in China and Korea.
And I think it's useful to consider this in terms of globalization.
We can call this ancient globalization.
Because as we noted in an earlier lecture, we see similar processes more than a thousand
years later in the 1800s and 1900s.
Now here's the big parallel.
In both eras, first in the 500s to the 700s and then again in the 1800s and the 1900s,
Japan faced a new challenge, an enormous, powerful and expansive foreign culture.
In the ancient period, that foreign culture was China, the Sui dynasty and then the Tang
dynasty.
In the modern world, it was the great western powers, the US, Britain, France and later
Germany.
In both cases, Japanese leaders responded in similar ways.
First with the massive adoption of Chinese ideas and technologies and then more than
a thousand years later with the massive adoption of European and American ideas and technologies.
So let's take a closer look at the factors that shaped Japan's ancient experiment with
globalization.
Let's get into some of the details of geopolitics in ancient East Asia, what was going on in
China and Korea that so intimidated the rulers of the Japanese islands.
In short, it's the return of a unified China.
The first big Chinese dynasty was the Han, but that collapsed in the 200 CE.
Over the next 300 years, China was ruled by multiple rival kingdoms, over a dozen kingdoms
in the 4th century.
Then that consolidated to three in the 500s, the Chen in the south, the Zhou in the northwest
and the Qin in the northeast.
In the late 500s, however, the Sui dynasty consolidated and ruled much of the area that's
now called China.
The Sui lasted only to 618 CE, but the Sui was followed by the Tang dynasty, which endured
for three centuries.
Tang emperors were at the helm of a powerful, stable, expansive Chinese empire.
Now at a basic level, this Chinese unification inspired Japanese unification.
The Tang dynasty in East Asia was like Rome in Europe, unprecedented in its cultural sophistication.
Art, culture, technology, and also unprecedented in its military prowess.
So it was both a positive model of what a state could be and a terrifying threat.
The threat to Japan was quite tangible because in the 7th century CE, Tang China intervened
close by on the Korean peninsula, and that served as a catalyst for centralizing authority
in Japan.
You see in the 500s, there had been four kingdoms on the Korean peninsula, Shilla, Baekche, Goguryeo,
and the Gaia Confederacy.
But in the 600s, Tang China helped Shilla defeat all other rival kingdoms and become the ruling
dynasty of the entire peninsula.
This was seen as a serious threat in Japan, especially because Japan was associated with
the losing sides, loosely with the Gaia Confederacy and Goguryeo, and much more closely with the
Kingdom of Baekche.
In fact, Japanese noble families and Baekche noble families had deep connections through
intermarriage and immigration.
So when the Tang dynasty interfered on behalf of Shilla, this was a double threat.
Not only was the Tang fighting against the relatives of Japanese nobles, but what would
happen if the Tang won?
Would they then move on to Japan?
So it's against this backdrop of Chinese intervention in Korea that we can really appreciate
Japan's dilemma.
In essence, a movement towards greater centralized state authority was necessary to deal with
a perceived threat from the continent.
Now as we've seen, Japan was really not a unified country in the 500s.
Rather, it was a loose confederation of clans struggling for control.
And in this environment of battling rival clans, one ambitious house came to the fore,
the Soga Clan.
The Soga were connected to Baekche, and to Goguryeo, and the Gaia Confederacy.
They claimed dissent from the legendary Japanese Emperor Kogen, but also from Korean nobles.
And crucially, the Soga made no attempt to hide this.
Their palace in Japan was called Kudada, which is the Japanese word for Baekche.
And they brought over nobles from Baekche to serve as officials in Japan.
Now having gained the upper hand, among rival clans in Japan, the Soga were committed to
the task of building a stronger central state.
And for political models, the Soga looked to China.
In addition, they aggressively promoted foreign culture, especially Buddhism.
And they were involved in building some of the earliest Buddhist temples in Japan.
That drew stiff opposition from other Japanese clans, in particular from the Mononobes and
the Nakatomi clans.
Those clans were indignant about this foreign influence.
In one instance, they supposedly threw a Buddhist statue into a river and burned down one of
the Soga temples.
And so the Soga responded, with force.
In 587 CE, they crushed the Mononobes and the Nakatomi in a palace coup.
And in 592, they assassinated the emperor.
But the Soga decided not to make themselves emperors, but instead to rule through pliant
proxies.
They married their daughters to emperors, and then they served as high-ranking ministers.
But Soga men themselves did not claim the throne.
In that capacity, the Soga will did great influence during the Asuka period.
And they effectively drove the great transformation of Japanese society that we've been talking
about today.
The creation of a centralized Japanese state based on Chinese models.
The continental influence was evident everywhere.
For example, the Soga introduced a system of court ranks that was almost identical to
the system found in Sui, China, and Baekche, Korea.
You might think of this as a rudimentary civil service, with grades for each level of rank.
These new court ranks trumped older clan titles.
And these ranks weren't just numeric, they were named for moral qualities.
First was virtue, then benevolence, and then propriety.
So a continental moral philosophy, both Buddhist and Confucian, was actually built into the
administrative hierarchy of the Asuka period.
Now the Soga were importing Chinese ideas partly to press back against China.
Remember how the Sui dynasty had looked down on Pimiko?
She was just a shaman queen who sent tribute to the great and Chinese civilized empire?
Well the Soga pushed back.
They began insisting that the Japanese king was the equal of the Chinese king.
In fact, they were both emperors.
And the Japanese sent a diplomatic note to the Sui that was both polite and obnoxious.
It stated that the emperor, the son of heaven, of the land of the rising sun, was sending
his warmest greetings to the emperor of the land of the setting sun.
Now the Soga maintained power for about 60 years, and they were tough.
They assassinated their rivals.
But in 645, they themselves were overthrown in a coup led by their old enemies, the Nakatomi.
OK, let's think back about this for a moment.
Back in the 580s, the Nakatomi had opposed the Soga over the question of Buddhism as
a foreign religion.
So it would be reasonable to assume that they would reverse the Soga reforms after driving
them from power, right?
In fact, the opposite happened.
The Nakatomi doubled down on continental style reforms, and they accelerated the process
of building a powerful centralized state.
And the question is why?
Why would clans that had opposed Buddhism and foreigners from Bekche and the 500s now
endorse importing continental ideas and technologies?
Well, here are two answers.
First, cynically.
Has any government ever aggressively reduced its own power?
When the Nakatomi grabbed the makings of a powerful centralized state from the Soga,
why would they want to return to a system where a chieftain's power was limited to
his own clan?
Second, back on the continent, remember that Civil War in Korea?
Well the Tang dynasty is intervening right next door.
They are backing Shilla against Bekche.
And despite their distrust of the Soga clan, the Nakatomi were unwilling to abandon Japanese
allies on the continent.
In fact, the son of the Bekche king had fled to Japan.
So the mid-600s are a very bad time to argue in favor of a weak central state, and in favor
of a loose confederation of clans.
Unfortunately, when Japan tried to help Bekche against Shilla, they got clobbered.
Japan sent troops, they sent the army, they sent the navy.
Supposedly, according to ancient chronicles, they sent over 30,000 men and 800 ships.
But they were crushed.
In a major battle in 663, the battle of Hakusikinoe, they lost half the fleet and tens of thousands
of men.
Now this development was genuinely terrifying.
The Nakatomi must have been asking themselves, what if the Tang-Shilla alliance decides to
attack Japan?
So defeat in Korea actually helped inspire a massive centralization of power.
And even more emulation of continental models.
Okay, with this historical background in mind, let's go back to those before and after snapshots.
Remember how I mentioned that the imperial state tried to compile a massive administrative
code governing supposedly all of Japan, all the land, all people, everyone and everything?
That makes a lot of sense if we think of a context involving frantic international rivalry.
Now, as it turns out, the invasion from the continent never came.
But that army that the central government had raised, well, it proved pretty useful nonetheless.
The imperial state used it to expand its power on the Japanese archipelago.
In the early 600s, most of Japan northeast of present day Tokyo was wild frontier.
Fukushima, for example, the site of the 2011 nuclear disaster, that would have been considered
wild frontier in the early 600s.
But over the next 200 years, the imperial court pushed its control almost to the northern
edge of Honshu, pushed the border north about 300 miles.
Meanwhile, to the southwest, the imperial state extended its control over all of Kyushu.
Now this raises the question, who was on the other side of the border?
Were they politically different, culturally different, physically different?
Quite frankly, we really don't know for sure.
In the northeast, the so-called barbarians were known as emishi, and they may be related
to the present day Ainu, and therefore physiologically close to the Caucasian peoples of Siberia
and the Amur River Basin.
In the southwest, the barbarians were called the Hayato.
There the difference was probably more cultural and political than physical.
In any case, whether they were called emishi or Hayato, barbarian meant people who did
not grow rice and did not pay taxes on that rice to the central state.
But with the expansion of the imperial state by the 800s, the capital in Kyoto was actually
getting tax revenue from almost everywhere in the three main islands of Japan, Honshu,
Shikoku, and Kyushu.
This had a permanent impact on Japanese culture.
Here's a good example.
The ancient system of highways set up to collect taxes from distant corners of the empire.
Those names survive in the Japanese railway system.
If you take the bullet train from Tokyo to Osaka or Kyoto, that line is called the Tokaido
line.
That's the name for the ancient imperial highway that connected the capital to the
northeast stern frontier.
Now even though the Chinese invasion never came, the emerging Japanese state was still
determined to impress its neighbors with displays of power.
Now today, if a country wants to do that, the pattern is that you show your technological
and economic ascendance by hosting the Olympics.
Tokyo in 1964, Seoul in 1988, Beijing in 2008, they were all used to show off the wealth
and power of the host countries.
But how do you impress the world in the 740s without an International Olympic Committee?
Well the Japanese state decided to build Todaiji Temple.
Emperor Shomu was determined to build the biggest Buddhist temple in the world, biggest
outer building, biggest Buddha image, and this really was at the outer limits of Japanese
technological ability.
According to ancient records, the temple employed 50,000 master woodworkers, over 300,000 smiths
and metalworkers, and 2 million ordinary laborers.
Now these have to be exaggerated numbers because the total population of Japan was probably
only 4 to 6 million in the 8th century CE.
But even so, it was an enormous undertaking.
Casting the bronze Buddha alone took multiple efforts.
The opening ceremony for Todaiji Temple was attended by monks and officials from around
the known world, from Shilla, from Tang China, from Southeast Asia, and from South Asia.
A monk from India officially consecrated the Buddha.
His name is recorded as Bodhisattva.
Now setting aside the idea that Emperor Shomu was very devout, this massive expenditure
makes sense primarily in terms of something like the Olympic Games.
Expensive peaceful propaganda designed to impress an international audience.
You build huge expensive buildings, you invite guests from around the world, and the goal
was partly just to send people home saying, wow, what a show, I had no idea that they
could stage such an elaborate opening ceremony that they could build such a big stadium or
cast such a big statue.
And that's a good closing note for the 8th century.
The Japanese elite was determined to impress their nation's power and sophistication upon
Asia, which for them was the rest of the world.
And being sophisticated meant, in many ways, emulating Buddhism and Confucianism, the philosophies
of the continent.
And so just like hosting the Olympics, it meant showing off, but in a cosmopolitan fashion.
And also, like hosting the Olympics, mounting these impressive projects can be unsustainable.
A government can look back at their massive construction projects just a decade later
and wonder, we ran up a debt for that?
And that's a good perspective on the legacy of the ancient imperial state, the Ritzirio
state.
On the one hand, Ritzirio law in Japan was like Roman law in Europe.
It continued to have an influence long after the empire was gone.
In fact, the official titles of the Ritzirio system remained in use until the 1800s.
But many of the achievements of the Ritzirio state began to feel unsustainable rather quickly.
They made sense only in terms of furious international competition.
So don't just think of a huge Olympic stadium that begins to seem like a waste of money
a few years after the Games.
Think about how the space race was connected to the Cold War.
The Russians were the first to put a man in orbit, so the U.S. had to be the first to
put a man on the moon.
But it was a remarkable achievement.
And then to the dismay of NASA and fans of space exploration, support for the program
began to fade after the first lunar landing.
Or think of the level of national unity and national mobilization that happens when a
country feels threatened.
All sorts of domestic conflicts get buried and everyone buys war bonds and then the threat
passes and well, things return to normal.
Now many aspects of the Ritzirio state were like that.
Projects that made sense during a period of national crisis and intense rivalry.
But they simply lost support after the crisis was over.
So remember how all the land in Japan was supposed to be redistributed every six years?
And remember how Japan built a national army based on conscription?
Well that made sense if you expect an invasion and you want a massive national army or if
you were determined to impress neighboring countries by hosting the 8th century version
of the Olympics.
But then the invasion didn't come and the Olympics were over.
And you have a tax burden so heavy that farmers keep running away and your army is plagued
by desertion because farmers don't want to be drafted.
The great accomplishments of the Ritzirio state began to look unnecessary and unsustainable.
You can't keep a country on a permanent wartime footing and you can't host the Olympic games
every four years.
So by the late 800s the imperial elite, the courtiers around the emperor, they began to
wonder whether this massive central government was worth the effort.
Well we'll return to those courtiers and to the fate of the Ritzirio system in a later lecture.
