In Japan, gardens are treated as cultural treasures.
They are listed as UNESCO heritage sites.
Tourist dignitaries are taken to gardens as a means of showing them Japanese culture.
And famous gardens have huge crowds and long lines in the tourist season.
Now all countries have beautiful gardens.
England and France have rich garden cultures.
But Japanese gardens have a cultural significance that's unusual.
So in this lecture, I want to consider Japanese gardens in two ways.
I want to discuss gardens as part of the history of aesthetics.
Why are Japanese gardens designed in a certain way?
What concept of beauty lies behind these gardens?
But I also want to look at gardens as expressions of broader political and social concerns.
So, with both the aesthetic and the social dimensions in mind,
let's look back on a millennium or so of Japanese gardens.
And let's start with the gardens of the high classical period.
A famous example is the Garden of the Byodo-in in Uji.
Both the buildings and the garden are classic evocations of Heian aesthetics.
The Byodo-in was originally a rural villa on the Uji River near Kyoto.
Fujiwara no Michinaga, the master of Heian court politics, used it as his meditation retreat.
It was converted into a temple in 1052.
It's worth considering the gardens and the surviving buildings in their totality
since there's a unity of purpose.
In fact, the goal of the designers of the Byodo-in was to create a tiny scale model of the pure land,
paradise in miniature.
As you'll recall, pure land Buddhism focused on rebirth in a pure land created by the monk Amida.
People who called out to Amida for help would be reborn in a paradise created for those believers.
The largest surviving structure in the Byodo-in complex is a hall dedicated to Amida.
It's known alternately as the Amida Hall or the Phoenix Hall.
The large statue of Amida inside is considered a national treasure
and the walls of the Amida Hall are covered with angels, a hovering sculpture garden of
auspicious figures, all rejoicing in Amida's vow to save every sinner who repents.
The Amida Hall is set in a lotus pond, an artificial lake, and this placement is important.
Essentially, it makes the Amida Hall an island of salvation.
There's a second tiny island next to the Amida Hall, and you can cross a bridge
from the Amida Hall to the tiny island and then to the shore.
This symbolizes Amida's bridge to the pure land.
So this garden is one with a clear religious message.
Another superb example of this type of classical garden can be found hundreds of miles to the
northeast in Hirazumi at a temple called Mootsuji. Mootsuji was originally a large
temple complex built by the northern branch of the powerful Fujiwara House.
All the original temple buildings were lost in a fire in the 1200s,
but the overall landscape architecture of the ponds is largely unchanged.
In its original layout, Mootsuji had the same major buildings as the Buodo Inn.
A main prayer hall set on a quiet lake and a bridge to a small island and then a bridge
to the shore. Those bridges have not been rebuilt, but the layout is clear.
The garden is famous for two groups of rock formations and a tiny sandy beach.
Those features are miniature replicas of real landscapes,
such as the craggy sea coast of northeastern Japan.
So the lake show represents in miniature the entire world with a huge range of landscapes.
So visitors enter the complex and then leave the world behind by crossing a bridge
to the small island and then crossing another bridge and arriving at the main temple building.
That path was an analogy for Amida's saving power,
which moves us from this ordinary world to paradise.
Now, like the Buodo Inn, Mootsuji had something of a dual role,
as a religious site and as an aristocratic villa.
And each year in May, there's a reenactment of a Heian-era garden party.
Reenactors in Heian court dress sit on mats by a gentle stream
and they indulge in a favored Heian pastime.
Sake is floated down the stream and the revelers need to compose a poem
appropriate to the occasion before it's their turn to drink.
Now, that is either a taste of heaven or perhaps a taste of hell,
all depending on your attitudes towards the impromptu composition of poetry.
But let's move forward in time to medieval gardens and medieval aesthetics.
One of the most imitated gardens in Japan is the garden at Saihoji in Kyoto.
It's also one of the hardest to visit. You need to apply in advance and to copy sutras,
and that's all to reduce the volume of visitors.
Saihoji is also known colloquially as Kokedera or Moss Temple,
because the gardens are famous for rich verdant moss.
Ironically, where there is now moss, there was once raked sand.
The exact origins of the Saihoji gardens are unclear,
but the current layout reflects the influence of the monk Musoul Soseki.
Soseki converted the site from a pure land temple to a Zen temple in the 1300s.
So originally the garden was probably a paradise garden,
but in its redesign it no longer directly represents the paradise theme.
Instead, the garden offers ever-changing perspectives.
There's a new view from each step in the path.
Second, Saihoji has the prototype of a Japanese rock garden.
A clump of rocks commonly thought to suggest a waterfall.
Now, Musoul Soseki was an influential monk in his own right,
and his garden designs were widely imitated.
Perhaps the most famous garden influenced by Saihoji is at Kinkakuji,
the Temple of the Golden Pavilion in Kyoto.
The Golden Pavilion was built at the end of the 14th century
by the 3rd Ashikaga Shogun, Ashikaga Yoshimitsu.
He used it as a villa, but after his death
it became a Zen temple known as Roku-onji.
Now the garden at Kinkakuji, like the garden at Mootsuji,
uses large stones to create the illusion of a much larger landscape seen from a distance.
The small lake seems like a vast sea with a rocky shore,
but like Saihoji, there's no longer a bridge to paradise.
The original Pure Land Buddhist element is gone,
and the emphasis is instead on changing perspectives.
There are points where the main building, the Golden Pavilion, dominates the landscape,
and others where it almost disappears in favor of small rocky islands or a wooded grove.
And behind this aesthetic is something conceptual.
Instead of the Pure Land emphasis on a journey to the Pure Land,
there's a nod to the Zen notion of extreme subjectivity.
How we see the world can change radically based on our state of mind.
If we are optimistic or pessimistic, angry or sad,
the same things will look differently based on that attitude,
and Zen gardens highlight that idea by letting us see strikingly different worlds
just by walking a few steps or turning our heads.
Now, in addition to the gardens that surround it,
the pavilion at Kinkakuji is also worthy of our attention.
In fact, it tells us a great deal about its patron, Ashikage Yoshimitsu.
Remember, Yoshimitsu was the most powerful shogun in a weak dynasty,
and his powers stand from his ability to flatter and cajole the imperial court,
and also to flatter and intimidate other warriors.
Moreover, as a patron of culture, he relied on trade with Ming China for income.
Well, we can see all of these aspects of Yoshimitsu's rule in the design of the Golden Pavilion.
It was completed around 1397, and it incorporates three distinct styles.
The first floor is laid out like a Heian-era aristocratic villa, like the Biodo Inn.
Heian residences were mostly open spaces, separated by wooden screens.
So, this is Yoshimitsu's nod to his position in Kyoto aristocratic life.
But the second floor is in the style of a warrior residence.
That layout featured floors with bamboo matting called tatami,
and sliding doors called shouji.
That style is now what most Japanese think of as traditional Japanese architecture.
So, this second floor is Yoshimitsu as shogun.
He's literally stacking his position as a warrior on top of his position as a courtier.
And then, the tiny third floor is in the style of a Chinese Zen temple,
with distinctive arch windows.
So, this is Yoshimitsu as a patron of high culture and a supporter of Zen Buddhism.
So, we have one building that blends three different styles,
and it reflects Yoshimitsu's syncretic approach to politics.
He knew that he had to work all the angles to maintain power,
simultaneously styling himself as a warrior, a courtier, and a patron of the arts.
And the syncretism of Kinkakuji, the combination of distinct cultural elements,
is considered a centerpiece of medieval aesthetics.
And so is the godliness of Kinkakuji.
Note, for example, the opulence of the gold leaf on the second and third floors of the pavilion.
The term basara, now rather obscure, referred to the conspicuously outlandish design.
The best counterpart in modern English might be to refer to a man as a dandy.
It's mostly a term of praise, but it also carries the connotation of flashy and ostentatious.
But, there's also a countervailing aesthetic in medieval design.
Towards the austere, and towards the simple.
In landscape architecture, the great example of this is the emergence of temple rock gardens.
The term in Japanese is kare-sansui, or dry landscaping.
Two iconic rock gardens are the abbot's gardens at Daishen-in and at Ryō-an-nii.
Both date from the 1400s or the 1500s, in their original layout,
and both have been attributed to the famous painter, Sou-ami.
Now, both of these gardens have changed over the years,
and there's a vigorous debate over which elements were added later.
Some research suggests that the garden at Ryō-an-nii, for example,
was rebuilt extensively in the 1700s.
So, it's actually not so much a medieval garden as an early modern recreation of a medieval garden.
But, all of those quibbles aside, there are two distinctive innovations in these gardens.
First, the concept of dry landscaping itself.
Using raked gravel or moss to represent water,
and using stones to represent such features as mountains and bridges,
and in the extreme case of the rock garden at Ryō-an-nii, the only plants are moss.
Second, these gardens are incredibly compact in size.
The rock garden at Daishen-in is L-shaped.
It bends around a corner of the abbot's residence.
It's about 30 feet by 40 feet, with the most important features squeezed into a corner
and area about 10 feet by 10 feet.
Now, this tiny garden has generated an outsized volume of interpretation.
The most basic is that the tall upright stones represent mountains.
The rake sand is a rushing stream.
The long horizontal stone is a bridge over the stream.
Another stone in the adjacent garden is supposed to represent a boat floating in a rushing stream.
In that interpretation, the genius of the garden is that it takes a scene
from classic monochrome Chinese landscape painting with a waterfall rushing out of the mountains
and converts it into a garden and shrinks it to a tiny scale,
all while somehow invoking the grandeur of a spectacular vista.
There are much more esoteric interpretations, though.
Some argue, for example, that the tall upright stones at Daishen-in are not simply mountains,
but highly stylized images of the Buddha, and that the smaller stones around these
are actually protector deities.
The same debate rages over the meditation garden at Biolanji,
which consists of 15 stones surrounded by rape gravel.
An early description of the garden at Biolanji talks about rocks representing a tiger swimming
with her cubs. Another reading of the rocks is that they are islands in a sea.
Now, many have noticed that it's impossible to see all 15 stones in the Biolanji garden from any one angle.
And that reinforces the Zen belief in the limits of the senses.
Looking at the garden reminds the viewer that they are only seeing a fragment of what is really there.
Now, because so much written about these gardens is speculative,
including the history of the design changes, I don't want to run wild with these interpretations.
But these two gardens are at Zen temples, so it's worth highlighting the contrast between a
Zen garden and a Pure Land Paradise Garden.
The Paradise Garden is supposed to represent Paradise.
In other words, it represents Paradise to our senses.
But by contrast in a Zen garden, we are reminded that that naive reliance on our senses
will actually impede our progress towards enlightenment.
Instead, we want to be reminded of how unreliable our senses are.
So even if the garden is beautiful, perhaps it should also be a little bit perplexing.
Another important innovation of the 1500s is the tea garden,
a special style of garden leading to a small tea house.
But to understand the tea garden, we need to know a little bit about the Japanese tea ceremony.
So let's take a little detour and loop through the history
and the aesthetics of the Japanese tea ceremony before turning to the tea garden itself.
Tea drinking in Japan seems to have begun with monks who brought tea back from China.
But by the 1300s, tea drinking had become an important social occasion.
Warriors would hold large parties and put out all their finery, not just find tea cups,
but find rugs and trays and tables.
And these lavish parties were part of that ostentation, that basara of the medieval era.
Now in the 1500s, tea drinking became more structured and more formal.
And lords began to entrust the details of these parties to tea masters.
In modern parlance, tea masters were a combination of protocol officers,
etiquette masters, and event planners.
Now it's difficult to discuss tea ceremony because there was such
a large and rich literature on the subject.
And some of that literature is completely overwrought.
For example, one of the earliest serious books on Japanese aesthetics in English was about tea.
The Book of Tea by Okakura Kakuzo, published in 1906.
Okakura considered tea ceremony to be the essence of Japanese culture.
He called it a philosophy that encompassed ethics, religion,
economics, and, in his words, moral geometry.
Now I would encourage you to read Okakura's book.
It's just wonderful.
But I would disagree that tea ceremony is the essence of Japanese culture and philosophy.
What I would say instead is that it is an important reflection of Japanese aesthetics.
First, tea ceremony involves graceful and stylized movements.
The tea masters should enter the room, sit and prepare the tea,
serve the tea all without a single wasted motion.
Every move should be graceful and pleasing.
We see this in other Japanese art forms, like no theater.
Second, the tea house itself and the implements.
They are commonly simple without ornamentation.
A tea house is not the place for a labric gold leaf.
Rather, an ideal tea implement is a simple bamboo whisk or a water ladle.
The clean lines have a form follows function beauty, rather than a rococo ornamental beauty.
A perfect cup for tea ceremony could be a little bit lumpy, maybe a dull earth tone.
And therefore, it's all the more beautiful to those who are aesthetically attuned to the simplicity of the overall ceremony.
And here's a third way that the tea ceremony reflects Japanese aesthetics in general.
The ideal tea house is somewhat cramped,
which creates a feeling of intimacy.
The interior might be decorated with a single flower and a single hanging scroll,
but the key idea is that less is more.
On these elements of Japanese aesthetics, simplicity, natural materials, clean lines, functional elements,
these values have historically dovetailed with certain western aesthetic movements.
The English arts and crafts movement, the architecture of Frank Lloyd Wright,
Steve Jobs of Apple had a long standing Zen practice.
And while there are no bamboo max, Steve Jobs himself linked his emphasis on clean simple functionality to Japanese aesthetics.
Okay, with these remarks on the tea ceremony in mind, let's now return to the tea garden itself.
What's the function of this garden?
Well, essentially it's supposed to lead you into the almost meditative space of the tea ceremony.
So an ideal tea garden has carefully placed stepping stones.
The walk should be peaceful and moist, but not muddy.
So moss is good.
The palette of the planting should be muted.
Evergreens are ideal.
Bold flowers and bold colors, not good.
So plum blossoms are nice because they have such a muted, subtle blossom.
Maple is okay, a little red amidst the green,
but cherry is, by all classic manuals, a definite no-no, just too flashy for a tea garden.
Now many famous gardens are actually fusions of multiple styles.
For example, the gardens of Jishoji, more commonly known as Ginkakuji, the Temple of the Silver Pavilion.
The Silver Pavilion was built for Shogun Ashikaga Yoshimasa, the grandson of Ashikaga Yoshimitsu.
And there's a wonderful contrast between the bold assertiveness of the Golden Pavilion
as compared to the somber muted tones of the Silver Pavilion.
And that's fitting because Yoshimitsu was the most powerful Shogun in the Ashikaga dynasty,
while Yoshimasa presided over the collapse of the Shogunate into civil war.
In many ways, Ginkakuji's muted pavilion anticipates the small scale and the design of tea houses.
It has a strolling garden around a lake, but it's most famous for a gravel garden,
a smooth mound of gravel, and a long raised sand plain.
The combination of those two is said to look like a mountain by the sea.
Now, Ginkakuji was built in the 1400s, and this gravel garden was almost certainly not a part of the original design.
According to one account, when the garden pond was dredged many years after the initial construction,
the dirt was piled up and the garden designer had a brainstorm to cover the dredged mud with gravel.
But the net effect of these layers of design and redesign is that Ginkakuji is now like three gardens in one.
A garden inspired by Saihouji, a quasi tea garden, and a rock garden.
Now, some of the most famous gardens in Japan are called strolling gardens or tour gardens.
These gardens can actually combine multiple elements, and they might have boarded one tea house.
Strolling gardens are often grand in scale, but they use elements from small scale gardens.
The idea is to pack multiple perspectives into this space.
A fine example of a strolling garden is Katsura Rikyu in Kyoto,
known in English as Katsura Imperial Villa or Katsura Detached Palace.
It was built mostly in the 1600s for a prince Toshihito, the younger brother of Emperor Goyose.
Toshihito's garden is not astonishingly original, but it's a fantastic combination of the elements we've discussed so far.
It has two beautiful showing or drawing rooms.
That's the style of the Silver Pavilion at Ginkakuji and also of the middle floor of the Golden Pavilion.
Ginkakuji.
Katsura Rikyu also has four surviving tea houses.
Each of those four tea houses has a separate path, and each path hides most of the garden until you reach the tea house,
at which point a final vista is revealed, but each vista is unique to that tea house.
In addition, we find a famous example of borrowed scenery at Katsura Rikyu.
There's a gravel promontory that leads out to a lantern, beyond which are two small islands connected by a stone bridge,
beyond which is a tea house.
The effect is two-fold.
First, it suggests a famous view from Amanohashidate on the Japan seacoast.
And second, it makes the tea house look far away, although it's not.
And that's exactly how a tour garden should function.
So let me close with a contrast between Japanese and Western gardens,
specifically between the gardens at Versailles and Katsura Rikyu.
While this contrast is not original, it's informative.
When you visit Versailles, what's your general impression?
Well, it has lots of straight lines and right angles, lots of clear, broad vistas.
The human effort required to build and maintain Versailles is obvious.
It's obvious in the fountains, the exact shape of the shrubs.
The garden is nature bent to man's design, the natural world conforming to the power of the king or the power of the state.
There's something very different going on at Katsura Rikyu.
Instead of broad vistas, you have an ever-changing perspective.
Indeed, there are not many gardens in Japan where you can walk 50 feet and see pretty much the same thing.
In much the same way, many have observed Japanese gardens look more natural than nature itself.
Now, it's tempting here to make a grand generalization about philosophy in the East versus philosophy in the West.
But let me instead make a more limited observation about Japanese aesthetics.
Often the goal in Japanese aesthetics is to hide human effort rather than to extol it.
And in gardens, that means invoking nature rather than coercing it.
Japanese gardens avoid hard-right angles, avoid unnatural forms.
You want natural elements to suggest and invoke still grander natural elements.
A rock suggesting an island, for example.
Well, we've certainly covered a lot of ground today.
Along the way, I hope you've gained some insights that will heighten your appreciation of Japanese gardens,
whether you tour them virtually or physically.
