Today, I'd like to talk about Japanese woodblock prints, a central form of visual art in early
modern and modern Japan. And I want to focus on one of the most famous masters of the form,
Katsushika Hokusai. Hokusai is best known for his woodblock print of a huge wave with
Mount Fuji in the background. It's called, in English, the Great Wave of Kanagawa, and in
Japanese, Kanagawa Okinamiura. It's probably the single most famous work of art, Japanese work
of art, in the world, and one of the most widely reproduced, arguably over reproduced. In fact,
when I did just a quick search online for products featuring Hokusai's Great Wave, I found, well,
of course, various posters and prints, but also ashtrays, pillows, refrigerator magnets, coffee
mugs, fans, a liquor flask, cell phone cases, wall switchplate covers, kitchen drawer knobs,
and perhaps, most unexpectedly, a ukulele. So in terms of commodification, Hokusai's wave probably
ranks with the Mona Lisa and Edvard Munch's The Scream in terms of ubiquity. It's plastered
everywhere. It's unseemingly everything. And Hokusai's popularity in the West is longstanding.
The French impressionists loved his work, and he was the subject of the first museum exhibit in
the U.S. dedicated to a single Japanese artist, an 1893 exhibit at the Boston Museum of Fine Arts.
Now, Hokusai's Great Wave is one image in a series of prints called 36 Views of Mount Fuji. The
series was published around 1830, and it was such a hit in Japan that Hokusai added ten more prints
to the series, shortly after the publication of the original 36. So today, I want to explore how
the Great Wave fits into the history of Japanese woodblock prints. And I'd also like to use
Hokusai's life as a window into late Tokugawa history. In particular, I want to look again at
our themes of isolation versus globalization, because Hokusai's career brings to the fore
the complexity of that relationship. Hokusai was born in 1760 and died in 1849,
just short of his 90th birthday. And for his entire life, visiting Europe or even China was
punishable by death. But that did not stop Hokusai from studying European and Chinese painting.
And while we might think today of Hokusai as quintessentially Japanese, his genius lay largely
in his ability to synthesize Chinese and Western elements within Japanese artistic traditions.
So, Hokusai's art gives us an insight into the tensions of the late Tokugawa period.
When he was born, the Tokugawa regime was stable and robust. But by the time of his death,
the regime seemed rather shaky. It was beleaguered by threats from outside and discontent from within.
And we can see evidence of that in Hokusai's work. So, let's take a snapshot of Edo and
Hokusai's youth. When he was born in 1760, the shogunate was just coming off its peak of power.
The eighth Tokugawa shogun, Tokugawa Yoshimune, had restored the regime's finances. He'd instituted
a series of wide-ranging reforms, from easing restrictions on imported books to changes in
the land tax. So, when Yoshimune died in 1751, he left the regime stable and solvent.
And Edo, the city of Hokusai's birth, was a bustling city with over a million people.
It was full of poetry societies and theaters and restaurants and bookstores and brothels
and gambling dens. Lots of legal and semi-legal and completely illegal ways for a rising bourgeoisie
to spend their time and money. And that rising urban class, that was Hokusai's clientele.
Because people living in an exciting city with some disposable income, they wanted to buy nice
things. But they did not have the income to enjoy the more conventional forms of art that were
favored by the samurai elite and the aristocracy. For example, a Chinese-style landscape painting
on a silk scroll. That's wonderful, but it's way too expensive. Tiger's style was a little
expensive. Tigers in the forest painted on a large wood panel. Well, that would be several
years' salary. So instead, this emerging class of urban consumers, they wanted art they could
afford. And they wanted art depicting things that captured their interest. And this led to an
explosion in woodblock print illustrations. Because once the boards were carved, these prints
could be produced in enormous volume. And if an image was popular, then the printers would keep
going until the boards wore out. And then they'd re-carve the boards and print even more. And
these prints were cheap. It was like buying a magazine today about the price of an inexpensive
meal. So what about the subject matter? Well, probably the most popular Tokugawa prints are
known as Ukiyo-e, or pictures from the Ukiyo. And what's the Ukiyo? Well, literally it means
floating world. And it refers to the demimonde of the geisha and of theater actors. So scenes from
the theater, portraits of famous actors, and portraits of courtesans, these were steady sellers
of the woodblock print industry. Now, I struggled to come up with a modern counterpart to portraits
of famous courtesans, famous geisha, something that would capture how the prints were simultaneously
beautiful and artistic, but also exploitative, enormously popular, but also somewhat tawdry
and trashy and ephemeral. And the best I could come up with was the annual sports illustrated
swimsuit issue. Because it certainly doesn't present itself as high art, but it certainly
involves a high level of photographic skill, and it absolutely sells a lot of magazines.
Now, today, these woodblock prints are acclaimed as works of art. And both museums
and individual collectors treasure, for example, prints by Suzuki Harunobu, who produced delicate
portrayals of famous geisha. Those were extremely popular and widely imitated. Another artist,
Kitagawa Utamaro, had great commercial and critical success with prints that resemble
modern headshots, focusing solely on courtesans from the neck up. And as for actor prints,
sometimes these were images of actors in famous scenes from the theater. Sometimes they claim
to show the actors relaxing offstage. So these were something of a cross between entertainment
weekly and people magazine. These were commercial projects, and they were rather ephemeral. In many
cases, the prints were just discarded at the end of the theater season. And they survived today,
partly because they were printed in such enormous volume.
Now, Hokusai began his career working in this tradition. He was apprenticed to a leading
Ukiyo-e artist named Katsukawa Shunshou. And following the custom of the day, Hokusai received
a new name from his master. He became Katsukawa Shunro, marking him as a disciple of Katsukawa
Shunshou. And working as Katsukawa Shunro for 15 years, Hokusai was quite successful, producing
well-executed, if unremarkable, actor prints. But in addition to learning the basics of Ukiyo-e,
Hokusai also learned from Katsukawa the basics of perspective drawing. Japanese artists had
learned this from Dutch prints. And the Katsukawa school was known for its use of perspective.
These prints were called Ukiyo-e, or floating pictures. Now, after Katsukawa died in 1793,
and especially beginning in the 1800s, we see Hokusai engaging in all sorts of bold experimentation.
He continued to do theater prints, including a series on the famous play Chūshingura.
But for this series, he set the scenes outside, so he could combine the figures with a dramatic
landscape. And while the prints correspond to exact scenes from the play, what I find most
interesting is Hokusai's complete mastery of vanishing point perspective. The scenes have
such depth, and the landscapes are so complex that the actors in the foreground just don't seem
that important. Now, Hokusai's mastery of Western style perspective is a great reminder
that although Japan was closed to Westerners during the Tokugawa period, it was not closed to
Western influence. On the contrary, Hokusai, like other Japanese artists of his day,
saw examples of Western art, and he was able to experiment with perspective and Western style
painting. Now, while Hokusai embraced Western aesthetics, he also tried other forms of Japanese
art. For example, he experimented with the style of the Rinpa school. They specialized in elegant
and refined landscapes, beautiful flowers, famous poets. Rinpa design was largely two-dimensional,
flat, almost the opposite of Hokusai's Western style landscapes. And Rinpa artists often used
gold leaf and worked on large screens. Now, what's remarkable at Hokusai is how studying these
different styles gave him the ability to transform conventions and infuse his work with the distinct
sensibility. For example, he did a series of bird and flower prints. Now, bird and flower painting
was a Chinese genre, going back centuries. But Hokusai's approach looks strikingly modern,
almost like Art Nouveau. And there's a good reason for that, because in fact, Hokusai's bird and
flower prints influenced Western European Art Nouveau artists years later. In his 1834 print
Wagtail and Wisteria, for example, Hokusai used a simple palette, just a few colors, but with
strong contrasts, red versus green, for example. And the flowers are precisely rendered and draped
almost as architectural elements. It's highly stylized, yet it's also flowering and organic.
And that's a combination that would enchant Western connoisseurs like William Morris.
At the peak of his career, Hokusai kept very busy working on an amazing range of projects.
He was in demand as an illustrator for some of the best-selling authors of the day,
like Takizawa Bakin. He published an illustrated dance instruction manual. And he even continued
to publish cheap popular works on his own. You see, money management was not one of Hokusai's
strong points. And these popular works solved his chronic need for cash.
For example, in 1814, Hokusai decided to make some quick cash by publishing some of his sketches
with explanations of how to draw. It was a sort of manual. And he called it Hokusai manga, or
Hokusai sketches. But in the process, he accidentally invented the comic book,
because people loved the sketches, and they didn't care about the explanations. So Hokusai
dropped the explanations and began publishing volume after volume of manga.
Now, the term manga is a bit misleading, because today it refers to a graphic novel or a comic
book with a coherent story. Whereas, Hokusai's manga are just sketches, but they look astonishingly
like modern cartoons. His sketches show plants, animals, buildings, but most important are the
sketches of ordinary people in all sorts of activities. Work, household chores, eating,
drinking, arguing, sleeping. And he moved on to pictures of wrestling holds, dance moves,
skinny people, fat people, people with silly faces. These drawings are deceptively simple. For the
most part, they're just basic black outlines with the simplest color. But they have a certain
immediacy and accessibility that captured both Japanese audiences, and then starting in the 1850s,
Western audiences as well. Okay, now that we've traced Hokusai's artistic development and range,
we're almost ready to discuss his most famous work, his Great Wave from the 36 Views series,
which was published around 1830, when Hokusai was 70 years old. But first, let's get caught up with
how Japan had changed since Hokusai's youth, and get a sense of how his famous print fit into the
cultural landscape of the 1830s and 1840s. Well, by the 1830s, the Shogunate no longer looked like a
stable regime at the peak of its power. In fact, it was beginning to look more like a battered and
tattered regime. And while major urban centers were still prosperous, there was a pervasive
sense that something was not quite right. The socioeconomic order was out of whack.
For example, in the countryside, the samurai class had long relied on village headmen,
wealthier commoners, to keep control of their villages. And until the late 1700s,
these headmen commonly represented their villages in disputes with samurai authority.
But in the 1830s, the economy had changed so much that village headmen had become targets of
protests. Poor farmers no longer saw their village headmen as sharing their interests.
Increasingly, they saw them as the enemy, as exploitative landlords who always demanded more of
the crop, or unscrupulous merchants, or as loan sharks. And as a result of these growing tensions,
when there was a series of bad harvests in the 1830s, the countryside exploded in new levels of
violence. Instead of farmers asking their village headmen to request tax relief from samurai authorities,
they attacked their headman's property. Rarely the headman himself,
but they would wreck his floors, his furniture, his clothes, and they destroy his debt records.
Now, since samurai relied on these headmen to control the countryside, this was a breakdown
in control. It was alarming. And even worse was the appearance of samurai discontent.
In 1837, there was a huge protest in Osaka, led by a samurai named Oshio Heihachiro.
Oshio had worked as the equivalent of a police lieutenant in Osaka. And he was something of an
1820s Japanese Cipriko. The police in Osaka kept order partly by tolerating Yakuza activity,
so long as there was no street crime. But Oshio was appalled by this. He had a high sense of moral
rectitude. And he kept exposing illegal activity that was not supposed to be exposed until he
finally quit the force. And he founded an independent academy where he taught that Japan needed a
wholesale moral renovation. Now, amidst the harvest failures of the 1830s, Oshio petitioned the
government to take immediate action and seize private stores of grain for use in emergency relief.
It was, after all, the paramount responsibility of the shogunate to protect the people against
natural disaster. Well, his petition got no response. So Oshio took matters into his own hands
and he led his students into Osaka to overthrow the government and to help the poor.
Now, this protest was a disaster. Instead of overthrowing the government, the protesters
fled in disarray once their plans were discovered. But in the commotion, huge sections of Osaka burned
down and this was a massive humiliation for the shogunate. In highly visible fashion,
it had been rebuked by one of its own, a former samurai police officer.
And things were equally bleak on the forend front. After decades of international peace,
in the early 1800s, the Russians began attacking Japanese settlements in Ezo and the Kura Islands.
And then during the Napoleonic wars, a British ship entered Nagasaki and threatened to burn down the
city. And U.S. whalers, searching for fresh water and supplies, started coming ashore and stealing
things and scaring the locals. So in 1825, the shogunate ordered that all western ships
trying to come ashore in Japan should be driven away. Shoot first and ask questions later,
even if it meant attacking the Dutch by mistake. Now, that was a pretty tough response,
except that in 1841, the shogunate got the bad news that these foreigners were pretty tough
themselves. They had defeated China in the opium war. And that suggested that shooting first and
asking questions later was the wrong response. And the shogunate had to back down. It quietly
changed its policy from shoot first and ask questions later to give the foreigners fresh food
and water and try to get rid of them without shooting. Now, while this reversal pales next to
the public humiliation that was in store for the shogunate 12 years later, when Commodore Matthew
Perry sailed into Uraga Harbor, nonetheless, it badly damaged the shogun's prestige.
Okay, now let's return to Hokusai, who had been drawing and painting during all this turmoil.
The first run of his 36 views of Mount Fuji came out in the midst of the foreign crisis,
and the series was reprinted again and again throughout the tumultuous 1830s and 1840s.
So how does the Great Wave of Kanagawa fit into this period of turmoil? Well,
unlike conventional views of Fuji, in fact, unlike all the other prints in Hokusai's series of 36
views, it's not a view from Japan. The perspective is of someone looking at Japan from outside.
So one striking thing about the Great Wave is that it anticipates an end to Japanese isolation.
Hokusai has actually symbolically left Japan to show it from the outside as foreigners might see it.
So not surprisingly, this perspective, however, subconsciously, was deeply appealing outside
Japan. But it was also appealing within Japan for a people who were becoming curious about
what Japan looked like to foreigners. The other key point is how Hokusai treats the human figures.
The men in this print in the boats are hard at work. They're fighting huge waves,
and they're probably bringing the day's catch back to Edo. This is your fresh sushi on its way to
market. And Hokusai is doing something remarkable here. These ordinary hardworking men are bigger than
Fuji. So instead of Fuji dominating the landscape with tiny people in front, Fuji is just there to
tell us that these hardworking men are in Japan. You can see the same thing in the ninth print in the
series, Fuji View Fields in Awari, or Bishu Fujimigahara. There's a barrel maker hard at work in the
foreground, and his barrel is actually much larger than Fuji. Now it's a brilliant composition.
It's almost a study in how to compose a landscape from simple shapes. And we see the same thing in
the 34th print in the series, hardworking people in front, bigger than Mount Fuji, and a bold
composition with a few strong geometric elements. So what's going on here? Well, I'd argue that
Hokusai is struggling with the looming question of the 1830s in Japan. What to do about all these
discontentant commoners? Our government is run by samurai, which is fine. So long as it's not run
solely for samurai. And by foregrounding these figures, by making them bigger than Fuji, I think
Hokusai is saying in a sense, don't forget the common people. They are important.
Okay, consider another late Hokusai work, Boy Viewing Mount Fuji. Now here Fuji is gigantic.
That's its more conventional depiction. And Hokusai is again using simple bold shapes to balance his
composition. But notice the young boy, whose basket probably should be full of fish, but instead he's
playing the flute and looking at Mount Fuji. And so are we. We're looking at him and looking at Fuji.
That simple country boy is actually just like us. We're both transfixed by Fuji. And come to think
of it, we're not exactly hard at work either. We're just looking at a painting. We're watching him
watch Fuji, or maybe we're looking at Fuji along with him. In that case, the viewer and the
view we are doing the same thing. So Hokusai is suggesting that the viewer and this simple playful
boy from a mountain village have more in common than we might think. We're all in it together.
That's quite a message for an art collector. Now, Hokusai's interest in ordinary people
helps explain why European impressionist painters were so taken with him,
as well as a range of other Japanese artists who also depicted scenes of ordinary life.
Because the impressionists and the Japanese artists were really doing the same thing. They were
insisting that ordinary people and daily life could be subjects for works of art.
Think of a classic pre-impressionist painting like Nie's The Gleaners, with poor, hard-working women
dominating the foreground of the painting. That painting was originally vilified,
but later acclaimed by the impressionists. Or think of Monet's painting, The Coal Man,
which depicts men unloading coal from barges on the sand. Now, Monet reportedly discovered
Japanese prints in a spice shop where they were being used as wrapping paper.
But however he came upon them, he discovered something amazing. There were kindred spirits
on the other side of the world working in a different style, but engaging the same basic
questions. How do I make everyday life beautiful? Mary Cassatt was another western artist captivated
by Japanese woodblock prints, especially the work of Kitagaru Utamaro.
Her painting, The Letter, is such a close study of Japanese prints that it could almost be a
Japanese artist attempting to draw an American scene. Now, because Utamaro did mostly courtesan
prints, Cassatt had to adapt those to American domestic scenes, and she might not have known that
in Utamaro's portrait of a woman holding her infant, that mother was a geisha. But Cassatt's
portraits of mothers bathing their children were drawn closely from Utamaro. Van Gogh, by contrast,
was most interested by the artist Utagawa Hiroshige. In fact, his painting entitled
Bridge in the Rain after Hiroshige is a direct copy of a Hiroshige print.
Now, Hiroshige and Hokusai were contemporaries, and to some degree rivals. Hiroshige's famous series,
The 53 Stations of the Tokaido, is somewhat parallel to Hokusai's 36 views of Fuji.
But Hiroshige was engaged in the same issue, putting ordinary people in his landscape. Parents,
and children, and pilgrims, always like Hokusai, he sought to make the mundane important and beautiful.
Well, we've covered a lot of ground today, and I'd like to close with an observation about
what Hokusai tells us about our big themes of globalization versus isolation.
Now, Hokusai lived a remarkable life, and despite his chronic financial troubles,
he lived to be almost 90, and he produced acclaimed work almost until the day he died.
And Hokusai lived that long and productive life without ever meeting a foreigner. He lived and
died during an era of isolation. But that was isolation from foreign people. It was not isolation
from foreign culture. Hokusai knew about Western painting techniques. He even used Western inks
in some of his prints. And that points to a fascination with the rest of the world,
and a hunger for knowledge about the world outside Japan. So, Hokusai was something of a paradox,
a distinctly cosmopolitan artist who lived entirely in an era of isolation.
Now, that hunger for knowledge of the outside world, that drove the next cycle of Japanese history,
modern globalization. And that's the subject we'll address next time.
