Religious thought does not exist in a vacuum.
It both shapes politics and is shaped by politics.
Today we are going to discuss how the decline of the Imperial Court and the rise of the
warrior class changed Japanese culture, with a specific focus on Japanese Buddhism.
What were the consequences of decades of fighting in Kyoto and across Japan, and the rise of
powerful new warrior families, first the Taita House and then the Minamoto House, and then
the establishment of a new type of government, a warrior government in Kamakura?
Well, we can look to 13th century Buddhism in Japan to see how aesthetic, religious,
and philosophical concepts were both reflecting and shaping this cultural transformation.
Amidst the fighting of the 1150s and the 1180s, the Imperial Palace was burned several times,
and Kyoto was also struck by natural disasters.
And the aristocracy emerged from the turmoil with less power and less money.
Now those changes did not obliterate the appeal of court culture.
In fact, Shoguns and Samurai warriors co-opted parts of aristocratic culture.
But simply put, the world of the tale of Genji was over.
After the tumultuous events of the 12th century, the aristocracy would never again be at the
apex of wealth and power.
So as an aristocrat, what do you do with that loss?
Well, perhaps the most evocative and influential response to that question can be found in
an early 13th century work called Hojouki, which can be rendered in English as the tale
of my hut or an account of my hut.
Hojouki was written by Kamo Nochome, who was born in 1155 and died in 1216.
Kamo's father was the superintendent of a major Shinto shrine, Kamo Shrine, and therefore
Kamo received junior fifth rank at the Imperial Court.
That was technically a mid-ranking civil service position in the old Ritsuryo system.
But practically it meant that Kamo was a petty aristocrat.
And he was most important and most respected as a poet.
Emperor Gotoba appointed him to the Imperial Poetry Office, so he got to enjoy special
visits to the Imperial Palace.
But Kamo was never adept at Kyoto politics.
He was unable to inherit his father's position at Kamo Shrine, which went instead to a cousin.
So Kamo moved in with his paternal grandmother, but he eventually left to live largely as
a recluse.
So adding to the general decline of the power of the Imperial Court, we have Kamo Nochome's
own personal failure.
And this led to his masterpiece, his brilliant evocation of the Buddhist concept of impermanence.
Almost any well-educated Japanese person can recite the opening lines of Hojoki, which
in English can be translated this way.
The flow of a Russian river is ceaseless, and yet the water is never the same.
The froth that floats on stagnant pools, now vanishing, now forming, never lasts for long.
So too it is with the people and dwellings of the world.
Now that sense of impermanence, we are just foam on the water.
Well that's just Buddhism 101.
But Kamo relates to his own life.
He describes in vivid detail the great fire of 1177, a great whirlwind in 1180 and an
earthquake in 1185, and he asks, what's the point?
Why build a gorgeous mansion?
It's just another thing to lose.
And instead Kamo says to the aristocracy, give up, become a hermit, live in the mountains
in a simple hut without a fancy house that could burn down.
Live in isolation so you're not pulled into the frenzy of city life.
And the result of this is a series of beautiful evocations of the allure of simplicity, along
with evocations of the pain of loneliness.
And Kamo wrote, if the evening is quiet, I long for old friends.
When the wild deer of the mountain approached me without fear, I realized how far I am from
the world.
And when sometimes, as happens in old age, I awake in the middle of the night, I stir
up the embers of the fire and make them my companions in solitude.
Now just savor that thought, when I wake up at night, tortured by fears of my own mortality,
I don't distract myself with worldly things, I stir up memories.
And in another place, Kamo writes, when the weather is fine, I climb the nearby peak and
look out over Kyoto, my old home, far, far away.
No one owns this view and no one can interfere with my enjoyment.
And so Kamo concludes that our ability to enjoy things is not determined by the splendor
of the things we possess, but by our wisdom.
And so, describing his view of a mountain, he writes, it is not an awesome mountain,
but it scenery gives me endless pleasure as it changes through the seasons.
And I listen transfixed to the lonely hooting of the owls.
How much more would this all mean to someone of deeper knowledge?
So it doesn't need to be a remarkable mountain, instead we need to deepen our aesthetic sense.
Now I want to take a leap here and emphasize the less is more aspect of Kamo's aesthetic.
Because if you think about Japanese design, you probably think of clean, simple lines,
muted colors, subtle textures, refined, restrained.
You probably don't think of Todaiji Temple with its huge bronze Buddha inside in one
of the largest wooden buildings in the world.
Now to be fair, when I say Japanese aesthetics, some people might conjure up anime or images
of something garish.
But for now, I want to focus on Kamo Nochome's less is more aesthetic.
Which is certainly Japanese, but it's specifically medieval Japanese, and Kamo is emblematic
of an aristocratic culture that is trying to find meaning in loss.
Trying to find out how less is more because they have less.
In fact, Kamo is associated with an aesthetic term, yugen.
That means mysterious or deeply evocative.
And the idea is to summon up a mood through small, subtle hints, rather than explicit gestures.
And that aesthetic goal would influence a broad range of Japanese art forms, including
poetry, tea ceremony, and no theater.
So beyond this changing aesthetic sensibility, what else came from the turmoil of the 12th
century?
Well, the Buddhist temples of Kyoto that were dependent on noble patrons suffered a drop
in income and status.
But at a more philosophical level, the entire conceptual framework of institutional Buddhism
took a hit.
Remember the idea that was embraced in ancient Japan?
The idea that kings who promoted Buddhism would enjoy peace and prosperity?
Well, that peace and prosperity notion was a tough sell after the warfare of the 1100s.
And that raised a deeper question within the medieval Japanese clergy.
Some wondered what good is a massive temple complex?
What good is a massive library of sutras if we are beset by civil war and turmoil?
Maybe the established temples have gotten key aspects of Buddhism all wrong.
And as a result of these anguished questions, in the century after the founding of the first
shogunate, we see two major changes in Buddhism.
One is the start of a school new to Japan, Zen, that's well known around the world.
The second is a massive growth in Pure Land Buddhism, the dominant form of Buddhism in
Japan today, and some remarkable changes in Pure Land Buddhism.
Let's talk about Pure Land Buddhism first.
As you recall, Pure Land Buddhism focuses on a monk named Amida, who attained Buddhahood
and took an important vow.
He promised that he would transport to a wondrous Pure Land anyone who called out to him in
supplication.
That supplication to Amida is called the Nembutsu, and the full phrase is Namu Amida Butsu,
literally save me Amida Buddha.
And salvation was a Pure Land to which the supplicant would be transported.
The Pure Land was a western paradise, paradise is always in the west in East Asia.
And the Pure Land can be seen as more of a physical place, or as the bliss you experience
when you're released from worldly turmoil.
Now the saving power of Amida was not new to the 1200s.
Remember, Heian aristocrats died calling out to Amida.
It's new was the sense that other approaches to Buddhism might actually be broken, and
that Pure Land Buddhism might be the only true teaching.
That idea was first put forth by a monk named Honen, who lived from 1133 to 1212.
Honen was born into a prominent royal family.
He became a monk in his youth, and he spent decades as a devoted student of Tendai Buddhism
at Enrakuji.
Now Enrakuji was a powerful and prominent temple complex in your Kyoto, but Honen became
profoundly dissatisfied with the monks there.
And by the way, that's something of a theme in medieval Japanese history, dissatisfied
monks from Enrakuji.
Well, why was that?
Enrakuji was very wealthy, partly because it engaged in money lending, and Enrakuji
would use its religious power to force loan collection.
If you owed money, monks might bring down a portable shrine from the temple and place
it in front of your residence, which had both the powerful symbolism of religious sanction
and the practical effect of a picket line.
No one could enter or leave your residence.
And Enrakuji also had armed monks, who often got into skirmishes with monks from other
temples.
We'll encounter some other armed monks later when we discuss Japan's civil war of the
1400s and 1500s.
But money lending monks, profit making temples, these things were emblematic of the problems
of institutional Buddhism in classical and medieval Japan.
And so Honen concluded that he was living late in a cycle of Buddhist law.
The Buddhist conception of time is cyclical, Buddhist truth is discovered, then diluted
and then lost, and then another Buddha rediscovers it.
Think of it this way, Buddhist insight is like the children's party game of telephone.
A Buddha discovers how to attain nirvana, and he tells his disciples, and they do their
best to convey this truth accurately, but of course it becomes slightly garbled with
each generation, as it gets a bit further away from the master's insight, until eventually,
as with the party game, it becomes incoherent.
It no longer resembles the original idea or original words.
Now when Buddhism, always not lost, because there will be another Buddha.
In many Mandaras, there is an image of Midoku, the Buddha of the future, who might not even
exist yet, but will rediscover truth in the future, which is good.
But what if you're living late in that game of telephone?
Buddhist truth is now garbled, and the future Buddha has not yet arrived.
Well Honen says, that's exactly Japan's situation in the 12th century.
Look at this turmoil and corruption, we are living at the end of a cycle.
The Japanese term is mapo, meaning roughly end times, and Honen said, our sutras are garbled,
our world is in turmoil, and the only true Buddhist insight left is Amida's vow.
So according to Honen, the only way to achieve an auspicious rebirth is by calling out to
Amida.
Now as I've noted, there was nothing new about the Nembutsu, the Nembutsu as part of Buddhism,
but Honen said it was all of Buddhism.
So all of the achievements of the great temples, all of their learning and scholarship, was
worthless.
Sure, some monks were doing their best, but after playing telephone for so long, all they
had was good intentions, rather than Buddhist insight.
And not surprisingly, this got Honen in trouble.
Major temples lobbied to have his teachings banned, and in response, Honen agreed to respect
other Buddhist teachings.
But he got banished from Kyoto anyway, although he was allowed to return after a few years.
Even so, in his final testament, he insisted that the power of the Nembutsu does not come
from study or understanding, but just from thinking of Amida.
And this revolutionary doctrine was taken still further by Honen student Shinran.
His sect became known as True Pure Land Buddhism to distinguish it from Honen's Pure Land Buddhism.
And Shinran took the radical egalitarian aspect of Honen's thought and ran with it.
Now Honen had already made salvation available to ordinary people through their prayers.
You didn't need to be learned, or wise, or make large donations to a temple, you just
needed to say the Nembutsu.
And Shinran concluded that because of this, the more wicked and stupid and vile you were,
the more blessed you were.
Because a wealthy and a wise person, well, in another epoch, they might have been able
to achieve an auspicious rebirth through their virtuous actions.
But dirty, rotten scoundrels, they would be doomed, if not for Amida.
In fact, according to Shinran, the combination of the two following things makes a person
uniquely blessed.
First, being born after Amida's vow.
And second, being a rotten person who should go straight to hell based on their worldly
actions.
That's what it takes to be uniquely blessed.
Because salvation is just seven syllables away from anyone, Namu Amida Butsu.
But how much more miraculous that is, that Amida made salvation seven syllables away
for the poorest of the poor, the vilest of the vile, the most incorrigible of sinners.
And Shinran declared in a famous phrase, if good people can be reborn in the pure land,
how much more the wicked man.
And another way of putting this might be, repent and be saved.
In fact, not only can you repent and be saved, but if you truly abandon yourself to Amida,
give up on the power of your own actions.
It will feel as though Amida took his vows for you, just for you.
Now, if this sounds vaguely familiar, if you're thinking, did you just say, Amida died
for my sins, well, not surprisingly, many scholars have noted that pure land Buddhism
is a sort of Protestant reformation in Japanese Buddhism.
You cut out the clergy, you cut out the monasteries, and you focus on simple questions of faith.
In fact, the pure land emphasis on faith, specifically salvation through faith rather
than salvation through acts, leads to something of a paradox in both Christian and true pure
land Buddhist thought.
If you know you can be saved through faith, why not sin like crazy for a few years just
to make salvation even more worthwhile?
And there's a small but fascinating literature in comparative religious studies looking at
how both Christian and Buddhist thinkers have struggled with that problem.
So as we can see, Shinran took Honen's ideas and pushed them to their radical conclusion.
Now, Shinran was a follower of Honen, but while Honen was willing to compromise with
the more established schools of Buddhism, Shinran almost reveled in his outsider status.
For example, Shinran was exiled along with Honen, and even after he was pardoned, he
saw no reason to rush back to the capital.
In fact, he married an explicit violation of the Buddhist tradition of clerical celibacy.
And then he declared that he was a better Buddhist because he was married.
It was his responsibility to bring Amida's vow to ordinary people.
And ordinary people get married, so the conventional distinction between clergy and laity was actually
contrary to good Buddhist practice.
Because that made clergy seem remote and strange.
So Shinran seemed to relish his persecution by mainstream Buddhism.
In fact, where Honen had compromised, Shinran became more dogmatic.
Honen allowed for salvation through good deeds, through merit.
He just minimized it.
And that way, he could have peace with other sects.
But Shinran insisted that even the thought that you could reach the Pure Land on your
own would undermine your faith in Amida.
It would confuse you with the lingering sense that you can be redeemed through acts, and
you can't be redeemed through acts, only through faith.
And Shinran even created a special purgatory so that those who believed in the power of
their own acts, they would eventually get to the Pure Land, but it would actually be
harder and more painful.
Now we can look at Shinran's radicalism not just from a religious perspective, but
also from a broader social and political perspective as well.
Shinran himself was from a low level Fujiwara family.
So his renunciation of institutional Buddhism is a great marker of a broader shift in power
that occurred at the end of the Heian period.
The shift away from the imperial court at Kyoto were a few noble families and the Fujiwara
in particular had held sway.
Now let's move from Pure Land Buddhism to consider the other great school I mentioned
earlier, Zen Buddhism.
There are actually two main schools of Zen, the Rinzai school and the Sultou school.
But before we get into respective doctrines of those two schools, I want to talk politics
because the sects capture two approaches to sponsorship that were emerging in medieval
Japan.
The Rinzai sect got a powerful patron, but it wasn't the Fujiwara, it was the new Shogunate
and Kamakura.
And Sultou Zen, by contrast, tried to be more independent.
But neither school was based in Kyoto.
Both were opposed by the major temples in Kyoto.
And the two founders of Zen Buddhism in Japan, Asai and Dogen, were both tendai school monks
at Enryakuji.
Both left Enryakuji in disappointment and went to study in China.
So Zen, like Pure Land Buddhism, is emblematic of medieval challenges to the older Kyoto
based schools.
Zen is quoted as saying, It is taught that we are all born Buddhas, but I have yet to
find amongst the monks of Enryakuji a single person who looks like a Buddha.
It seems that a collection of scriptures is worth nothing unless someone puts it to use.
Now apart from its commentary on Enryakuji monks, that quote is actually a great introduction
to the core concept of Zen.
We are all Buddhas with Buddha nature within us.
We attain enlightenment by revealing that Buddha nature, and central to revealing that
Buddha nature is meditation, particularly meditating on nothing.
So unlike Shingon meditation, where you might meditate on an incredibly complex mandala,
the goal in Zen is not to fill your mind or expand your mind, but to empty your mind.
There are a great number of Zen parables that focus on this emptiness.
For example, there is the famous modern parable of a university professor who visits a Zen
master and the master begins pouring tea into the guest's cup and just keeps pouring.
The cup fills, then it overflows, and eventually the professor says, stop, it's full, there's
no more room in the cup.
And the Zen master responds, the cup is like your mind.
If you come here with a full mind, there's no room for Zen.
An older, famous metaphor is from Dogen, and he said that the quiet mind is like a tea
cup full of pure, still water.
That tea cup can reflect the moon.
In fact, a single drop of water can seem to contain something enormous so long as it is
clear and still.
Now, because everyone already contains Buddha nature, enlightenment can come in a flash.
Training may take years, but enlightenment is instantaneous.
It's like clouds parting, and all of a sudden there's a beautiful moon.
That moon was there all along, but you couldn't see it.
Now this emphasis on meditation and on emptying the mind is common to both major schools of
Zen.
The difference between the schools is primarily that Dogen-Soto school focuses largely on
unceded meditation, whereas Asa Rinzai school focuses more on the use of koan, a type of
riddle.
You're probably familiar with two of these.
What is the sound of one hand clapping?
And if a tree falls in the forest, does it make a sound?
Now those koans are so familiar that it's easy to overlook the primary insight, which
is that your rational mind is a source of confusion rather than enlightenment.
So let me give you a non-Zen example.
If you've ever had a golf lesson, or a tennis lesson, or a batting practice in baseball,
you've probably heard something like swing through the ball.
Now rationally that's absurd.
The bat, the club, the racket, they do not go through the ball.
And basic physics tells us that as soon as you lose contact with the ball, nothing you
do can have any effect on the ball.
So why does imagining the counterfactual swing through the ball work?
Well it seems that that's the only way we can put full power into the swing and not
stop too soon.
The only way we can do that is to delude ourselves.
If you think rationally about the physics of the process, you will play less well.
You need to trick yourself into swinging through something.
So imagine that insight applied to every aspect of life.
Just try that golf trick on everything.
But here's a commercial example.
Don't try to hit your sales target, swing through the target.
Modern monastic life isn't commercial, but it tries to infuse a sort of simple unconscious
rhythm into everything, preparing meals, eating meals, gardening, housekeeping.
All those things should be done with awareness, but not an aggressive sense of intention.
Now if you've ever had an especially great day playing a sport, a musical instrument,
or maybe even just cooking and felt that strange effortlessness, that's the goal of
Zen practice.
Now let me highlight something that might be obvious.
Zen is a very appealing approach to Buddhism for warriors.
That idea of a calm and collected mind, a state of mind that makes you more able to
execute complex physical tasks, that's crucial for a warrior.
Because if you're a swordsman, a bad day on the links might mean you die.
So clearly, Zen meditative practice would have had a powerful appeal to the Samurai
class, the Samurai class that had begun to wield authority in Japan in the latter part
of the 12th century.
And here again, as with pure land Buddhism, we see a connection between the religious
atmosphere in medieval Japan and the political change that's taking place.
Now Zen and pure land are in many ways extremely different Buddhist traditions.
Zen with its focus on nirvana through a quiet mind, and pure land with its focus on salation
through faith.
But both are actually similar in terms of broader social change.
Zen is both reflect the decline of the imperial court and the shift of power away from an
aristocracy in Kyoto.
Both schools sought to bring Buddhism to a new audience.
