Our topic today is Japan's relative isolation from the 1600s to the 1800s.
We could call this isolation phase two, and it followed globalization phase two.
That was a period of intense international interaction, from the 1300s to the early 1600s.
So what triggered this shift from globalization to isolation?
There were multiple interconnected causes, but overall we can point to two main forces.
One was Toyotomi Hideyoshi's disastrous invasion of Korea.
Hideyoshi had overreached and failed, and the Tokugawa were not going to make the same
mistake.
The second was Christianity, which had come to Japan in the 1540s, but it began to seem
especially destabilizing in the early 1600s.
Now the Tokugawa shogunate was not strictly isolationist, but it was ready to eliminate
any foreign contacts that might undermine its authority.
So we might say that international involvement was considered guilty until proven innocent,
and curtailing international engagement was central to the Tokugawa power structure.
The Tokugawa dynasty lasted for over 250 years, from 1600 until the 1860s, and it endured
largely because the Tokugawa shoguns avoided foreign wars, they especially avoided wars
that they might lose.
So let's look at this in detail.
How did the Tokugawa come to power?
And how did they stay in power for two and a half centuries?
And how did their policies tend to isolate Japan from the broader currents of international
affairs?
You will recall that the three unifiers of the 16th century were Oda no Bunaga, Toyotomi
Hideyoshi, and Tokugawa Ieyasu.
Well Ieyasu served first as Vassal to Nobunaga, and then to Hideyoshi.
But when Hideyoshi died in 1598, he left a five-year-old as his heir, Hideyori.
Hideyoshi had hoped that a council of five lords would work together to support Hideyori.
But in fact, that council quickly split into two factions, each vying for control of Japan.
A great battle, the fight that determined the political future of Japan, was the battle
of Sekigahara in 1600.
It was a massive engagement, with about 80,000 men on either side.
Ieyasu's side, known as the Eastern Army, was actually by some estimates the smaller
of the two factions, smaller than the so-called Western Army.
But during the first days of fighting, three generals decided to defect to Ieyasu's side.
That tipped the balance of power, and the Eastern faction was able to rout their enemy.
After the battle of Sekigahara, Ieyasu immediately began consolidating his power.
He seized the land of enemy Daimyo, keeping some for the Tokugawa House, and reapportioning
the remainder to his allies.
And the result was that within just a few years, the Tokugawa controlled about 50% of
Japan directly.
By that I mean land directly controlled by Tokugawa Ieyasu, and then later his direct
descendants.
Now about half the land was controlled by close vassals of the Tokugawa, or by Tokugawa
relatives.
That's basically descendants of Ieyasu's younger sons.
And a little more than a third was controlled by what the Tokugawa called outsiders.
So Ieyasu did not eliminate all of the Daimyo who opposed him in 1600.
Rather he let several powerful enemy Daimyo survive, but on reduced holdings, and mostly
in the far southwest.
The Shimazu House for example, they opposed the Tokugawa in 1600, but they were allowed
to keep their holdings in the far southwestern corner of Kyushu.
The Mori also opposed Ieyasu, and they were allowed to keep a reduced holding in the far
western edge of Honshu.
Now ironically, 268 years later, those two domains would lead the revolution that toppled
the Tokugawa Shoguns and restored the Emperor.
Now I'm counting 268 years as 1600 to 1868.
Ieyasu technically only became Shogun in 1603, and the last Tokugawa Shogun, Yoshinobu,
resigned in 1867, although that didn't prevent a battle in 1868.
So back to the early 1600s.
It's tempting to ask, why did the Tokugawa let these enemies survive?
But upon a moment's reflection, keeping your enemies at bay for 268 years is quite a political
accomplishment.
By longevity standards, the Tokugawa did rather well.
And this is one of the paradoxes of Tokugawa rule.
In hindsight, the reasons for the fall of the regime were built into the foundations
of the dynasty, but those weaknesses did not manifest themselves for a long time.
So the next question is how?
How did the Tokugawa regime last for so long even though they let their rivals survive?
Well, the Tokugawa had several strategies.
As I mentioned, they allowed powerful enemy Daimyo to survive, but primarily on reduced
holdings and far away from the Tokugawa capital of Edo, now known as Tokyo, and far from the
major cities of Osaka and Kyoto.
They also tightly monitored the Daimyo.
The Tokugawa issued strict orders that the Daimyo were not allowed to enter alliances
without Tokugawa approval.
They were not allowed to arrange marriages without Tokugawa approval.
In fact, they were not allowed to do new things.
Shinki is the exact term in the edict.
Daimyo cannot do anything new without Tokugawa approval.
And that makes sense, because if the Tokugawa can prevent Daimyo alliances, they don't need
to control all of Japan.
Fifteen percent is plenty.
Just keep your allies loyal and your enemies confused and fragmented.
And this worked for over 250 years.
Now it's true that when the Tokugawa were confronted by Western gunboats in the 1850s,
this settlement from the 1600s immediately looked terrible.
Now think, because the Tokugawa were shoguns, they were responsible for defending all of
Japan.
But to mount that defense, they could only draw on revenue from 15 percent of Japan.
But in the 1600s, that crisis was the distant future.
So the Tokugawa were able to serve as shoguns from 15 generations because they kept the
Daimyo under tight surveillance.
They kept them from meeting without supervision.
They kept them from conspiring.
But here we come to a decisive fact for Japanese culture under the Tokugawa.
Making that system of surveillance work required both curtailing globalization and Christianity.
To understand why, let's first take a quick glance at the history of Japanese Christianity
before the Tokugawa came to power.
So Christianity arrived with the Spanish and Portuguese explorers in the mid-16th century.
And for the remainder of the century, Christian missionaries, primarily Jesuits, were rather
successful.
They converted several major Daimyo along with hundreds of thousands of Samurai and
commoners.
Now Oda Nobunaga and his successors, Toyotomi Hideyoshi and Tokugawa Ieyasu, they were willing
to tolerate Christianity as long as it did not threaten their rule.
And so in the 1570s and 1580s, we have something remarkable.
Nobunaga was allowing the construction of Christian churches while he was simultaneously destroying
temples associated with true Pure Land Buddhism.
And in fact, as a percentage of the population, there were probably more Christians in Japan
in the 1590s than in the 1950s.
Now Hideyoshi, Nobunaga's successor, he did once become suspicious of Christians and he
issued an order banning Christianity.
But he changed his mind when missionaries offered prayers for his invasion of Korea.
In fact, some of his best generals in Korea were Christians.
The Daimyo Konishi Yukinaga, for example, he took Busan for Hideyoshi and then he took
Seoul and then Pyongyang.
Konishi, also known by his Christian name, Augustine, was a practicing Christian until
his death in 1600.
But he was also a loyal Japanese warrior.
But as the Tokugawa began to implement their tight surveillance of the Daimyo after 1600,
this attitude towards Christianity changed significantly.
And here's why.
If the leaders in Edo didn't want Daimyo to forge any alliances that weren't approved
by the Shogun, well that made Christianity immediately suspect because Daimyo who are
co-religionists will have all sorts of occasions to meet outside of Tokugawa's surveillance.
And in fact, fellow Christians might consider each other natural allies.
In fact, Tokugawa Ieyasu became alarmed when a Christian samurai, Okamoto Daihachi, forged
a document for a Christian Daimyo, Arima Harunobu.
Arima was the Daimyo of a territory near the port of Nagasaki and he had his eye on
some adjacent lands.
So he paid Okamoto to lobby for him.
Okamoto was an aide to one of Ieyasu's senior counselors.
But rather than lobbying, Okamoto just forged the documents.
And when this was discovered, Okamoto confessed.
But he insisted that Arima was in fact planning to murder the magistrate of Nagasaki, a Shogun-o
official.
Now for the Shogunate, it didn't even matter if this murder conspiracy allegation was true.
The problem was chain of command and loyalty.
Okamoto, a retainer of the Daimyo Honla Masazumi, had gone around his own lord and he'd gone
around the Shogunate to have direct contact with Arima Harunobu and the only thing connecting
Arima and Okamoto was that they were both Christians.
So this affair raised the specter that Japanese Christians formed a network of subversive men
with dual loyalties.
And this turned Ieyasu against Christianity.
And in 1614 he issued a decisive edict banning Christianity.
According to the edict, Japan was the land of the gods and Christianity was leading people
to quote, contravene government regulations, traduce Shinto, defame the true law of Buddhism,
destroy righteousness and corrupt goodness.
That's quite a list of accusations.
But Ieyasu was genuinely concerned that this foreign religion was going to undermine his
regime.
Japanese Christians were ordered to renounce their faith and missionaries were forced to
leave under penalty of death.
But here's the problem, Japan has porous borders.
You could expel every missionary and close every church in Japan, but what if they just
moved to a Japanese expatriate community in China or Manila or Thailand and conspire there?
So one obvious solution is to cut off that flow of people.
In other words, to isolate Japan from the rest of the world.
And in fact, the cornerstone of Tokugawa foreign policy was a strict limitation on the presence
of foreigners in Japan and on the ability of Japanese to travel overseas.
So in 1624, the Tokugawa government banned the Spanish from coming to Japan.
If you just banned the Spanish, then you don't have to check whether or not they are missionaries.
And in 1635, it banned almost all overseas travel by Japanese.
To solve the problem of conspiracy overseas, you can't leave.
And then in 1638, the regime faced the exact peril it had been dreading, a massive uprising
of Christians called the Shimabara Rebellion.
The Shimabara Rebellion was staged largely by Catholic peasants.
The rebellion came to a head when the rebels took over Hada Castle in Hizan Province in
southwestern Japan.
To suppress the uprising, the Shogun sent 125,000 troops.
That was to defeat about 30,000 rebels.
And after a siege of several months, the Shogun's forces retook the castle and they beheaded
virtually all of the defenders.
Now this was not unprecedented.
In fact, this was just how Nobunaga had dealt with the Ikkoiki.
Those were the Buddhists who challenged his authority.
But this confirmed Tokugawa's suspicions that Christianity was a subversive force.
So the Tokugawa intensified their suppression of Christianity and in 1639 they banned the
Portuguese.
Now despite these bans on Christianity, the Dutch and the English were allowed to remain
in Japan because they separated commerce and missionary work.
But the English stopped sending ships in the 1620s largely for financial reasons.
And the Dutch were restricted to Nagasaki.
They were actually restricted to a small landfill island in Nagasaki Harbor called Dejima.
Chinese merchants were still allowed to come to Japan for trade, but they were restricted
to Nagasaki and they were required to live in a walled Chinatown.
So foreigners in Japan were increasingly treated like a possible contagion, something
that needed to be contained and closely monitored.
And that marked a huge shift.
It eliminated a transnational community of adventurers, traders and advisors.
Here are two examples of the types of people who disappeared after the early 1600s.
First, Will Adams, the English navigator and shipwright who inspired the James Clavel
novel Shogun.
Adams reached Japan in 1600.
He was befriended by Tokugawa Ieyasu who employed him as a commercial agent, an informant,
a pilot, a shipbuilder and an interpreter.
Adams grew wealthy as a commercial trader.
He made voyages to Ryukyu and to Southeast Asia.
Ieyasu treated Adams as a vassal.
He even gave him two matched swords, the standard mark of a samurai.
He had an income equal to that of an upper ranking samurai and he was allowed to marry
the daughter of a Tokugawa official.
But after Adams died in 1620, no Westerner was treated with that level of confidence for
about 240 years.
My second example is a reverse example.
Not a foreign advisor to a Japanese ruler, but a Japanese advisor to a foreign ruler,
Yamada Nagamasa.
Yamada was a Japanese adventurer who journeyed to Thailand in about 1611.
Yamada had what was called a Vermillion Seal.
That was an official trading permit from the Tokugawa.
But he made his base in Ayutthaya, the capital of the Thai kingdom.
And there he became the leader of a large Japanese expatriate community, numbering in
the thousands.
Yamada received a title from the Thai ruler, King Song Tham.
Then after the king's death in 1628, Yamada led local Japanese forces in combat to secure
the throne for Song Tham's son.
But remember, in 1635, the Shogunate effectively cut off its foreign communities.
Overseas Japanese were not allowed to return, so the Japanese community of traders based
in Thailand, they gradually assimilated and disappeared.
So the cases of Will Adams and Yamada Nagamasa, they illustrate the growing isolation of Japan.
But since history is never quite as tidy as the textbooks make it seem, I think it's
important to qualify Japan's isolation during the Tokugawa period.
First, the Tokugawa didn't cut all ties with the outside world, just ties that might be
dangerous.
Yes, they avoided major wars on the continent.
But if the Tokugawa were fairly certain that they would win, they didn't object to a war.
And the best example of this is the conquest of Ryukyu in 1609.
Now in the 15th century, the Ryukyu Kingdom, which is today the Japanese prefecture of Okinawa,
it was an independent kingdom with close ties to China.
But in 1609, the Shimazu clan of Satsuma asked the Tokugawa for permission to attack the
island kingdom.
Now Satsuma was a domain in far southwestern Japan, so you can see why the Shimazu might
have looked on Ryukyu with greedy eyes.
In any case, the Shimazu assured the Tokugawa that conquest would be easy.
These were largely undefended islands, and this would not turn into a long drawn-out
battle on the continent.
The Shogun said yes, and the Shimazu were right.
They quickly captured the capital of Naha, and they brought the king of Ryukyu to Satsuma
as a hostage.
But then they did something remarkable.
They sent the king back to Naha, with instructions to conceal the Japanese conquest of Ryukyu
from China.
Instead of trumpeting their conquest, Japanese leaders decided to hide it, to lie about it.
Why?
Well, the main value of Ryukyu was as a trading center.
The kingdom had tributary status with the Ming, and they also traded with Korea, and
much of Southeast Asia.
But if the Ming heard that Japan had conquered Ryukyu, then at the very least they would
cut off ties with Ryukyu and stop trade.
And that would destroy much of the value of the conquest.
But what if the Ming didn't know?
Well then, Satsuma could get access to international trade through Ryukyu.
So the Shimazu stationed troops in Naha.
But when Chinese diplomats came to Naha, the Japanese troops left the capital and hid.
The Shimazu also gave the kings of Ryukyu, the Shou Dynasty, increasingly strict and
detailed instructions on how to conceal Japanese influence.
There were, for example, directives to conceal from Chinese officials anything written in
Japanese.
So let's contrast this with Hideyoshi's 1592 invasion of Korea.
Instead of a massive and exhaustive campaign on the continent intended to impress the Ming
with Japanese power, the Tokugawa chose a small, quick battle, and then carefully avoided
annoying the Ming.
We see a similar pattern in Tokugawa relations with Korea.
First Ieyasu disavowed any connections to Hideyoshi's invasion.
Now, since Ieyasu was Hideyoshi's vassal, the Korean court probably knew he was lying.
But they also understood that Ieyasu was not interested in another invasion, so both sides
began moving cautiously towards a peace treaty.
But then they hit a big snag.
What titles should they put on the treaty?
The Korean court was a stickler for proper Ming protocol, so they thought the treaty
should be between the King of Japan and the King of Korea, both of whom would be vassals
of the Ming.
The Tokugawa did not like that.
They did not want to be vassals of the Ming, and they didn't want the title King of Japan.
But they did want a peace treaty, so they got creative.
They invented a new title, Great Lord, or Taikun.
The Tokugawa Shoguns became the great lords of Japan in diplomatic correspondence with
Korea.
Now, here's a question.
Is a great lord equal to a king, or perhaps superior to a king, or perhaps inferior to
a king?
Who knows?
That was the beauty of the strategy.
The shogun was superior to the King of Korea in Edo, but inferior to the King of Korea
in Seoul.
Now, the two sides could have tried to clarify this question, but that would have meant a
war, so everyone was much happier to invent a new title and then secretly agree to disagree.
And by the way, that term Taikun, meaning great lord, that's the origins of the English
word Taikun.
Okay, what about the eternal East Asian problem?
How does the Japanese sovereign, either the shogun or the emperor, how does he relate
to the Chinese emperor?
Here again, the Tokugawa decided to dodge the question.
They didn't want to be kings.
They didn't want to challenge China like Hideyoshi, so they came up with a brilliant dodge.
These merchants in Nagasaki were not regulated by the shogunate, because that might raise
concerns in Beijing.
Instead, they were regulated by the Nagasaki Chinese Translation Office, which took orders
from the shogun, but nothing they wrote said shogun.
Now, sure, Beijing knew that regulations coming out of the Nagasaki Chinese Translation Office,
those were shogunate orders.
But China didn't want a war either.
So if a Chinese merchant complained that he wasn't being treated right in Nagasaki, he
couldn't bring in as many ships as he wanted, the Chinese emperor could answer, you want
the emperor of China, the son of heaven, his august majesty, to intervene in your petty
dispute with the city translation office?
So for over 250 years, there were no direct relations between Japan and China.
But the two countries managed to regulate bilateral trade.
A Japanese scholar has described this as silent diplomacy.
Both the shogun and the Chinese imperial court knew that they were indirectly managing trade
with each other, but it was a tacit arrangement.
So what have we seen?
Well, we've seen that while it's accurate to call Japan isolated during the Tokugawa
era, nevertheless, we need to qualify what we mean by isolation, because Japan did manage
to maintain a certain level of international trade.
And in fact, one consequence of this ongoing trade was that Japanese people remained fascinated
by foreign culture, by foreign objects, even though almost no one met an actual foreign
person.
Here is my favorite example of this Tokugawa era of fascination with the exotic, with the
foreign.
The eighth Tokugawa shogun, Tokugawa Yoshimune, was interested in foreign culture and technologies.
He promoted new crops like tobacco and cotton and medicinal herbs.
He even brought Chinese specialists to Nagasaki for advice.
And he was also fascinated with foreign novelties.
And he wanted to see a real elephant.
So in 1728, an ambitious trader brought an elephant, actually a pair of albino elephants,
to Nagasaki.
So Yoshimune actually asked for and got a white elephant, actually two white elephants.
Now the female of this pair died in Nagasaki.
But the male was walked first to Kyoto, the imperial capital, and then to Edo, the shogun's
capital.
Now in Kyoto, the emperor wanted to see this amazing elephant.
But the imperial court objected.
The courtier said it was improper for an ordinary beast to have an audience with the emperor.
So after much debate, the elephant was given court rank.
He was designated Vietnamese white elephant, fourth court rank.
And he was admitted to the emperor's presence.
The elephant then moved on to Edo, where he was received by the shogun.
So not only did foreign things make their way to Japan, there was also a massive interest
in these foreign things.
But for centuries, almost no foreigners actually came to Japan.
And virtually no Japanese left Japan.
There were some exceptions.
A few people with special authorization went to the Japanese trading post in Busan, Korea.
Some went to Naha in Ryukyu, and some traders in Ezo, now known as Hokkaido, sometimes traveled
into what's now Russia to trade for furs.
But for most Japanese, leaving Japan was impossible.
It was even unthinkable, until the 1860s.
And this is where we can circle back to the opening point of this course.
Remember when Itohiro Bumi, the future prime minister of Japan, gave a speech in Washington
D.C. in 1871, and he declared that Japan, for most of its history, had been isolated
from the rest of the world?
Well that was, as we've seen, completely wrong.
For Itoh, born in 1841, it described the world into which he had been born.
In fact, it described the world of Itoh's father and Itoh's grandfather, in fact the
world of his ancestors going back several generations.
So Japanese history for Itoh was the world of his grandfather.
That's an honest mistake.
Now that world began to collapse when Itoh was around 12, when Japan was forced to engage
with rising Western powers.
But that's a story for another day.
