I've chosen to call today's lecture, Japanese Poetry, The Road to Haiku, for a couple of reasons.
First, it's because haiku is not only the best known form of Japanese verse, but it's also the newest.
The term haiku itself was only coined in the 1890s.
But in addition, my lecture title reflects the fact that we're going to do some historical traveling today.
While I want to talk about the best known forms of Japanese poetry, I also want to give you a sense of the range of voices and styles in Japanese poetry.
So let's start not in the 1890s, but in the beginning with the oldest surviving Japanese poems, which actually appear in Japanese mythology in the stories of the gods.
There are two ancient editions of Japanese mythology.
The Kojiki, compiled in 712, that's the broadier, rowdier version. It's a compilation of Japanese oral tradition.
And the other is the Nihonshoki, or Nihongi, compiled in 720. That's more like a Chinese-style imperial history.
So instead of lurid details of rape and murder, we get classical references to Chinese virtue, Confucian virtue.
Needless to say, it's the Kojiki that has the better poetry.
And in the Kojiki, the gods simply compose poetry as they go about their days.
I've always liked the quip that opera can't be realistic because people just don't burst into song while going about their lives.
But in the Kojiki, the gods do just that. They compose songs and poems. If something great or terrible happens, they commemorate the event in verse.
My favorite example is the tale of Yamato Takeru.
He's a legendary emperor who's been inserted into the official imperial genealogy.
Yamato Takeru supposedly lived from 72 CE to 114 CE, but he's even less historical than King Arthur.
Yamato Takeru is simultaneously a great warrior prince and something of a dangerous lunatic.
For example, in the Kojiki, that's the rowdy version, Takeru murders his brother on a whim.
Takeru's father, Emperor Keiko, asked Yamato Takeru to find out why his brother had not been coming to the imperial palace.
So Yamato Takeru lay in wait for his brother, ambushed him outside the privy, killed him, ripped him limb from limb, rolled up his brother's body parts in a straw mat, and then threw it all away.
And when Emperor Keiko asked Yamato Takeru, why is your brother still not coming to the palace?
Yamato Takeru explained that, well, I killed him, I ripped him limb from limb, and I threw him away.
And Emperor Keiko was understandably alarmed, and he decided to send his son to the frontier where he could go berserk and kill border people instead of family members.
Now, because the Yamato Takeru legend has been pieced together from different oral traditions, he comes across as both a romantic hero and a violent conqueror who subjugates the wild frontier.
And his story includes poems about both courtship and murder.
The poems about murder are less interesting, I think, than the courtship poems, but both can be quite bizarre.
For example, Yamato Takeru is betrothed to a princess named Miyazu, but he leaves on a mission, and when he returns, there's a banquet for him.
But the princess has a menstrual bloodstain on the edge of her robes.
And Yamato Takeru writes a poem, in free translation it's like this.
Across boundless heavenly Mount Kagu, curved necked swans fly.
Your arm as slim as pliant, I wanted to use as a pillow.
I had thought of sleeping with you, but on the hem of the outer garment you wear, the moon has risen.
And the princess responds, my great lord, I have waited for you for years, but I could not wait any longer.
And then she quotes his couplet, on the hem of the outer garment I wear, the moon has risen.
And so Yamato Takeru marries her.
Now, this episode is just strange.
The implication seems to be that Princess Miyazu was going to wait to begin menstruating until Yamato Takeru returned,
but what's even more striking is that this comes up in courtship poetry.
Now we've already spoken about poetic banter in the Heian court,
which would reach its apex of refinement 300 years after the compilation of the Kojiki.
And needless to say, Prince Genji never wrote a poem about menstrual blood.
In the Heian court, too explicit a mention of blowing flower petals could be considered vulgar.
So menstrual bleeding would have been utterly beyond the pale.
And in fact, this shift in poetry from the crude but vibrant verse of the Kojiki
to the refined but studied poems of the Heian period.
That's a contrast in poetry that matches a transformation in society.
So we can trace this transformation in official poetry anthologies.
The oldest Japanese poetry anthology is the Manyou-shu, compiled in the 700s,
probably with some later editing.
Manyou means 10,000 leaves or possibly 10,000 words.
But 10,000 in East Asian languages can mean many or countless.
For example, the phrase may you live 10,000 years means may you live a long time.
So it's possible to interpret Manyou-shu to mean a collection of countless words.
In any case, the Manyou-shu is strikingly different from later anthologies.
First, the writing system is different.
As you'll recall, written Japanese uses Chinese characters and two phonetic systems.
But those phonetic systems only emerge in the 800s.
The Manyou-shu uses an earlier, quirkier phonetic system.
It's unique to the work itself.
This system is called Manyou-gana, literally the Manyou writing system.
A second characteristic that sets the Manyou-shu apart from later anthologies
is the earthy simplicity of the poems it contains.
Now these poems are not quite as rowdy as the Kojiki,
but they're certainly rougher than the refined aesthetic of later court poetry.
There are poems about seeing dead bodies washed up on the shore, about hunger and famine.
Those words and themes were considered unseemly in later centuries.
And a third characteristic of the Manyou-shu is that it contains poetic forms that disappear in later anthologies.
Most important are choka, which means long poem.
Now a choka features alternating lines of five syllables and seven syllables,
just like later Japanese poetry.
But a choka alternates five and seven many times before ending with five, seven, seven.
The Manyou-shu has hundreds of choka.
So it's probably the last stand of what was probably once a dominant poetry form.
But even in the Manyou-shu, short poems already outnumber long poems by about 20 to 1.
Above all, there are the five line poems, usually with a five, seven, five, seven, seven meter.
Those are called tanka, which means short poem.
And that shorter form would become the cornerstone of Japanese poetry.
In fact, tanka are often called waka, which means simply Japanese poem.
And here let me make a brief digression.
The word waka itself, Japanese poem, that calls attention to a distinction between poems written in Japanese
and poetry written in classical Chinese.
You see, by the time of the compilation of the Manyou-shu in the 700s,
there had been over a millennium of Chinese poetry with a range of styles and forms and meters.
And Japanese men, and here I emphasize men, often wrote in classical Chinese.
But for Japanese authors, writing in Chinese was challenging.
In classical Chinese poems, the tones were supposed to rhyme.
But almost no one in Japan spoke Chinese. It was a written language.
And Japanese is not a tonal language.
Chinese tones aren't any more natural for native Japanese speakers than they are for native English speakers.
So in Japan, poets writing in classical Chinese relied on props, like rhyme tables.
Now these were used in China too, because classical Chinese and spoken Chinese were often quite different.
But in Japan, these cheat sheets, they were even more important.
And they were pocket sized classical Chinese rhyme guides.
So you could always be ready to write an impromptu classical Chinese poem.
And despite those challenges, educated Japanese men, and again I emphasize men,
wrote poetry in classical Chinese well into the 1900s.
But in any case, back to Japanese poems.
Five line Japanese poems, or tangka, are sometimes called waka,
in order to distinguish them from classical Chinese poems.
And with this in mind, let's look at the development of the five line form.
The canon of classical Japanese verse was shaped largely by imperial anthologies,
collections that were commissioned and authorized by the imperial court.
Technically there are 21 imperial anthologies, starting in the 900s and ending in the 1400s.
But it's the first eight that are considered the true classics.
And the first and the last of these eight, the kokinshu and the shin kokinshu,
are considered the most influential.
Poems from those collections were not only famous as poems,
but they became the basis for other artworks like paintings and screens.
The dominant form in these anthologies was the waka, or the tangka, with a 57577 meter.
But classical tangka also featured two devices that are distinctive to Japanese poetry.
Pillow words and pivot words.
Now pillow words are set phrases that refer to other poems.
One or two words invoke an earlier poem and an earlier set of illusions.
So if you're poetically literate, you can enjoy a chain of references.
Here's an example.
By the 1100s, the image of falling asleep on a warm spring day surrounded by blossoms
wasn't just a pretty image.
It was a reference to a poem by the acclaimed poet, Kino Tsurayuki, who lived from about 872 to 945.
But also a poem by Kino Tsurayuki's cousin, Kino Tomonoi.
So in Princess Shikishi, a daughter of Emperor Goshirakawa,
when she wrote about napping and dreaming of blossoms,
everyone knew she was quoting those two poems.
In addition to pillow words, the other device that we typically find in classical poems is called the kakekotoba, or pivot word.
Pivot words are homophones that change meaning midway through the poem.
Now it's easy to show how kakekotoba work in English if you're willing to tolerate a banal example.
And I'll play with the English homophone here, meaning to hear a sound, and here, meaning this place.
It is so noisy in this crowded bustling room that I cannot hear.
At last I can find some peace away from the madding crowd.
Okay, get it? The poem pivots with the word here, first meaning I hear a sound, and then here, I've moved away.
I was in the noisy room, but now I'm away. I'm in a new here.
Okay, Japanese has celebrated poems that use that technique and are beautiful rather than banal.
Although they are punishingly difficult to translate.
So here's a famous example from the Kokinshu.
Tachi wakare, inaba no yama no, mine ni ouru, matsuto shikikaba, ima kaerikon.
Now the first word in the fourth line is matsu, which can mean either pine tree or two pine four.
So we can make that work in English as in this translation by Stephen Carter.
I must depart now for the pines that await me at Mount Inaba.
But should I hear that you two pine, I will hurry back to you.
Which is beautiful, although it still doesn't really work in translation because in English we need to repeat the word pine.
In Japanese, by contrast, the pivot word matsu is said only once, but it carries two meanings,
just like here in here in my bad English poem.
There are many pivot words, or kake kotoba, that just can't be represented in English.
Like urami, meaning to gaze at the shore and also to resent.
Or oto, meaning a sound, and also being the start of the word otozuru, meaning to visit.
There is a famous poem in the Kokinshu, the first imperial anthology, that uses a brilliant double homophone.
Hana no iro wa utsuri nikerina, itazura ni wagamio ni furu, nagame se shima ni.
So the poem opens with a lonely woman, behold my flower, its colors faded away, as to no avail.
So far so good in English, a five-syllable line, followed by a seven-syllable line, followed by a five-syllable line.
But then the last seven-seven couplet becomes very difficult to translate because the poem employs two pivot words.
First, there's the word furu, which means either rainfall or the passing of time.
And then there's the word nagame, which either means to gaze at or a long rain.
So when English, this needs to be spelled out in many words, I spent my days gazing at long rains and the passing of time.
Now that English translation fits the seven-seven count, seven syllables in each of the last two lines.
But the density of language in the original, that double meaning, that essence of high court poetry, it's hard to convey all that in English.
Now late in the classical era, a new poetic form rose to prominence, linked verse, or renga in Japanese.
Renga takes the standard five-seven-five-seven-seven format, and it breaks it into parts.
And it also involves multiple poets.
The first poet writes a five-seven-five poem.
That's the starter poetic fragment with only three lines.
But the next poet finishes the poem with a seven-seven couplet.
And then a third poet writes the next five-seven-five.
The official rules for a high art renga were set in the 1300s.
And in its classical form, renga were long, 100 stanzas, and there were also fairly strict regulations on the topic.
For example, there were specific stanzas in which you needed to mention the moon,
other stanzas in which you needed to mention flowers.
Some topics could not recur until a certain number of stanzas had passed.
And classic renga also focused on two themes, elegance, ushin, and mysterious beauty, you again.
Now, despite all these rules, renga allowed for remarkable creativity,
because of the ability to play with and explore other aspects of poetry.
A great example is a renga called Three Poets at Minase, or Minase Sangin Hyakuin,
composed in 1488 by the great poet Soogi and two of his disciples.
Now, this link poem follows all the classical rules.
The seasons of autumn and spring appear the right number of times.
Mountains and water appear the right number of times.
Love is always separated by five stanzas from the next mention of love.
But within these constraints, Three Poets at Minase creates a beautiful flowing dialogue.
So imagine if three fellow screenwriters are working together on a project,
and they're discussing what should happen, or what should happen, what has happened,
and they're sketching out the story, perhaps a series of intersecting or overlapping stories in real time and in poetry.
Okay, here's an example.
Partway through the cycle, the poet Socho, one of Soogi's students, wrote a 575 couplet.
If he should return, he will see how patiently I have waited.
So the subject is a woman waiting for her lover, but then the next line shifts.
Uttoki motare ga kokoro naru beki, which basically means, how could your heart be so cold?
So now this lonely woman seems to be getting angry.
Now the next three lines, 575, they touch on the overall theme of love gone wrong.
Since the beginning, it has been a source of pain, the way of love.
So this is a slightly new twist. Maybe it's not just the woman waiting for the man.
Maybe the whole affair ended badly. Are they both hurt?
And now the poem drifts in that direction, because the next two lines are about the inability to forget someone or something, even if you want to forget.
Wasure rare ga taki, yosai urameshi.
In loose translation, I resent the world because I cannot forget you.
And then the speaker becomes a hermit in the hills.
Living in the hills, what knowledge should I have of spring and autumn?
Now the poem does not explicitly say this is a man, but hermits by convention are always men, just like someone waiting by the window by convention is always a woman.
So we've now shifted to the man. Someone was waiting for him for stanzas earlier, except now it seems like he's not coming because he's a hermit.
And maybe he's hiding because she broke his heart.
And so the poem flows on. The speaker is now an old hermit who wonders if anyone even remembers he's still alive.
And then the speaker is a traveler unable to sleep, but each transition is graceful and thematically coherent.
Now beginning in the 1400s, poets began to play with Renga conventions, loosening the rules.
And originally these new poems were not taken seriously, although we do have some of these poems from anonymous anthologies.
And here's a great example from the 1400s. My translation doesn't match the syllable count, but it does match the surprise ending.
At a gap in the fence, did someone say hush? A little mouse, the cat next door, about to pounce.
Now those last lines for me capture perfectly the playfulness of comic verse.
Was it the mouse that said hush? No, no, no, it was the cat, the cat who's going to eat the mouse.
Now the playfulness of this verse, the lightness, the twist ending, this anticipates modern haiku.
And here we'll return to the beginning of the lecture, my lecture titled The Road to Haiku.
Because it took centuries for these little verses to become accepted as real poetry.
In fact, the earliest haiku appear more than 300 years before the word haiku.
In fact, the scholar Stephen Carter refers to these early poems as haiku before haiku.
So what happened? How did haiku become a legitimate form of poetry?
Well, first there was a boom in comic renga, renga on vernacular subjects with fewer rules and a broader vocabulary.
These simpler renga were all the rage in the 1600s and 1700s.
The poet Bashou is today known as a haiku poet, but in his day he was known as a renga poet.
And the 17th century author Ihara Saikaku is today known for his prose love stories,
but in his day he was also known as a great renga poet.
Now in addition to loosening the renga rules, poets also began to compose one person renga,
linking their own verse to their own verse, so it was no longer necessary to have a poetry circle.
And finally the Japanese began to appreciate the first three lines of renga,
just 575 as an independent form of short poetry.
And the word haiku itself reflects this evolution.
The hai in haiku comes from haikai, which means comic or casual.
These new renga were called haikai no renga, comic renga.
And the ku in haiku comes from hoku, that's the word for the opening lines in a renga.
So the 575 lines, so haiku is the hoku of a haikai,
the first stanza of a comic renga series.
So it's a very logical term, but a relatively new one.
For a wonderful example of this emerging poetic form, let's turn to a famous poem by the 17th century master Bashou.
Here's how it goes in Japanese.
Furu ike ya, kawazu tobikomu, mizu no oto.
And now in English, an old quiet pond, a frog jumps in, the sound of a splash.
Now everyone from the poets Kenneth Rex Roth and Alan Ginsberg to the translators Edward Sidensticker and Haruo Shirane
to the philosopher Alan Watts, they've all tried translations of this haiku.
But it's hard in English to get Bashou's hidden joke.
In classical Japanese poetry, the frog symbolizes love, because frogs croak so loudly to find a mate.
So when Bashou says kawazu, frog, his original readers would have been expecting a love story.
But no, it turns out to be just a frog.
So this classic haiku is as playful as something like on a moonlight stroll, a long stroll beneath the sky, where are the car keys?
Now today Bashou is Japan's most famous poet and he was fortunate enough to be acclaimed in his own lifetime.
He had thousands of students and he supported himself as a poetry teacher.
And that's remarkable in terms of social history, because amidst the increased literacy and prosperity of the Tokugawa period,
poetry went from being associated with aristocratic or monastic leisure to being a part of daily life for wealthier and more educated commoners.
For Bashou's students, getting poetry lessons was like, well, maybe like enjoying a lecture series from the Great Courses,
a way to have fun and feel more cultured at the same time.
And that expanded the audience for poetry in Japan.
And that began in the early Tokugawa era and it continues to this day.
So let me close with an observation on the importance of poetry in daily life in Japan.
To me, perhaps the best indication of this importance is the card game, Hyakunin Ishu, meaning 100 Poems by 100 Poets.
The game is based on an anthology compiled by Fujiwara No Teika, a courtier and poet who lived in the 12th and 13th centuries.
There are 200 cards, two for each poem.
One card has the first three lines and the other card has the last two.
And in the basic game, the reader reads the first three lines from a card and the players scramble to find the matching card.
There are several variations of this basic game, but what I want to highlight is the fact that Hyakunin Ishu was an incredibly popular game
from the 1700s to the 1900s.
Now, poetry aficionados, they look down on the game, observing that some of the poems just aren't that good.
But the popularity of the game reflects Japan's long-standing and widespread interest in poetry.
And here's the kicker. There are dozens of variants of Hyakunin Ishu with different poems.
There's a 2012 version, and that came after a 2002 version.
There are versions of the game for specific types of poet.
As early as 1847, there was a Hyakunin Ishu that featured solely women poets.
But for me, the most striking is the 1942 wartime version.
That was called Aikoku Hyakunin Ishu, 100 patriotic poems by 100 poets.
It was edited by a government committee and promoted by a major newspaper.
The poems ran from the ancient to the modern, and they all had themes of loyal service and sacrifice.
Now, I think it's impossible to imagine an American variant of Aikoku Hyakunin Ishu.
Can you imagine the U.S. Department of Education, or maybe the Department of Defense,
seriously promoting patriotism with a new version of a card game based on recognizing classical poetry?
But in Japan, well, that attempt to use the country's long love of poetry for the 1940s war effort,
that manipulation, for better or for worse, shows the depth and breadth of poetry's impact on Japanese life.
