Today, we're going to talk about Japan's Road to World War II, but I'm not going to
describe that road purely in terms of battles and treaties and major events.
Instead, I'd like to consider the early decades of the 20th century by looking at the lives of
three important individuals, each of whom offered a distinct perspective on Japan's place in the
world. The individuals I have in mind are Nitobe Inazo, Shidahara Kijuro, and Ishihara Kanji.
Nitobe and Shidahara were both proponents of Japanese democracy and international cooperation,
although from somewhat different perspectives. Ishihara, by contrast, was a die-hard militarist.
And we can understand the fate of Japanese democracy and Japan's road to war by examining
how and what made each of these men influential. So let's start with Nitobe Inazo. He was a true
cosmopolitan, in some ways an exemplary product of the major restoration, educated largely in the
United States. With an American wife, he was probably as comfortable in Washington, D.C.,
as in Tokyo. And his great accomplishments were representing Japan to the world,
both through his writings and through international organizations. For example, he was under
Secretary General of the League of Nations and Director of the International Committee on
Intellectual Cooperation, which you probably know by its post-war name UNESCO.
So if I had to summarize Nitobe's approach to the world in one slogan, I'd use the optimistic words
peace through mutual understanding. So where did Nitobe come from and how did he become
one of Japan's most influential spokesmen in English? Well, Nitobe was born in 1862,
just a few years before the beginning of the major restoration.
And as a student at Sapporo Agricultural College, now Hokkaido University, he converted to Christianity.
He went on to study at Tokyo University, but by 1883 he was already consciously stalling
himself as a bridge across the Pacific. So he traveled to the U.S. in 1884 and continued his
studies at Johns Hopkins. After completing his academic work at Holley University in Germany,
he returned to Japan and became a professor at Sapporo Agricultural College, but not before
taking an American wife, Mary Patterson Elkinton. So here we have a Meiji era educator who's
thoroughly steeped in the ways for the West. And it was in part this deep connection to the West
that drove Nitobe to write a very influential book called Bushido, The Soul of Japan.
Composed in English, this work attempted to offer Westners a sort of inside view of Japanese culture
and traditions. In fact, Nitobe said the book was prompted by a question from a Belgian jurist
who wondered how the Japanese taught ethics and morality since they did not have religious
instruction in schools. Now this was an especially fraught question for Nitobe since as a Christian,
he represented a tiny religious minority in Japan. But he pondered the question and he concluded
that Japanese morality was not rooted in Buddhism or Shinto or even in religion per se, but in
Japanese chivalry, Bushido. Now you may recall that the word Bushido literally translates as
the way of the warrior, but Nitobe's book is not a coherent historical account of Bushido.
Rather, it's a series of sometimes strained comparisons between Bushido and European chivalry.
In fact, Nitobe was most interested in establishing Bushido as a coherent, ethical,
and moral tradition, leading people to be stalwart, brave, honest, dutiful, and generous.
And it's an eccentric book, but those very eccentricities made it a huge success in the West.
It was translated into 10 languages and Nitobe produced no less than 12 revised editions.
And the impact of the book was enormous. H. G. Wells read it and he wrote a now largely forgotten
book called A Modern Utopia, in which the utopian society is governed by an intelligent,
physically rugged, self-sacrificing elite called the Samurai. Robert Badden Powell,
founder of the Boy Scout movement, read Bushido and then he included Samurai stories in his
collections of inspirational stories for Boy Scouts. Teddy Roosevelt also read the book
and he started practicing judo. So we can't underestimate Nitobe's role in the major era,
especially his impact on Japan's image overseas. Nitobe was a major reason Japan was seen as
progressive and civilized in the West. And this favorable view of Japan was one reason
whether U.S. and the U.K. were actually supportive of early Japanese colonial efforts in Taiwan and
Korea. In essence, Japan was seen as bringing progress to backwards places. One observer wrote
that Japan needed to send 100 intellectual Samurai policemen to Korea to clean up backwardness and
corruption. Moreover, in staking a claim to Korea, Japan was actually fighting against Russia,
which served British and American interests just fine. But then in 1905, the West's perspective
began to change. To put it bluntly, the U.K. and the U.S. were delighted so long as Japan was building
a colonial empire at the expense of Russia. But after 1905, it looked as though the Japanese
Empire might clash with European and American ambitions. And as a result, the period between
1905 and 1918 was tense, because Japan was now an imperial power, but it was unclear where it sat
in the pecking order of great powers. But in the wake of World War I, Nitobe saw an opportunity
for Japan to participate in a multinational effort to shape a peaceful and democratic world order.
And Nitobe's vision of Japan's role was bolstered by the surge in idealism and anti-war sentiment.
The devastation wrought by modern weapons had shocked the world, and a generation of idealists
insisted that World War I would be the war to end all wars. Now, I'm sure you're familiar with
institutions and the agreements that emerged from that generation. The Paris Peace Conference,
the Permanent Court of International Justice, the League of Nations, and most remarkably,
the Kellogg-Briand Pact, in which the signatories pledged not to use war to resolve disputes.
Both the U.S. and Japan signed the treaty. Now, in East Asia, post-war optimism produced one of
the world's first major arms control agreements. That emerged from the 1921 to 1922 Washington Naval
Conference. And according to the agreements reached at that conference, the great naval powers in
East Asia, Japan, Great Britain, and the U.S., agreed to limit the size of their fleets. And they
also agreed to stop carving up China. They would no longer establish colonies or special spheres
of influence. Instead, they would each recognize each other's rights to trade in China, and they
agreed to support the establishment of a stable unified government in China. So the great powers,
in a sense, agreed that they would compete economically, but not militarily. Now, Nitobe was
fully supportive of these military and economic agreements. And many historians consider the
Washington Naval Conference a great achievement in arms control. But for Nitobe, the most exciting
thing about the end of World War I was the start of a new era of intellectual and cultural exchange.
And his greatest passion was a non-governmental organization he co-founded in 1925,
the Institute for Pacific Relations, or the IPR. The IPR gathered businessmen, educators,
and intellectuals from across the Pacific in order to discuss problems. And in a spirit of
cooperation, basically, to fix the world. The group exuded Wilsonian optimism and idealism.
The first meeting was held in Hawaii, and Frank C. Atherton, one of the richest men in Hawaii,
declared with no apparent irony that their goal was to turn men from selfish ambition
toward reason, justice, and the morality. And Nitobe poured his heart into the IPR.
At the opening of its 1929 meeting in Kyoto, his address was full of idealism.
The Pacific lands, he declared, are to be the stage where shall meet all the races and cultures
of the world, but not in the spirit of conflict, but with a will to understanding and peace.
Unfortunately, by 1929, Nitobe's idealism was facing a serious challenge from within Japan,
because men like Ishihara Kanji were causing trouble in Manchuria. They were trying to carve out
a sphere of influence for Japan despite the agreements of the Washington Naval Conference.
And thus, at the Kyoto meeting, Nitobe found himself apologizing for Japan,
saying things like, Japan has committed some grave errors in dealing with China.
And then, in a wonderful turn of phrase, describing the different policies of different
factions within Japan, he admitted that Japan might look like Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde.
Now, Nitobe did not explicitly name the other two men we'll discuss today,
Ishihara Kijuro and Ishihara Kanji, but we can think of Ishihara as Nitobe's Dr. Jekyll,
the gentle philanthropist, and Ishihara as his Mr. Hyde, the depraved murderer.
So let's turn from Nitobe, who was committed to the idealistic goal of peace through international
and cultural exchange, and let's explore the personalities of his Jekyll and Hyde.
In the years leading up to World War II, how did Ishihara and Ishihara understand Japan's place
in the world of nations? Well, let's look first at Ishihara Kijuro. He was the diplomat who
represented Japan at the Washington Naval Conference, and in many ways he was similar
in orientation to Nitobe. Both could speak English with ease, both were married to Christians,
although unlike Nitobe, Ishihara's wife was Japanese. But Ishihara was far more practical
than Nitobe. If Nitobe's slogan was peace through understanding, then Ishihara's was more like,
let's make peace more profitable than war. And I say this because Ishihara, while arguably a
pacifist, was married into one of the most powerful business interests in Japan. His father-in-law was
Iwasaki Yattaro, the founder of Mitsubishi, the single most powerful conglomerate in 20th century
Japan. So Ishihara, whether he was serving as foreign minister or even briefly as prime minister,
he never had a gauzy vision of peace through mutual respect. Instead, he argued for peace
in terms of a business plan. So, for example, let's consider the question of a possible
Japanese invasion of China. Shida Hadas' thinking ran more or less like this. If Japan were to invade
China, it might conquer and hold parts of it. But whatever parts of China Japan did not control,
those would be fiercely anti-Japanese. And they would probably boycott Japanese exports.
So you'd actually lose more of the China market than you would gain. But what if Japan did not
invade China, and instead helped China establish a stable and independent government? And then
Japanese businesses, including Shida Hadas in laws at Mitsubishi, they would have access to the
entire China market. So it was a pretty practical plan. And this is also why Shida Hada pressed
so hard for arms control. And naval arms race with the U.S. and Great Britain would be very expensive.
So Shida Hadas' approach to economic growth was essentially, don't undermine a chance to dominate
a huge emerging market. By starting an arms race, you can't afford it anyway.
But what's remarkable about Shida Hada is how committed he was to a strong China. He was more
committed to Chinese territorial integrity than either the U.S. or the U.K. We can see this in
the so-called Nanjing incident. In March of 1927, the armies of the Chinese nationalists
and the Chinese communists together retook the city of Nanjing from a local warlord, Zhang Dongchang.
Now the details are still contested. But when the Chinese army retook Nanjing, soldiers from
either the national side or the communist side, or possibly both, began attacking the foreigners
in Nanjing. They tried to kill businessmen, diplomats, teachers. Nanjing was a major treaty
port with a substantial foreign community. Now in response, the U.S. and the U.K. sent in warships
and they began attacking Chinese troops with machine guns and high explosives.
And Japan was asked by Britain to join an expedition to re-establish order.
But Shida Hada, who was then foreign minister, refused. He argued that while foreign troops
should protect their own residents, they needed to let the Chinese leader,
Zhang Kai-shek, get control of his own army and punish his own troops. Foreign intervention would
likely just make matters worse. So under Shida Hada, Japan's response was markedly less aggressive
than that of either the U.S. or the U.K. So clearly, Shida Hada's policies were a distinct
contrast to the goal of a military conquest in China. His policies were based on peaceful
competition for Chinese consumers instead of military competition for Chinese territory.
But even when Shida Hada was at the peak of his power as foreign minister,
militarists like Ishiwara regarded him as weak and dangerous. He was lambasted in the right-wing
press. And then, starting in 1929, Shida Hada's world began to unravel.
So beginning on October 1929, with the New York stock market crash, the world economy began to
collapse. Stock markets from London to Tokyo fell. And with that, all the optimistic talk of
international cooperation and trade. And in the face of this economic crisis,
the U.S. implemented strict import restrictions. The famous Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act of 1930
placed large tariffs on imports to the U.S. And then all U.S. trading partners retaliated
with tariffs of their own. And world trade collapsed. So all of Shida Hada's talk about
Japan not needing to establish a special sphere of influence in China, but instead
relying on free market access to a larger market, that vision just died.
And that was Ishiwara's cue. It was time for the military to take action.
Now, Ishiwara was a graduate of the Japanese Army War College, where he lectured in military
history from 1925 to 1928. And during that period, he developed an apocalyptic doctrine
of a final coming war. For Ishiwara, World War I was absolutely not the war to end all wars.
It would soon be followed by World War II and then by a final war, World War III,
which would result in complete world unification. And this coming World War III would be a war
between Eastern and Western civilization. And therefore, Ishiwara's mind, it would be a war
between Japan and the U.S. So it was critical for Japan to stop all this idiotic prattle
about a new era of cooperation and free trade, and to begin instead grabbing all the resources
necessary to fight this final war. Ishiwara's understanding of the world was both terrifying
and visionary. He observed that military mobilization was growing more and more
extensive over time, and that this expansion was erasing the line between civilian and soldier.
So he predicted that armies would soon be targeting their enemy's civilian population,
and that they would do so with amazing new weapons, including airplanes that could fly
around the world with just a small crew and bomb targets anywhere at will.
Now, with this vision of a coming apocalypse in mind, Ishiwara was transferred to Manchuria
as an operations officer in 1929. Now, as part of the Treaty of Portsmouth,
ending the Russo-Japanese War, Japan had won control of key railroad lines in Manchuria.
And the Japanese army in Manchuria, called the Kwandong Army, was supposed to protect those
railroad lines. But Kwandong army officers were intent on using that power to carve out a Japanese
sphere of influence in Manchuria. And the Japanese army in Manchuria also had a long
tradition of insubordination, of even ignoring direct orders from Tokyo. But Ishiwara, he raised
that ambition and that insubordination to a new level. In 1931, with the collusion of
mid-ranking officers throughout the military, Ishiwara helped organize the invasion of Manchuria,
and the creation of a new puppet state, Manchukuo. Briefly, the events went like this.
The Japanese army faked an attack on the South Manchurian railroad,
and then they deployed troops to suppress this, to suppress the very attack that they
themselves had staged. They routed the troops of the local warlord, and then rather than simply
declare that they had staged a coup, they orchestrated a conference demanding the formation
of an independent country. And then they proceeded to place a puppet ruler on the throne,
Hu Yi, the last emperor of the Qing dynasty, who had abdicated at the advanced age of five.
And thus, Ishiwara and his military cohorts created a new country, Manchukuo, and they presented
Tokyo with the Fed a complete, a Japanese puppet state in Manchuria. Now these actions had not
been approved by the Japanese government, or even discussed at a cabinet meeting. In fact,
when it seemed that civilian officials were becoming suspicious, the Kwondung army had actually
accelerated their plan. And the creation of Manchukuo sealed the coffin of the internationalist
dreams of the 1920s. First, men like Ishiwara knew that they could not face down the army over this.
There's one thing to prevent a coup. It was another to tell the army to give up territory.
And it didn't help that back in Tokyo, right-wing extremists were beginning to eliminate their
opponents. These groups were a mix of military men and civilians, and they were commonly both
anti-communist and anti-capitalist. They considered capitalism a corrupt and exploitative system.
But they also rejected the communist solution, class warfare and revolution.
Instead, they thought that Japan could achieve a post-capitalist utopia through the emperor system.
A shared love of the emperor would bind everyone together in an egalitarian community.
All they needed to do was kill the capitalists and the civilian politicians who supported the
capitalists. And these men emphatically supported plans for a great overseas empire.
Now, amidst the despair of the Great Depression, these extremist groups became increasingly brazen.
They shot one prime minister in 1931. They killed another in 1932. And a remarkable
number of elected civilian politicians died because they were deemed either too complicit in
capitalism or insufficiently aggressive in China. Japan continued to hold elections into the 1940s,
but fear of assassination stifled most of the opposition.
Now, Ishihara's creation of Manchukuo led to the end of Nitobe and Shidahara's vision
of international cooperation. China insisted that Manchukuo was a puppet state,
and they demanded a League of Nations investigation. The League set up a commission,
and that commission reported that Manchukuo was not a legitimate state. The League approved the
report, and then Japan quit the League. So the invasion of Venturia was a crucial moment. It closed
off alternative paths proposed by Nitobe and Shidahara. It ended Japanese reliance on multinational
agreements, and it became clear that the U.S.-Japanese rivalry in the Pacific was now going
to be military. Maybe just an arms race, maybe all the way to open war, but it was certain that,
for the moment at least, Ishihara's militaristic vision had won the day.
So, how did the aftermath of the invasion play out in the lives of our three subjects?
Well, Nitobe was devastated. He knew the army's actions were illegitimate, but he somehow felt
obliged to defend Japan, and those two impulses were of course completely incompatible. And at a
meeting of the Institute for Pacific Relations in 1933, he and the other Japanese delegates
struggled painfully to explain their nation's actions in Manchuria. And soon after that meeting,
Nitobe collapsed from pneumonia and died shortly thereafter. Now, I don't think one can literally
die of a broken heart, but I think Nitobe's death was hastened by the despair of seeing his life's
dreams collapse. As for Ishihara, well, the Japanese army did not quite know what to do with him.
He was intelligent and charismatic, but he was also consistently insubordinate,
and he was so enthralled by his own vision of Japan's future that he was unable to compromise
with anyone else. In fact, he managed to alienate almost everyone in the military. For example,
he once publicly denounced General Tojo Hideki as a nitwit whose major accomplishment was
misdirecting army funds to a ridiculous pet project, a club for officers' wives.
And as a result, Ishihara was moved around in the army until he was forced into a very early
retirement in 1941, just months before the attack on Pearl Harbor. Now, ironically, that
endless insubordination probably saved Ishihara's life in 1945, because the US occupation had no
idea what to do with him. On the one hand, the invasion of Manchuria was the start of the road
to war between Japan and the US, so it seemed like Ishihara was a war criminal.
But on the other hand, the US occupation was convinced that there was
a unified conspiracy within the Japanese military, so they didn't know what to make of Ishihara,
who was always fighting with other officers and had publicly denounced Tojo.
So in the end, they just ignored him. Although he was called as a witness for the defense
at the Tokyo War Crimes Tribunal, and irrepressible as ever, Ishihara took the witness stand
and then denounced President Truman as a war criminal for the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
But for all his bravado, Ishihara's vision had come true only in the worst possible way.
He was right about a new stage of war. He was right about aircraft unleashing unprecedented
destruction on civilian populations. But those new weapons had not been used for Japan ushering
in a glorious empire. They'd been used to defeat Japan. So when Ishihara died in 1949 at age 60,
he was probably as broken in spirit as Nitobe had been 16 years earlier.
Now it was Ishihara who arguably got the last laugh. He survived World War II and his views
were vindicated. He was even tapped by the U.S. occupation to serve as interim prime minister
in 1945. And one of Ishihara's last public acts would shape Japan to this day. As you may know,
the post-war Japanese constitution has an anti-war clause. Article 9 prohibits Japan from using war
to settle international disputes. It's basically the Kellogg-Briand pact written into the Japanese
constitution. Now some accounts say that General Douglas MacArthur, commander of the U.S. occupation,
that he proposed this article to Ishihara and some say that Ishihara proposed it to MacArthur.
But either way, Ishihara sold it to his cabinet and he was instrumental in getting it approved.
In fact, some say Ishihara said Article 9 was an American demand, so his Japanese colleagues
would accept it. They might argue with him, but not with the U.S. occupation.
But whatever the details, Article 9 was written into law and Japan would be an economic superpower,
not a military superpower, and that was Ishihara's pre-war vision. Now I doubt Ishihara in the 1920s
expected that it would take defeat by the U.S. in a major war for his vision of Japan to prevail.
In fact, he was horrified by the cost of the war. But when Ishihara died in 1951,
just short of his 80th birthday, he found that looking backwards on his own life
made him optimistic about Japan's future. Because what he foresaw for Japan in the coming decades,
a peaceful Japan dedicated to economic power rather than military power,
that was what he had tried to create 30 years earlier.
