In this course, we've been thinking of the sweep of Japanese history in terms of waves
of globalization and isolation.
As we've seen, the first wave of globalization took place from the 500s to the 800s.
That was followed by a period of relative isolation, running from around the 900s to
around 1300.
Today, we come to Japan's second great wave of globalization, which stretched from the
1300s to the early 1600s.
Now there are some strong parallels between Japan's first and second waves of globalization.
In the first wave, Japan moved from fragmentation to centralization, as the SOGA clan employed
continental ideas and technologies to address the threat posed by rising dynastic powers
in both China and Korea.
And similarly, the second wave of globalization began in the 1300s with a fragmented and decentralized
Japan.
But by the 1590s, Japan again had a powerful centralized state, probably the most powerful
Japanese central government since the 9th century.
And once more, that process of centralization was driven by broader trends in East Asia.
This time around, the powerful new dynasty in China was the Ming dynasty.
The canonical dates for the Ming are 1368 to 1644.
A strong dynasty also emerged on the Korean peninsula, the E dynasty, which lasted from
1392 until 1910.
So let's pick up Japan's story in the 14th century.
You'll recall that the Ashikaga Shogunate had been established in the 1330s after Ashikaga
Takahuchi turned against Emperor Godaigo.
This led to a situation where there were two rival imperial courts, a northern court in
Kyoto and a southern court in Yoshino.
Moreover, the Ashikaga Shoguns were relatively weak.
So in the 1300s and 1400s, Japan was wracked by civil strife.
But in China, the Ming dynasty was consolidating its power.
And as part of that consolidation, China reached a new level of prosperity, and East Asia underwent
an unprecedented surge in the movement of people, goods, and ideas.
That surge in trade gave Japanese merchants new opportunities for trade, but also new
opportunities for plunder.
Because in the absence of any strong central government, large parts of western Japan,
especially Kyushu, became a haven for pirates.
These pirate bans were massive, hundreds, sometimes even thousands of ships, and they
would attack coastal cities and strip them bare.
These pirates were called Wakul, meaning Japanese pirates.
But as pirates, they were not sticklers for questions of national identity.
They did not ask for your birth certificate.
These were thoroughly cosmopolitan pirates, and they raided Japanese cities too.
Now both China and Korea were alarmed by piracy, and they sent envoys to Japan to urge the
Japanese government to suppress the Wakul.
But there was no government in Japan powerful enough to do so.
In fact, these foreign envoys were not even sure who was in charge in Japan.
When the Ming dynasty sent envoys in 1369 and 1370, the envoys followed ancient precedent.
They landed in Kyushu, and they were received in Dazhaifu, near present-day Fukuoka.
But Dazhaifu was in the hands of the southern court, Emperor Godaigo's side.
And the Ming envoys assumed that this was the ruler of Japan.
Now the Chinese imperial court had a distinctive view of the world.
They saw Chinese emperors as unique and supreme, appointed by heavenly mandate.
And all other rulers in the world, they were lesser monarchs.
They were kings, but not emperors.
And those kings, they ruled at the behest of the Chinese emperor.
Now if a regional monarch agreed to recognize the Chinese emperor as his sovereign, then
China would allow trade.
So trade was a reward for subservience to the Chinese throne.
Well, way back in the 600s, the Japanese imperial court had pushed back against this worldview.
They had insisted that the Japanese emperor was in fact the equal of the Chinese emperor.
But in the 1300s, the southern court, while still proud, was weak.
And they tried to finesse the issue.
They tried to establish relations with the Ming without being overtly subordinate.
And then in 1372, the Zhaifu fell to the Ashikaga Shogunate.
So when Ming envoys arrived later that year, they discovered that they might have been
working with the wrong Japanese government.
There was another Japanese government in Kyoto.
And the Ming emperor became both confused and angry because his own envoys couldn't
tell him who was in charge in Japan.
And they couldn't even find someone to suppress the pirates.
This question was not sorted out until around 1401.
And that was when the third Ashikaga Shogun, Ashikaga Yoshimitsu, began sending suitably
respectful letters to the Ming court.
He'd referred to himself as your subject, the king of Japan.
Now that was a dicey proposition because Yoshimitsu did not want to publicly declare within Japan
that he was subordinating himself to a foreign king.
But subordination was lucrative.
Not only did Yoshimitsu get lavish gifts from China, but he got trading rights.
And he could sell the trading rights to merchants.
And that was an important source of income.
Now later Ashikaga Shoguns went back and forth on this question of how to deal with the Ming.
Yoshimitsu's own son, Yoshimochi, denounced his father's actions.
But then later Ashikaga Shoguns returned to Yoshimitsu's model.
And they did accept investiture as king of Japan from the Ming emperor.
Eventually, however, the entire question of the Ashikaga and the Ming became irrelevant.
Because the Ashikaga became too weak to matter.
Yoshimitsu was arguably the most powerful Shogun of the Ashikaga dynasty.
So he was able to capture some pirates and send them to China as prisoners.
But later Ashikaga Shoguns, they could not control the periphery.
They couldn't even control the pirates.
They couldn't even control their own lords.
In 1441, the Sixth Ashikaga Shogun was assassinated in his own capital by an angry vassal.
And then in the 1460s, under the Eighth Shogun, Japan slid into open civil war.
Different local warlords or daimyo simply ignored the Shogunate.
This fighting within Japan affected relations with China.
Because daimyo, who were fighting each other in Japan, started fighting each other in China as well.
The most spectacular incident occurred in 1523.
When ships from two rival Japanese daimyo arrived in the Chinese port of Ningbo at the same time.
And they started arguing over who was going to unload and sell their cargo first.
Now since there was a civil war back home, their argument turned into a melee in the streets of Ningbo.
With Japanese samurai killing each other, burning ships, raiding storehouses and, for good measure, killing Chinese port officials.
Before leaving and returning to Japan.
This did not make the Chinese leadership happy.
And the Ming insisted that the perpetrators be extradited to China for punishment.
But remember, back in Japan, there's no one who could possibly enforce an extradition order.
So in the end, the Ming just cut off trade.
They stopped diplomatic relations with Japan.
And remarkably, Japan for the Ming became just a dangerous lawless nation, a country of outlaws.
The Korean royal court was also struggling with the problem of civil war in Japan.
And also with the problem of the Wakul.
The Korean court realized that many of the pirates attacking Korea were based on a single island, Tsushima.
Which lies between Japan and Korea.
And therefore, the Korean court asked the Daimyo of Tsushima, the Seoul family, to suppress the Wakul.
That however proved to be a task that the Seoul either couldn't or wouldn't do.
So the Korean king sent his navy to attack Tsushima.
And in 1419, Korea defeated the Seoul.
And then an interesting thing happened.
The Seoul agreed that they would take the necessary steps to suppress the pirates.
And in return, they were granted special trading rights in the Korean port of Busan.
Now think about how this reflects both globalization and Japanese decentralization.
The local lord of Tsushima arranged an inter-
