Historians love to search for turning points, moments when everything changed, or if not
the narrow windows. Well, in the case of modern Japan, we can find that narrow window,
the period when post-war Japan ended and contemporary Japan began.
The crucial period started in early 1989 and extended over the next 24 months.
And I say that with confidence because over those two years, four things happened that changed Japan forever.
Number one, the Showa Emperor, Hirohito, died.
Second, there was the Tiananmen Square Massacre in China.
Third, the Japanese real estate bubble burst, and then, following on that, the Japanese stock market crashed.
And it's fair to say that Japan decades later is still sorting out the repercussions
of that remarkable stretch of time. So let's look at each of these four events in turn,
beginning with January 1989, when the Showa Emperor, Hirohito, died.
It was a long and slow death from intestinal cancer. He was in a coma for weeks,
and his impending death cast a long shadow over the last months of 1988 and the start of the new year.
The death of the Emperor marked the start of a new era, both figuratively and literally.
By tradition, Japan officially marks time according to the ascension of each Emperor.
So the ascension of Hirohito in 1926 marked the beginning of the Showa Period.
1926 is Showa 1 in Japanese Reckoning.
And Hirohito's successor chose to call the new era Heisei, which roughly translates
Achieving Peace. So 1989 became Heisei 1, the first year of a new era.
Now, this start of a new era came with a slew of new questions, even about seemingly mundane things,
containing the convention of era names. The Chinese and Korean monarchies once used era names as well,
but today they survive only in Japan, and people ask, is that a good thing or a bad thing?
And if Japan keeps era names in a democracy, shouldn't it be an open popular process?
Should the Imperial Court still choose era names?
And more practically, everyone in Japan had to reprint or reset everything with a date.
Perhaps you remember Y2K, when all those older checks with the first two digits of the year,
19, helpfully pre-printed, remember how all of those suddenly became obsolete?
Well, in 1989, that happened across Japan with the new era name.
But the bigger issue related to the role of the emperor in modern Japan.
It was impossible to dodge this issue because everyone needed to figure out how to behave
while the emperor was dying. And a huge problem was the emperor's cancer diagnosis,
because in Japan, families typically did not want the diagnosis of a fatal condition
disclosed to the patient. The thinking was that this would protect the patient from
undue grief and shock. Now attitudes have changed in Japan since 1989,
but even today, at least a third of Japanese families still don't want a fatal condition
disclosed to the patient. So in Japan, because Hirohito was a public figure,
everyone knew that he was dying of cancer, but the media could not say that the emperor was dying
of cancer. Not just out of respect, but out of the sense that the emperor might somehow hear.
And even after he relapsed into a coma, the mass media continued to self-censor.
Furthermore, even though no one could say that the emperor was dying, the public was asked to
show jishuku, self-control, and not to do festive things. Unfortunately, this restrained death vigil
ran into New Year's, normally a time for big celebrations, big lavish business parties,
club parties, personal parties, so it wrecked the budgets of hotels and restaurants.
Americans might remember how after 9-11, people stopped flying and the president issued a somewhat
contradictory message. He said, this is a period of national mourning, but please don't stop traveling
and thereby drive the hotel industry into bankruptcy. While the death of the Showa emperor
was similar, it was a strange, slow-moving national trauma. And many older Japanese
observed that this reminded them eerily of the last days of World War II. When everyone suspect,
in fact, everyone deeply knew the war was lost, but public discourse was completely disconnected
from that reality. And then, of course, there was the elephant in the room, because the emperor's
death opened up the question of the war. In commemorating the emperor's death, people had
to reflect on Hirohito's life. What exactly was his role in the war? Now, prior to 1989,
that debate had largely been smothered by a story that the U.S. occupation had encouraged,
that the emperor was somehow both head of state and yet simultaneously free from any
responsibility for the war. But in 1989, it was as though someone started poking at an old but
unhealed wound. The questions were painful and the debate was intense. Perhaps the most striking
example of how explosive the issue became was the case of the mayor of Nagasaki, Motoshima Hitoshi.
In December 1988, Motoshima was asked at a city council meeting whether he thought the emperor bore
responsibility for the war, and he answered, 43 years have passed since the end of the war,
and I think we've had enough time, enough chance to reflect on the nature of the war.
And I do believe that the emperor bore responsibility for the war. And later that day,
at a press conference, he said, it is clear from the historical record that had the emperor
pressed his senior staff to end the war sooner, the Battle of Okinawa, and the atomic bombings
of Hiroshima and Nagasaki could have been avoided. Well, the reaction was strong. Motoshima was a
member of the Liberal Democratic Party, Japan's main center-right party. And they insisted that he
retract his remarks. And he refused. And they expelled him from the party. And then shadowy,
extreme right-wing groups got involved and got belligerent. And after Motoshima's remarks,
they filled the streets of Nagasaki with sound trucks, screaming for a divine wrath to pour
down on Motoshima. Now, because of death threats, Motoshima had extensive police protection for
over a year. But in early 1990, when that protection was reduced, a right-wing extremist
shot him in the back. Now, many accounts of Motoshima end right there. And for some individuals,
the attack on Motoshima is evidence that Japan is dominated by a violent right-wing conspiracy.
But the story doesn't end there. Motoshima recovered. And in 1991, he ran for a fourth term
as mayor of Nagasaki. The Liberal Democratic Party, his former party, opposed him. But all the other
parties rallied behind Motoshima, even the Communist Party, which did not run a candidate of its own.
And Motoshima stood his ground on his statement about the emperor, and he won a fourth term
as the mayor of Nagasaki. Now, that's a pretty striking measure of how the emperor's death
opened up old wounds and unresolved issues. The people of Nagasaki rallied behind a mayor who was
rejected by his own party and targeted for assassination by the extreme right.
And it's fair to say that Japan today is still struggling with two related issues. How do we
commemorate the war? And how does an emperor fit into our modern political system?
Now, another major shock of 1989 was the Tiananmen Square massacre in China. Many of you probably
remember the events leading up to that event. In April, students began gathering in Beijing's
Tiananmen Square to mourn the death of Hu Yaobang, a high-ranking Chinese Communist Party member
known as a reformer. And their protests quickly turned into a movement demanding reform,
freedom of speech, freedom of the press, government transparency, and end to political corruption.
And the protests grew with astonishing speed. And while the government was conciliatory at first,
the tone changed when the students began to get support from ordinary Chinese, from workers
and farmers, and even from lower-ranking party officials and from the police. And the protests
began spreading across China. And then Chinese leaders decided enough was enough. They sent the
army into Beijing. They rolled tanks through the streets. They killed hundreds. They crushed the
protests. And they squashed all hope of further reform. Now, I was in Tokyo as a graduate student
when this happened. And it felt like it was next door. And in one of my seminars, the professor
one day said to the Chinese foreign students, let's forget the schedule. Just tell us what's
going on. And the Chinese students were full of revolutionary zeal. They said things like,
my younger brother is in Beijing now. And one said, he hitched a ride 700 miles. And it was easy
because the truckers are eager to pick up students. They'd say, go into Beijing, hop in, finish the
revolution for us. And then when the crackdown came, it was heartbreaking. Those Chinese students
were in tears. And the overall effect on Japan was similar, if not as intense. Imagine what this
looked like from Tokyo. What could be more welcome than the promise of a democratic China?
Japan was going to have a peaceful democratic capitalist neighbor with more than a billion
consumers, eager more than ever to buy Japanese goods. But then came the Tiananmen Square Massacre.
And it felt like the Cold War was over all around the world, except not in East Asia.
So just as the Berlin Wall was coming down in Germany, Beijing was returning to a conventional
Leninist communist form, strict control of the press, direct censorship, absolute one-party rule.
Now the dash promise of a democratic neighbor was deeply disappointing.
But the economic news at home was even worse. In late 1989, the Japanese economy began imploding,
starting what some call a two-decade recession. The primary issue was an asset bubble that
central government planners had been worried about for years. In 1985, commercial real estate
prices in Tokyo jumped 42 percent. Then the next year, the increase was 122 percent. And in 1987,
over 1986, that was another 54 percent. The numbers were unsustainable, but they were paralleled
in other parts of the economy. For example, residential real estate prices in Tokyo rose
over 100 percent in 1987. Residential real estate prices in Osaka jumped 500 percent in five years.
The Nikkei 225 stock index that surged as well. It passed 13,000 for the first time in 1985,
and it just kept moving up. Until in 1989, it hit almost 40,000.
Now the Japanese government knew something was amiss. But by the time the Bank of Japan started
raising interest rates to cool things off, it was too late. The wheels had come off,
the bubble had burst. The Nikkei 225 lost over 35 percent in 1990, and it just kept dropping.
Despite a few rallies, it dropped to under 15,000 in 1992, and then to just over 8,000 in the year
2002, down from a high of nearly 40,000 in 1989 to 8,000 in 2002. Real estate was only slightly
less bleak. Within a few years, commercial prices were off by over 80 percent. Although in the sub
category of prime commercial real estate in the financial district, that was down to an astonishing
1 percent of peak value. So this was one of the epic financial bubbles in world history,
and it continues to shape Japan to this day. Thousands of companies went from being insanely
wealthy to broke, and this was especially severe for banks, because banks needed to maintain reserves.
Basically they needed to have some percentage of the value of their deposits
on hand as liquid assets to cover potential withdrawals. But since those assets were stock
in real estate, all of a sudden their reserves were worthless, and the entire banking system began
to look insolvent. So in the language of the 1990s, Japan was full of zombie banks. They were
shuffling around, seemingly alive, but if you look closely, you could see that they were actually dead.
But these banks kept trying to act like old cadets of banks. They kept trying to keep
affiliated companies afloat with infusions of credit. So the zombie banks were lending to zombie
companies. And finally, after 10 years of pretending that Japanese banks were solvent,
the government began pressing banks to merge in the early 2000s.
And this created new entities like Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation, a merger of Mitsui
and Sumitomo, the banks of two rival cadets. Now since the cadets' system was a cornerstone
of Japanese economic growth, for a long time Japan watchers like myself, the merger of Mitsui
and Sumitomo was bizarre. It was like the merging of the New York Yankees and the Boston Red Sox.
It just seemed wrong on a visceral level. But today Japan is full of merged banks that had
been independent since the late 1800s. They've been pushed together to avoid default.
And while it's unclear how much of an impact those mergers have had on the overall economy,
a major impact is that they've transformed the old corporate landscape. The cadets' system is now
a shadow of it for myself. The bubble also had a devastating impact on consumer confidence.
People who already owned property in the 1980s, well, they had become passive millionaires.
But after 1989, they just became ordinary folks again. But what about those people who
borrowed money in order to buy at the peak? They bought at the peak for the market,
they were financially destroyed. How can a family ever recover from an 80% drop in the
value of a major asset like a house? And that shaped Japanese people's perspective on the
world. Because when most of the country is upside down on their mortgages, it's not exactly conducive
to consumer spending or any type of long-term investment. Even if you have some assets,
people are psychologically leery of anything much riskier than cash and a mattress.
And consumer confidence and consumer spending have also been suppressed by falling real wages.
Inflation in Japan has been astonishingly low, but wages have been dead flat. In fact, real wages
reached a 16-year low in 2009. And the overall impact on the Japanese economy has been decisive.
By most measures, Japan has seen economic growth of a few percentage points
total since 1990. Now, quite frankly, no one has a clear sense of how to solve
Japan's economic stagnation. And essentially, there are two ways to view the situation.
One is that Japan's GDP growth machine is just broken and someone needs to get in there and fix it.
And that attitude is powerful because Japan's economic growth was a point of national pride.
But here's an alternative perspective. And that's to describe extremely low growth starting from an
already high level of prosperity to see that as a good thing. That's just living within one's means.
And despite the gloom and doom of the economic statistics, by many other measures,
daily life in Japan has actually improved since 1989. For example, despite over two decades of
supposed economic disaster, Japanese life expectancy continued to increase. The Japanese now have the
longest life expectancy in the world. It's older for 87 years for women and 82 for men.
Also, the most reliable international measure of crime, the murder rate, has continued to drop.
In 2008, the murder rate for young Japanese men was one-tenth of what it was in 1955. It has been
steadily dropping for nearly 70 years, with no upward split from the economic woes of the past
two decades. By most measures, Japan has the lowest violent crime rate in the world.
Now, to the dismay of many economists, Japanese consumers have become exceedingly frugal.
But that means those 20 years of slow growth have made Japan more affordable.
You probably don't associate Tokyo with a great $5 sushi dinner, but you should.
And here's a not-so-secret secret. At a Japanese supermarket, the lunch trays of sushi are considered
old by about 2 p.m., and then they're often sold at 50% off, although they're fresher than
anything in the U.S. supermarket and better than a lot of U.S. restaurants. Or you could ask around
about a one-coin lunch, referring to the 500-yen coin. Lots of Japanese restaurants
feature fantastic business lunch specials for one coin. Now, this new frugality is more than
just about a cheap lunch. And that's illustrated by Mottainae Basan, an immensely popular series
of children's books. So, first volume was published in 2004, and Mottainae Basan might be translated
as The Waste Not Want Not Grandmother. And the series focuses on a frugal grandma who teaches
her family how to reuse things and save money. So, of course, you should eat everything on your plate,
but also don't throw away orange peels, because you can dry them and use them to
scent the bathwater. And don't crumple up that paper, you can press it flat and reuse it.
And don't complain about not having any toys, just look at what we can make from the stuff around
the house that you were going to throw away. Frugal grandma doesn't leave the water running
when she brushes her teeth, she turns off lights that don't need to be on, she uses her own shopping
bag at the store. Now, reflecting the zeitgeist of early 21st century Japan, the frugal grandma
series has been explicitly linked with sustainability initiatives. In fact, the Mottainae movement,
The Waste Not Want Not movement, got a huge boost when it was embraced by Wangarimuta Matai,
a Kenyan environmentalist, and the winner of the 2004 Nobel Peace Prize. At a UN meeting,
she wore a t-shirt with the words Mottainae on it, and she declared that Mottainae captured,
in one word, the four Rs of sustainable development. Reduce, reuse, recycle, and repair.
And she appealed to those in attendance, representatives of government and non-governmental
organizations, to shout in chorus. She said, come on everybody, repeat after me, Mottainae.
And the Japanese media loved it. She was acclaimed in Japan. She was even awarded Japan's
Grand Cordon of the Order of the Rising Sun. Now, this new vision of a frugal Japan has come into
conflict with the older vision of Japan as an industrial superpower. And that conflict came
to a head after the Fukushima nuclear disaster in 2011. All of Japan's nuclear power plants were
taken offline, and the government asked people to reduce power consumption. Now, even in the wake
of that disaster, the government fully intended to restore Japan's nuclear capacity, because
according to government planners, Japan needs lots of power for economic growth.
But then, an interesting thing happened. The Japanese public completely overshot the government's
targets for reducing power consumption. They reduced power consumption to the point where
green activists could argue that Japan doesn't need nuclear power. It just needs to maintain
its frugal energy use. Now, that battle over Japan's energy needs, that's part of a bigger
battle with a bigger underlying question. What is Japan's place in the modern world?
And one way in which that question unfolds is how the Japanese people look at their own past.
Now, a small but very vocal minority, they want to scrap the constitutional restriction on the
Japanese military, and they want to restore Japanese national pride with a military edge.
And that's based on a nostalgic view of the 1930s. And ultimately, there's a much larger group who
are eager to somehow restart rapid economic growth. And they finally look back on the boom years of
the post-war era, of the 1960s and the 1970s. And then there are those who argue that Japan's
future lies in restrained growth. And they look back, finally, to the Tokugawa period,
over 200 years without war, and by some standards, without any major technological innovations,
but somehow that period produced great art, great food, and a rich cultural life.
But this nostalgia for the Tokugawa era, it also involves an implicit nostalgia for isolation.
And we can see this trend too in contemporary Japan. In the late 1990s, Japan was a world
leader in sending students to the U.S. But the number of Japanese students has fallen by more
than half since 1998, while the number of Chinese and Indian foreign students in the U.S. has surged.
And Japanese tourism to the U.S. is off as well, although much less dramatically. Now,
there's certainly no Tokugawa era ban on travel. You can leave and return without facing execution,
but there's clearly a fading appetite for foreign adventure.
A Japanese colleague recently said to me, only partly in jest,
we are searching for a past we can be proud of. And our first plan for modern Japan was to become
a military superpower. And that didn't seem to work. And then the next plan was to become
an economic superpower. And that worked until it didn't. So now what? Now, the frugal grandma
superpower idea, that has a certain appeal, but it also has its limits. So is Japan supposed to be
the green sustainability superpower? But let's end this course on an optimistic note.
When people ask what I love about Japan, my quick and simple answer is Japan is the most foreign,
the most exotic place you can go with first world telecommunications, first world healthcare,
and first world food hygiene. And that's as true today as it was when I first went to Japan 45 years
ago. And that contrast of familiar and safe, but also challenging and exotic and foreign,
that connects with the broad themes of this course. Japan has both deeply cosmopolitan,
but also subject to the forces of insularity and isolation. That tension has shaped Japanese culture
from millennia. It still does so today. And it will continue to do so well into the future.
