In 1946, a Tokyo University political science professor named Mado Yama Masao looked back
on the past 15 years of Japanese history, and he tried to explain what had happened,
what had gone wrong.
How had the Japanese leadership led the country into World War II, a war that had proved to
be disastrous, and why did no one in the Japanese leadership feel personally responsible for
the war?
Well, Mado Yama concluded that Japan had created something as dangerous as German fascism.
But different.
It had created despotism without a dictator, a country run by a cult of ultranationalism,
but without a single leader, a country run by slogans instead of reason.
In Japan, he observed, generals and cabinet ministers had all described themselves as
loyal servants of the emperor, but they were also the emperor's advisors, and the emperor
routinely ratified the consensus of his advisors, and the result was that everyone was responsible,
but no one was responsible.
Mado Yama called this the psychology of ultranationalism, and it raised the dangers of groupthink
to apocalyptic levels.
It produced a leadership system in which few people had a sense of individual responsibility.
For example, in late 1941, on the eve of Pearl Harbor, no one had the courage to openly say
attacking the U.S. is stupid.
This is just compounding previous mistakes.
In the U.S. will not end the China War, but will instead draw us into a broader war.
We need to cut our losses and get out of China now.
Because saying something like that would require taking individual responsibility for earlier
bad decisions.
Or it would have involved criticizing the group, or even worse, it could have been seen as
disloyalty to the emperor and insufficient patriotic zeal.
So while in the German case we can point to a single dictator, Hitler, who led his country
into war, Japan had, as Mado Yama put it, slithered into war, based on one bad decision
after another, with no single leader ever feeling responsible for the disaster.
Now, there are some problems with Mado Yama's approach.
But today I want to focus on what I think is his most valuable point.
That Japan started a war in China, and then a war with the U.S. and its allies based not
on a master plan, but on pathological groupthink, a political culture in which the most fanatic
and irrational voices repeatedly dominated common sense.
So we'll look at two major examples.
In 1937, when Japan embarked on a full scale war in China, there were warnings then that
this would lead to a quagmire, but those warnings were ignored.
And in 1941, when Japan decided to attack the U.S., there were warnings that the U.S.
would shift from demanding Japan's withdrawal from China to the goal of a complete defeat
of Japan.
And those voices were again ignored.
Reason was discarded in favor of ultra-nationalist passion.
Now, as we saw in another lecture, one key turning point in the lead-up to World War
II was the takeover of Manchuria by the Japanese Kwandan Army in 1931.
That was a turning point for three reasons.
First, it marked a clear break with the U.S.
The U.S. refused to recognize Japanese control of Manchuria or the puppet government of Manchukuo
that Japan established in 1932.
Second, this marked a precipitous decline in the ability of Japan's civilian government
to restrain the military.
The government in Tokyo had not authorized the takeover of Manchuria.
It was orchestrated entirely by a network of radical officers who were unhappy with Tokyo's
policies.
And amidst a wave of assassinations and attempted assassinations, the Tokyo government didn't
even try to roll back what the military had done.
But third, and most important for today's discussion, the takeover of Manchuria fostered
a culture of insubordination within the Japanese military.
The Kwandan Army had acted independently of the Army High Command, and instead of being
punished, they acquired their own puppet state in China.
And the Army's tolerance for that sort of freelance imperialism quickly came back to
haunt them.
In fact, within just a few years, one of the leaders of the Manchurian takeover, Ishihwara
Kanchi, was complaining that officers in the Kwandan Army were ignoring their superiors
and carving out puppet states across North China, in Hubei, in Chahar, in Mongolia, and
then presenting Tokyo with the Fed a complete.
Now of course, that is exactly what Ishihwara himself had done, and the irony would be comic
if the consequences weren't so dire.
Now by 1937, Japan had seized much of North China, but at the highest levels, there was
still hope for some sort of cooperation with Zhang Kai-shek, the leader of the Chinese
nationalist government.
The idea was to exploit Zhang's fear of Mao Zedong and the Chinese Communist Party.
Japan could take as much of North China as it wanted, and Zhang would be content with
what was left.
He wouldn't fight back because at heart he hated Mao even more than he hated Japan.
But that plan collapsed when Japan initiated a full-scale war in China.
Now we'll refer to this conflict as the Sino-Japanese War, although at the time in Japan
it was referred to euphemistically as the China Incident.
And that euphemism is informative because it wasn't supposed to be a total war, yet.
The Japanese army was getting ready for war, but up until 1936 it was too internally divided
to have a comprehensive plan to conquer all of China.
But then one army faction attempted a coup in February 1936, and when that coup failed,
the leaders of the losing faction were purged, and not allowed the winning faction to finally
begin planning for total war.
And they had the Japanese bureaucracy look at what Japan would need in terms of natural
resources and industrial capacity, what they would need in order to fight a full-scale
war in China.
And so in 1936 the Japanese bureaucracy began developing a five-year plan for national mobilization.
It was influenced both by Nazi and by Soviet economic planning.
The goal was to get Japan ready for protracted war.
And there was a clear awareness in these plans that Japanese industrial capacity was inadequate.
That's why there was a five-year plan for the expansion of iron and steel production,
for the expansion of coal production, for the expansion of shipbuilding.
Japan was not ready in any of those areas.
So according to the government's own plans, it should not have launched a full-scale war
in China in 1937.
In 1942, maybe, 1942 would have been the end-year of the first five-year plan, but not 1937.
So what happened?
Well, a skirmish erupted between Japanese and Chinese forces near Beijing in July 1937.
And this time, Chiang Kai-shek was less concerned with fighting the communists and more concerned
with fighting Japan.
He began moving more troops to the area.
And the government in Tokyo became furious at Chiang's newfound determination.
They seemed to have been insulted that the leader of China had suddenly gotten serious
about defending China.
And a furious debate erupted within the Japanese cabinet about what to do.
Now, according to the government's own planning documents, the right answer at this moment
was to de-escalate the conflict, to implement the five-year plan, and then to wait until
around 1942 and crush Zhang like a bug.
Even radical nationalists like Ishihara, who had orchestrated the takeover of Manchuria,
he insisted that Japan needed to build up its industrial base before starting a large-scale
war in China.
And the government was so divided over the question of whether or not to escalate the
war that the orders to mobilize for a major offensive were issued and then rescinded four
times.
But in the end, the Japanese government made the wrong decision.
They acted on the unfounded assumption that a decisive, crushing blow against Zhang Kaishik
would bring him to his knees.
That was a catastrophic mistake, and that became apparent within less than a year.
True, Japanese troops won a series of victories, Beijing, then Shanghai, then Nanjing.
But Zhang did not surrender, even after the fall of Nanjing, which was his capital.
And this led to an obvious conclusion.
Japan was no longer fighting a conventional war in China.
It was now fighting a guerrilla war in China, practically speaking, the largest country
in the world.
And it had started this war without a plan, so it did not have the capacity to feed or
supply an army big enough to fight a non-conventional war in China.
The Japanese leadership had led the nation into a quagmire.
In fact, that lack of preparation helps explain the brutality with which Japanese troops treated
the Chinese population.
The rape of Nanjing is the most horrible example.
That's where Japanese troops killed tens of thousands of non-combatants.
From the outset of the Sino-Japanese War, Japan lacked the logistical capacity to feed
its own men in China.
So from the start of the war, the army lived off plunder.
The army commanders basically acknowledged this.
In August 1937, for example, the army issued a directive declaring that it was inappropriate
to hold troops strictly to the laws of war.
And that tacitly sanctioned the widespread abuse of the civilian population.
And this was compounded by the lack of support for holding POWs.
Japan had nowhere near enough MPs to guard POW camps, and they wouldn't have had enough
food for the POWs even if they had had enough MPs.
In any case, the war with China dragged on as year after year Japan lost more and more
men with no victory in sight.
The magnitude of this disaster was utterly clear by 1940.
It was so clear that a brave member of the Japanese diet named Saito Takau gave a 90-minute
speech in which he dismantled the government's conduct for the war, and he demanded that
the government explain its own propaganda.
The government's official policy was that Japan would respect the independence of China,
Japan would not seek territorial concessions in China, Japan would not seek an economic
monopoly in China, Japan would respect third-party rights in China, and would withdraw its troops
from China once the war was over.
But at the same time, the Japanese leadership was referring to the conflict as a holy war,
a saison, for establishing a new order in Asia.
And Saito said, explain this to me.
We have spent billions of yen fighting in China.
We've lost 100,000 men.
My district is losing sons in battle every day, and yet as soon as we win in China, and
by the way, you've never explained what you would define as a victory, but as soon as
we win, we will completely withdraw from China without any expansion of territory or economic
advantage.
Explain to me, he insisted, how does that possibly compensate for the sacrifices you
have already demanded of the Japanese people?
And also, given that we are now two years into a war, that you said you were going to
win with a knockout blow two years ago, what is your plan for victory?
Oh, and also, if the goal of the war was establishing a new order in Asia, then why
did it take a committee a year and a half after the war started to come up with that
slogan, and what does the slogan mean?
In short, he said, can anyone here tell me why we are at war?
Now, Saito's speech was censored, and he was voted out of the diet, although he was re-elected
in 1942, and he even lived to tell a story after World War II.
But the key point here is that the Sino-Japanese War was obviously a quagmire by 1940, and
those voices with the courage to say so were stifled or ignored.
Well, the worst was yet to come, because in order to resolve the China quagmire, the government
recklessly expanded the war to include the U.S. and its allies.
Tensions between Japan and the U.S. came to a head in July 1941.
Japan seized South Indochina, and in response, the U.S. and its allies declared an oil embargo
on Japan.
Until then, the U.S. was actually one of Japan's major oil suppliers.
And that embargo not only cut off that oil, but the U.S. and Great Britain also simultaneously
froze Japanese assets.
Now, in Japan, this was interpreted as a demand that Japan surrender its empire.
Take for example the words of Hada Yoshimichi, chair of the Imperial Privy Council.
Hada was deeply concerned by the specter of a broader war, but he felt Japan had no other
option.
If Japan gave in, he argued, it would give up all its gains in the Sino-Japanese War
and the Russo-Japanese War, and also the gains from the Manchurian Incident, and Hada
found that unacceptable.
Now he granted that the Japanese people had endured great hardships since the start of
the war in 1937, and he was loathed to compel them to suffer even more.
But he went on to say that the very existence of Japan was being threatened, and that all
the great achievements of the major empire would come to nothing.
So he concluded that Japan had no choice.
It had to go to war with the U.S.
And there's just one problem with this statement, none of the critical points are true.
None of the U.S. demands in 1941 mentioned Korea or Taiwan, those were the colonies that
Japan had gained in the Sino-Japanese and Russo-Japanese Wars.
In fact, Teddy Roosevelt had supported Japanese claims on Korea, so the links to the major
empire were baseless.
Nor was Manchuria really an issue.
The U.S. had refused to recognize the puppet state of Manchukuo since its founding in 1932.
But they had done nothing about it.
And as for Japanese gains in China since 1937, they were already clearly unsustainable.
The Japanese army and the Japanese nation were being bled dry.
So the U.S. demand that Japan give up its gains in China was merely a demand that Japan
recognized the futility of trying to rule all of China.
And nothing in the 1941 exchanges between the U.S. and Japan threatened, as Hada put
it, the existence of Japan.
On the contrary, it was the opposite.
If Japan attacked the U.S., that would provoke a war in which the U.S. might demand control
over the Japanese home islands.
So Hada's reasoning suffered from the defect of starting from flawed assumptions, ignoring
the alternatives, and racing to the wrong conclusion.
And what's striking here is that Hada wasn't a militarist.
He had served as justice minister and as a university president.
But he was not a military man or even a staunch advocate of war.
In fact, he was leery of a broader confrontation with the U.S.
But at a critical moment, even he began speaking in propaganda talking points instead of careful
analysis.
And because of this inflated sense of what would happen if Japan began withdrawing from
China in 1941, because the costs of that decision were inflated, they seemed larger than the
costs of attacking the U.S.
Even though on the eve of Pearl Harbor, military planners knew that if the war with the U.S.
went on for more than two years, Japan would lose.
Japan would lose because it was dependent on imported food and imported raw materials.
So the Navy and the merchant marine needed a fleet big enough to fight the U.S. and the
U.K., while also defending thousands of miles of sea lane.
And both were critical.
If there weren't enough combat fleet, the merchant marine would not be able to safely
supply Japan with food and raw materials.
And every combat ship that was lost would have to be replaced with largely imported raw
materials.
The Navy started the war with almost no slack in that system.
So with that in mind, let me give you a new perspective on the December 1941 attack on
Pearl Harbor.
It's probably one of the best known events in military history.
The U.S. lost eight battleships, hundreds of aircraft, thousands of men, Japanese losses
were minimal.
And this was a huge defeat for Japan.
Because for Pearl Harbor to be successful, the U.S. would have had to abandon the Pacific
Theater in order to focus on Europe.
As soon as it became clear that the U.S. was going to keep fighting in the Pacific, the
clock started running.
And the U.S. had 30 times the iron and steel capacity of Japan, so in terms of replacing
sunken ships, that clock was not in Japan's favor.
And this means that six months after Pearl Harbor, at the Battle of Midway in June 1942,
Japan effectively lost the war.
The Japanese Navy assumed that the U.S. Navy was broken and demoralized.
They didn't realize that six of those eight battleships sunk at Pearl Harbor were being
repaired.
And they didn't know that U.S. intelligence had broken their code.
And at Midway, the Japanese Navy lost four aircraft carriers and the U.S. won.
And the simple fact was, if the U.S. was able to fight that well, six months after Pearl
Harbor, it was no longer reasonable to assume that the war would end soon.
But the same flawed decision-making that had led Japan to war made it impossible for the
Japanese government to accept that fact for another three years.
At the cost of millions of lives in China, at least a million lives in Japan, and over
a hundred thousand Allied casualties.
And over those three years, not only Japanese troops, but the Japanese people were being
steadily bled dry, running out of fuel, running out of food, and running out of hope.
So by the summer of 1944, a motley group of Japanese officials, industrialists, generals,
businessmen, court nobles, men who actually had little in common and normally disagreed
about almost everything, they agreed that if Japan did not end the war soon, it would
collapse into anarchy or revolution.
The Japanese people were starving, they were exhausted, and they were distrustful.
And if the war did not end soon, the Japanese people would fall prey to communist agitation,
and the emperor system would be lost, not to an invading army, but to a domestic communist
revolution.
And so they prepared a memo to present to the emperor.
Now, unfortunately, this group was discovered by Japanese intelligence, and they were punished,
even though their basic contention was sound.
Japanese business needed to begin thinking about surrender to the US.
So once again, fear of heresy trumped reason, and the war went on.
So why did Japan finally surrender?
That question is still debated.
Three things happened in quick succession.
The bombing of Hiroshima on August 6th, the Soviet Union abrogating their neutrality
pact with Japan and attacking on August 8th, and the bombing of Nagasaki on August 9th.
Historians are still trying to understand how these combine to force Japanese surrender.
But one thing is certain, the prospect of fighting the USSR made surrender to the US
suddenly look like an appealing option.
So what are the lasting consequences of slithering towards war, as Marayama Masao put it?
Well, let me begin with a troubling result.
The diffuse responsibility for starting the war made it difficult to allocate responsibility
post-war.
In 1946, the Allies set up a war crimes tribunal, known as the International Military Tribunal
for the Far East, or the Tokyo War Crimes Tribunal.
This was essentially a counterpart to the Nuremberg trials, and the prosecutors started
looking for a Japanese counterpart to Hitler, or at least a Japanese counterpart to the
Nazi Party.
They were looking for evil by master plan instead of evil from collective irresponsibility.
And with that focus on a master plan, the prosecutors defined the very worst war crimes,
what they called Class A war crimes, as participation in that master plan.
And they downgraded to Class B or even Class C many war crimes in the conventional sense,
like the execution or even the torture of POWs.
And the result is that the Tokyo War Crimes Tribunal never got at the substance of Japanese
war crimes.
The prosecution couldn't make the case for a massive conspiracy because there was no
master plan.
And yet they minimized thousands of clear-cut cases of atrocities against POWs and civilians.
They made those crimes sound less awful than they were through their own terminology.
They downgraded them to Class B or Class C.
A second less troubling consequence is that much of the Japanese elite was eager to cooperate
with the U.S. in the post-war period.
Some were probably thinking, thank you for saving us from our own decisions.
Others were probably thinking, thank you for saving us from the Soviet Union.
But virtually no one thought that Japan should fight on.
So U.S. soldiers who had expected to be fighting in the streets of Japan were instead greeted
by Japanese officers who asked, how can I be of help?
But perhaps the most striking consequence is a deep-rooted Japanese pacifism.
More than two generations after the end of the war, most Japanese still associate troops
overseas with disaster.
And you can see this in 21st century politics.
As you know, Article 9 of Japan's post-war constitution renounces war and the maintenance
of armed forces.
And much of Japan's political elite wants to change that.
They consider it an infringement on Japanese sovereignty.
But constitutional revision remains extremely unpopular in the general public.
The public is more than two to one against changing Article 9.
And what's striking is that this opposition to constitutional change, it co-exists with
heightened fears of Chinese military power.
And if you ask voters, how do you reconcile wanting somehow a stronger military with your
support of Article 9, they'll often just say, we should not send troops overseas.
And just should not do that.
And I think that vague but deep-seated suspicion of foreign intervention that Japanese troops
overseas cannot possibly end well, that's a lasting consequence of Japan's experience
in World War II.
And that's actually a positive outcome of Japan launching a war without a clear plan
or reason.
Two generations later, also with that clearly articulated reason, the Japanese people remain
tenaciously averse to war.
