Japan has three main forms of traditional theater.
No, the high classical form.
Bunraku, theater with highly articulated puppets, about half human height.
And Kabuki, the popular theater of the early modern period.
Now today we're going to discuss two of these forms, no and kabuki.
No and kabuki have some important commonalities.
They both have a chorus and musicians who are essential to the narrative.
Sometimes the chorus gives important backstory, or tells you what a character is thinking.
Or even tells you what's just happened.
And second, the performers in both forms were exclusively male.
And of course, that's not unusual historically.
After all, in Shakespeare's time, Juliet would have been played by a young man.
But beyond that, the two Japanese theater forms are rather different.
And no, key actors wear masks.
So acting involves conveying emotion through body movements, rather than facial expressions.
The angle of the head, for example, or through dance.
Also, no sets are extremely simple.
Perhaps a single branch representing a tree, or a wooden frame representing a house.
And finally, no dramas have a fairly set roster of characters.
There's really only two.
One is a question asker, known as the waki.
And the other is a question answering, known as the shite.
The shite is the main character, the protagonist if you will.
In kabuki by contrast, we can have elaborate sets, complete with trapped doors and rotating
platforms.
Waki costumes are elaborate, and actors wear dense and sometimes outrageous makeup.
Indeed, actors make the effect of that makeup still more intense, with highly stylized facial
expressions.
Kabuki also has a greater range of subject matter than does know.
And therefore, a greater range of characters.
There are great lords, noble ladies, wise monks, lecherous monks, depraved bandits,
noble bandits.
And here's another important difference.
No theater was shaped by the sponsorship of wealthy and powerful patrons.
In fact, many plays in the No Canon were written by the great 15th century actor and playwright
Zeami Motokio, who was patronized by Ashikaga Yoshimitsu, the 3rd Ashikaga Shogun.
Yoshimitsu, you recall, was famous both as a great political strategist and as a great
cultural connoisseur.
By contrast, kabuki emerged from extremely base origins.
It built on a medieval popular ballet tradition called Joururi.
In the early 1600s, those Joururi ballads were adapted by prostitutes in Edo.
At first, they did performances to draw customers, but gradually they found that the performances
could be successful in their own right.
So for some, performers' prostitution became the sideline to theater rather than the reverse.
Still, because of the close association, the Tokugawa Shogunate banned women from kabuki
in 1629.
So women were replaced by boys.
But then kabuki became associated with male prostitution, so the Shogunate banned boy actors.
And the result is that by tradition, all kabuki roles are played by adult men.
Now today, kabuki is treated as a national treasure.
But until the 1900s, it was at the edge of respectability.
It was extremely popular and therefore extremely lucrative, but it was always a little bit
seedy.
For example, actors could be very rich, but they could not live in most parts of Edo.
They were restricted to the Yoshihara, the official red light district.
So they were actors who were as rich as Daimyo.
But these actors could live in the nice parts of Edo only if they bought a house through
an intermediary.
So we see a real cultural divide between no and kabuki.
No was so respectable that the great warlord, Oda Nobunaga, he himself liked to perform
in no.
But kabuki was so disrespectful that samurai were barred from attending.
They went anyway, but often in disguise.
In fact, kabuki was so popular that even shogunate attendance went.
But that didn't remove the social stigma.
In 1714, for example, a noblewoman named Ejima was sent an official visit, after which she
happened to meet a handsome and popular kabuki actor named Ikushima Shiguro.
And Ejima thoroughly enjoyed Ikushima's company.
And she returned conspicuously late to the shogunate women's quarters.
And this incident erupted into a huge scandal.
According to some accounts, Ejima and Ikushima had gone to a tea house.
What according to others, they had gone to Ikushima's house.
And when the dust settled on the scandal, both Ikushima and Ejima had been banished from
Edo and over a thousand other people punished, including Ejima's brother, a shogunate official,
who was executed.
Authorities even destroyed the theater where Ikushima had performed.
And they issued new regulations, restricting, for example, private spaces in theaters.
Unfortunately for the shogunate, this did not dampen the appeal of kabuki.
In fact, the Ejima-Ikushima story itself eventually became the plot of some popular kabuki dramas.
OK, with these differences between no and kabuki in mind, let's compare some actual plays.
As part of the high culture of the 1400s, many no plays focus on the Buddhist theme
of illusion, particularly the torments of illusion.
My favorite example of this is the play Atsumori by Zayami Motokio.
Like many no plays, Atsumori has two main characters.
Kumagai has the role of the waki, the character whose questions drive the plot forward.
And the protagonist is Atsumori.
He is the shite, the character who answers the questions.
The play picks up the story of these two characters from the tale of the Heike.
You'll recall that there's a brief passage in that ballad in which Amina Motowari, or
Kumagai, kills a Heike warrior, Atsumori.
Atsumori reminds Kumagai of his own son, and Kumagai is so distraught that he has killed
a beautiful young man that Kumagai thinks of becoming a monk.
Now, the Zayami play creates a sequel to this story.
It begins years later, Kumagai has in fact become a monk.
He is still distraught over having killed Atsumori.
And the drama opens with Kumagai preparing to travel to Ichinotani, the scene of the
battle, to pray for the repose of Atsumori's soul.
And Kumagai's opening line is, Awake to awareness, the world is but a dream.
Now, that's a pretty clear Buddhist message.
We live in a world of illusion.
Our senses deceive us.
We are blind to ultimate truth.
Our salvation lies in understanding the limits of our own understanding.
And what's marvelous about the No Tradition is that, in this work in particular, the practice
of no drama itself, the philosophy of performance connects with those Buddhist sentiments.
For example, Kumagai says, I'm leaving Kyoto now to go to visit Ichinotani.
And then he does a slow, graceful dance in which he describes the changing scenery.
And then he says, I have arrived at Ichinotani.
And he's at Ichinotani.
The sets don't change.
But why should the sets change?
We live in a world of illusion, after all.
Recall the Buddhist notion that believing in everything you see actually keeps you from
a higher level of understanding.
So Kumagai is now in Ichinotani.
And he sees a grass cutter, which in the Japanese poetic tradition is a metaphor for isolation
and humiliation.
And the grass cutter, who is Atsumori, the shite, says, I am a humble grass cutter.
I'm so humble.
I'm fallen in the world.
I am so lonely.
That's the overall idea.
The original language is full of beautiful poetic illusions.
Now, since the play is called Atsumori, and it begins with Kumagai saying he's going to
Ichinotani to pray for the repose of Atsumori's soul, the audience knows that this grass
cutter is Atsumori.
The only people who don't know this are Kumagai and Atsumori himself.
You see, Atsumori is a ghost.
He's bound to this world by his negative emotions, by anger, resentment, regret, bitterness.
And the whole arc of the play is Kumagai and Atsumori realizing who Atsumori really is
and then releasing Atsumori from his torment.
And it doesn't matter that there is no mystery or that the arc of the story is so simple
because it's so beautiful.
For example, Kumagai is immediately suspicious because this anonymous grass cutter has an
elegant flute, so Kumagai asks about the flute.
And the grass cutter says, it's nothing unusual.
Even shepherds have flutes.
But then the grass cutter asks Kumagai, could you pray to Amida for me?
And Kumagai says, yes, of course, but who are you?
And Atsumori responds, I'm related to someone named Atsumori.
And as Kumagai in the chorus say the prayers, Atsumori, who has begun to realize that he
is Atsumori, drifts off stage.
Then there's a brief comic interlude, and then we return to Kumagai saying prayers.
And Atsumori comes on stage to say, Atsumori has arrived.
At which point Kumagai says, I must be dreaming.
And Atsumori responds, no, you aren't dreaming.
I have returned to clear the karmic bond that binds me to this world.
So Kumagai and Atsumori re-enact on stage their initial meeting.
And Atsumori recalls playing the flute on the eve of the battle.
And in Zeami's version, the Heike ships leave without Atsumori, so he's abandoned on the
shore.
And then he turns to confront Kumagai and they fight.
And this is all in a stylized dance with explanation from the chorus.
And at the very moment when Atsumori is reliving his own death, at that very moment he snaps.
He draws his sword and he rushes over to kill Kumagai, but then he stops.
Because Kumagai is praying for Atsumori's salvation.
He is praying that they will be reborn together as friends, not as enemies on a single lotus
petal.
And then Atsumori is finally released from his torment.
He makes a gesture of prayer towards Kumagai, the man who killed him, and then he gracefully
moves off stage.
Now I think the appeal of this play to warrior patrons is clear.
Kumagai, he's refined and noble, and he cleanses himself of the burden of killing Atsumori.
So it basically allows the warrior audience to feel cleansed of any remorse that they
might feel.
But more broadly, this play expounds several key Buddhist ideas.
Atsumori is locked in torment because he can't accept his own death.
He's not stuck on earth to exact vengeance, although there are vengeful ghosts in Japanese
culture.
He's a distinctly Buddhist ghost.
He's trapped by his own negative motions.
He's trapped by his own anger.
And therefore, Kumagai, his enemy, can actually become his savior by releasing him from his
own anger.
So in many ways, Zeami's play Atsumori is a wonderful snapshot of medieval Buddhist
aesthetics and overall Buddhist thought.
Now not all no plays are that sublime, but those themes of ghosts trapped by karmic forces
of escape from illusion, those are common to almost the entire repertoire.
So let's contrast this gem of a no play with Kabuki theater.
In fact, let's contrast Atsumori, one of the most refined plays of a refined genre, with
a play called The Scarlet Princess of Edo, Sakurahime Azumabuncho.
This is a wonderful but utterly vulgar Kabuki drama and it was a huge hit in the early 1800s
and it's been revived several times successfully in the 20th and the 21st century.
It's a great example of Kabuki celebration of mayhem and decadence.
The story opens with a monk, Seigen, and his male lover, Shiragiku and Acolyte.
The two have decided to end their illicit love affair in a double suicide.
They have violated their Buddhist vows of celibacy and that's even more troubling than
the same sex issue.
They break apart an incense case.
One part has Seigen's name on it and the other part has Shiragiku's name and they
each take the part with the other's name.
So Shiragiku has Seigen's name clenched in his fist and he jumps off the cliff while
praying that he will be reborn as a woman so that he can become Seigen's lawful wife.
But then Seigen does not jump and he says, the ties that bind me to you Shiragiku are
powerful but the ties that bind me to life are more powerful.
And then Seigen sees an eerie green glow and a mysterious bird emerge from the sea in the
spot where Shiragiku plunged into the waves.
So then we fast forward 17 years and Seigen is approached by a noble family, the Yoshida
family.
They want him to say prayers for their daughter, Princess Sakura, who was born with a deformity,
a tightly clenched fist.
Can you tell where this is going?
And because of this deformity, the princess has been rejected by her betrothed of a man
named Akugoro.
So Seigen nonchalantly says a prayer for the princess and then her hand unclenches and
out pops the incense box with Seigen's name.
So Seigen is instantly obsessed with Princess Sakura because it's Shiragiku who has been
reborn as a woman and now the princess is no longer deformed so Akugoro, her betrothed,
has decided he wants her after all.
But we're not done yet because in addition to being deformed, Princess Sakura has also
been abducted and deflowered by an unknown assailant.
And she has born that assailant's child.
Now that unknown assailant turns out to be the gangster Gonsuke, who is remarkably the
brother of the priest Seigen.
But Gonsuke is also working for Akugoro, the betrothed suitor, who has a scheme to take
over the headship of Princess Sakura's family.
And then Gonsuke, while working for Akugoro, realizes that Princess Sakura is the woman
he raped and he also becomes obsessed with her.
So Princess Sakura is now being pursued by an obsessive and depraved priest, a scheming
noble and a violent gangster.
And that gets us almost to the end of Act 1 and the play has four acts with virtually
every possible form of lurid mayhem.
Seigen is by turns drowned, then poisoned, and then stabbed all by different people in
different scenes.
Princess Sakura is sold into prostitution, then she is dismissed because she is too regal
for prostitution.
She is haunted by the ghost of Seigen, who wants the princess's baby.
Seigen somehow thinks it's actually his baby, even though it's the baby of his brother,
Gonsuke.
Gonsuke gets drunk, and while drunk he says to Princess Sakura, oh yeah, by the way, I
think I killed your father, oops, did I say that out loud.
So Princess Sakura gets Gonsuke even more drunk, and she stabs into death, and then
she also kills their baby.
And yet somehow, in the final scene, she lives happily ever after, and it really doesn't
make that much sense.
Now this lurid stew is a little bit like taking La Traviata and Carmen and Don Giovanni and
putting them in some sort of special opera blender, maybe with a pinch of the real housewives
of 19th century Japan.
And so there's a real problem with taking Kabuki too seriously.
We can't lose sense of this wonderful, trashy mayhem.
And should you ever attend Kabuki or watch it on TV, remember that it was originally
considered so tacky that it was restricted to the Edo Red Light District.
But now let's look at a Kabuki play that's actually based on a no drama.
Because a comparison between the no source and the Kabuki play will allow us to refine
still further the contrast between these two forms.
You see Kabuki works through melodrama, the plots are over the top, the emotions are completely
straightforward and raw, whereas no invites us to envision things, it suggests rather
than depicts and it usually involves abstract, metaphysical rather than raw and emotional.
Now the Kabuki play is called Kanjincho, which is sometimes translated as subscription
list although a better translation could be donor list or contribution list.
And the play is an account of Benkei's incredible loyalty to Yoshitsune.
Now remember Yoshitsune is an historical figure, the half-brother of the first shogun and Benkei
is his largely fictional loyal retainer.
The backstory to Kanjincho is that Yoshitsune is fleeing north to escape from his half-brother
Yoritomo, the first Minamoto shogun.
Benkei, his loyal companion, has conspired to get them past a checkpoint by disguising
himself as a priest, traveling the countryside to collect funds for the restoration of Todaiji
Temple in Nara.
Yoshitsune is disguised as one of Benkei's porters.
So they reach a checkpoint commanded by a character named Togashi.
Togashi stops them and tells them they don't have permission to pass.
Benkei's men want to fight right there, but Benkei knows he needs a better strategy.
So he starts saying Buddhist prayers.
Togashi becomes curious and he asks Benkei for the list of pledges he has already received.
Certainly, if Benkei has been traveling to raise money for Todaiji, there must be some
sort of official document.
Where is the official fundraising appeal from Todaiji Temple?
Benkei is briefly dumbstruck, but then he decides to bluff.
He grabs a blank scroll and starts making up an appeal from the Buddhist temple.
He has flowery religious language because Benkei is a defrocked monk and therefore he
can bluff.
In any case, while Benkei is at living, Togashi sneaks around and sees that the scroll is
blank.
So Togashi decides to grill Benkei on the Buddhist symbolic meaning of Benkei's staff
and then of his hat.
Until in the end, Benkei is just bluffing on arcane points of Buddhist literature.
And finally, Togashi just relents.
Togashi's overcome with admiration for Benkei's determination to save his lord.
It's clear that Benkei will do anything for Yoshitsune.
And so he decides to let them pass, to let himself be deceived.
And so all seems well.
But just then, one of Togashi's men says, hey, wait a minute, this porter looks a lot
like Yoshitsune.
So now Benkei is really stuck.
And he turns and he starts beating Yoshitsune.
He's yelling, you think this idiot porter is Yoshitsune?
All this idiot ever does is make us late.
And now we're going to be delayed still more at every checkpoint because people will keep
mistaking this stupid porter for Yoshitsune.
And finally he says to Togashi, if you think that this is Yoshitsune, I will kill him right
now, but we have to get going.
At which point Togashi is convinced even more that it's really Yoshitsune.
But he's also still more impressed with Benkei's devotion.
So he lets them pass.
Now once they are safe, Benkei apologizes to Yoshitsune for the great sin of striking
his lord.
And Yoshitsune says, no, Benkei, I am lucky to have someone as loyal and clever as you.
And then Benkei collapses in tears and the chorus says it is the first time in his entire
life that he has ever cried.
Kanjincho was first performed in 1840 and it was a huge hit.
And in many ways Kanjincho remains extremely accessible.
It's kind of like a modern buddy movie.
What some media critics call male weepies.
It's about two men united in their willingness to die for one another.
But all that over the top in motion, with huge burly Benkei, a mountain of a man weeping
for the first time, all of that was added when the story was adapted from noether.
The original no play from the 1400s is called Ataka, meaning safe haven.
And the broad outlines of the story are almost identical.
But since Ataka is no drama, that intense emotional connection between Benkei and Yoshitsune
is raised to a high level of abstraction.
Yoshitsune says to Benkei, your intelligence at the barrier was beyond human.
And Yoshitsune interprets this as a sign that they were favored by a bodhisattva, an enlightened
Buddhist being.
And Yoshitsune then explains their struggles together in terms of Buddhist philosophy.
And the chorus observes, the master and the followers all remain dazed, just as if awakening
from a dream, looking at each other and shedding tears.
So instead of seeing Benkei break down on stage, sobbing instead of this emotional catharsis,
in the original version, in the no version of the story, we get both Benkei and Yoshitsune
weeping as they contemplate the evanescence of life and the tragedy of karma.
So after Ataka, we leave thinking, can Yoshitsune and Benkei transcend the turmoil of this world
with all its emotional conflicts?
But with Kanjincho, we order another bottle of sake, and we hope that the next play will
have even more emotional conflicts.
Well, I hope you've enjoyed our quick romp through no and kabuki.
I hope our discussion has inspired you to watch some, whether live or on DVD.
And if it's kabuki on DVD, please invite some friends over, and serve lots of snacks
and strong drinks, and yell back at the screen, because it'll not only be more fun, it'll
even be more historically accurate.
