These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by the teaching company.
The Great Courses cover a broad array of university-level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day,
you can finish even the longest course in just weeks.
Browse our catalogue or web page
by clicking on the link in the description.
And imagine how much you could learn
if you spent just 30 minutes a day for the next year
in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lecturers are university professors carefully selected
by the teaching company and its customers
for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
These lectures are titled Buddhism Part 1.
The lecturer is Professor Malcolm David Echel.
Dr. Echel is an Associate Professor of Religious Studies
at Boston University, where he has been teaching for over 10 years.
He holds two bachelor's degrees,
one in English from Harvard University
and a second in theology from Oxford University.
He went on to earn his master's in theology at Oxford
and his PhD in the study of comparative religion at Harvard.
In addition to his position at Boston University,
he has held teaching positions at Ohio Wesleyan University,
Middlebury College and the Harvard Divinity School.
At Boston University, Professor Echel has taught courses
on Buddhism, comparative religion and the religions of Asia.
In 1998, Professor Echel received the Metcalf Award
for Teaching Excellence,
the university's highest award for teaching.
In addition to many articles,
Professor Echel has published two books on Buddhist philosophy,
including To See the Buddha,
a Philosopher's Quest for the Meaning of Emptiness.
Professor Echel prepared the course guide that comes with these tapes.
The course guide includes a detailed outline of each lecture,
a glossary, a timeline,
biographical notes and a bibliography.
To get the most out of this course,
you may find it useful to follow along with the outlines
or review them before or after each lecture.
Lecture One
What is Buddhism?
Welcome to our course on the history of Buddhism.
My name is David Echel.
I teach about Buddhism in the religion department
at Boston University,
and I'm absolutely delighted to be here
to be able to share with you my interest in this remarkable
and lively and perpetually challenging religious tradition.
You might be interested,
just as we start this series of lectures,
about how I became involved in the study of Buddhism.
I didn't grow up in a Buddhist environment.
I suspect that that's true also for many of you.
I came to Buddhism when I was a young man
studying Christian theology at Oxford.
One of the biggest challenges we faced in those days
was to try to find something to fill
our long four-month summer vacation
between the two years of our program.
And I, being the naive guy that I was in those days,
signed up to do an expedition to the desert of central Iran
to study the life of Iranian nomads.
We got out to the desert and, sorry to say,
that we found no nomads other than ourselves.
But when we got to the end of that trip,
as I was sitting under the great Mongol dome
in the Friday Mosque in Isfahan,
gazing up into the brickwork,
I began to muse a little bit
about a lot of the things that I had seen,
and I decided that I wanted to do nothing more
with my life than to study the civilizations of Asia.
So I went back to Oxford and began to study Sanskrit,
the language of India,
and followed my nose,
and eventually ended up at Harvard
studying comparative religion and Buddhism.
One thing led to another,
and I found myself swimming happily
through the philosophical traditions of Indian,
the Indian Buddhist community,
and also the philosophical traditions of Tibet.
Buddhism has become really an endless source of fascination,
I would have to say, for me.
And I'm looking forward very much
to having a chance to share that fascination with you
in this course.
In this introductory lecture,
I'd like to give you a brief overview
of the history of Buddhism.
Our course is going to follow a historical trajectory
from the Buddhists of ancient India
to the Buddhists who have become such an important life
and such an important component in our own neighborhoods
here in North America.
So this overview of Buddhist history
will give you, I think,
a clear impression of the ground we will cover together
in these lectures.
I'd also like to say something
about my own approach to the study of Buddhism.
I think it's important not just to know
the history of Buddhism,
but to find some way, if we can,
this is not always easy,
especially when we're talking about people
who lived many centuries ago.
But if we can, I'd like to find a way
to get inside the hearts and the minds
somewhere in here,
wherever that mind is located,
in the center of the personality,
so that we can understand the people
who have made Buddhism such a dynamic component
in Asian civilization,
and now, of course, are making Buddhism
such a dynamic part of the civilization
of the rest of the world.
Finally, I'd like to comment on some of the things
that have made Buddhism such an endless source
of fascination for me,
and also some of the things that I hope
will become fascinating to you as well.
So let me begin by talking about the origin
and the expansion of Buddhism
from its homeland in Northern India.
Buddhism began in Northern India
around 500 years BCE.
BCE, as we use it,
that abbreviation commonly in the study of religion,
means before the common era,
or before the Christian era.
The Buddhist tradition gets its name
from a man who was known by his followers
as the Buddha, or the Awakened One.
He was born in a princely family
in a region of Northern India
that now lies in southern Nepal.
In those days, of course, it was simply part
of the great undifferentiated geographical entity
that we speak of now as the Indian subcontinent.
I suspect that all of you who are listening
to this lecture have an image in your minds already
of what a Buddha looks like.
I have one sitting right behind me now as I speak.
The Buddha often is depicted as sitting
very serenely in a state of contemplation.
His feet are crossed in front of him
in a position that we know as the lotus position.
I'd love to be able to imitate it to you,
but I'm afraid that capacity has gone
with many of my old yogic attainments
from an earlier life.
The Buddha is a very picture of calm
and contemplation.
That clearly is what a Buddha is.
And this is the image of this calm
and contemplative human being
and many people to the Buddha for centuries in Asia
and here, of course, in our own environment today.
This is the one that conveys most explicitly
the experience of his awakening.
But the Buddha did not always sit
in perfect contemplation, of course.
After his awakening, he got up from the seat
of his enlightenment and taught about his experience
with others on the roads of northern India.
The major events of his life took place
in what we call the Madhya Desha,
or the middle region of the Ganges Basin.
These sites are still the focus
of Buddhist pilgrimage today.
To understand the significance of the Buddha's life,
we will spend two of our lectures,
right at the beginning of the course,
studying the religious background
that the Buddha confronted himself in India
during his own lifetime,
the background that made it possible for the Buddha
to have such a strong religious impact
on Indian civilization.
Then we'll discuss the three categories,
or jewels, that are fundamental to Buddhist life.
We'll spend one lecture on the life of the Buddha himself,
two lectures on his teaching or his dharma,
and then one lecture on the development
of the early Buddhist community,
and one lecture on the tradition of Buddhist art.
Once we've set ourselves down firmly,
just put our feet down in these early aspects
of the Buddhist tradition,
then our challenge will be to understand
the extraordinary diversity of Buddhism
as it evolved in India
and then throughout the countries of Asia.
In India itself, there were two major reform movements
that appeared within the Buddhist community,
not so long after the lifetime of the Buddha himself.
One of these was called the Mahayana,
or the Great Vehicle.
The second was called Tantra.
The word Tantra, we'll talk about when the time comes
for us to discuss that movement in more detail.
But for the moment, I think it might be helpful for us
simply to imagine that the word Tantra means power.
This was a tradition in the Indian Buddhist community
that emphasized all the techniques
that cultivated a sense of power.
These two movements will each get
some very significant attention in separate lectures.
Before these movements had ever begun to brew in India,
Buddhism was carried to Sri Lanka,
the island that used to be called Salon,
just off the southern tip of India.
Carried by Buddhist missionaries in the third century BCE,
and from Sri Lanka, Buddhism was then carried on
to most of Southeast Asia, including Indonesia.
We don't think of Indonesia now
as being a particularly Buddhist country,
but some of the most extraordinary monuments
in the history of Buddhism are found in Indonesia.
Buddhism moved north, out of India,
into China in the second century of the common era.
Carried north by monks and by merchants
on the trade routes that went out
over the mountains of the Hindu Kush into Afghanistan
and then on into the great trade routes
called the Silk Road that moved across Central Asia
and into the major mercantile centers of northern China.
Here Buddhism encountered, of course,
a sophisticated and ancient civilization.
China was a confident and thoroughly civilized region
when these early Buddhist monks
began to make contact with Chinese civilization.
And for Buddhism to become part of China as it eventually did,
it was important for Buddhists to make some major changes
in the way they thought through
and expressed basic issues in Buddhist civilization.
So one of our preoccupations later in this course
will be all these subtle ways
that Buddhism transformed itself
in order to become thoroughly Chinese.
From China, Buddhism was eventually carried to Korea, Japan and Vietnam.
So as you think schematically here at the beginning of our study
about the different varieties of Buddhism in the world,
you might lump Korean, Japanese and Vietnamese Buddhism together
as expressions of this great East Asian strand
within the larger complex of the Buddhist tradition as a whole.
In the eighth century of the Common Era,
Buddhism was carried across the Himalayas from India into Tibet.
Today, the Dalai Lama,
who is the leader of the Tibetan Buddhist community,
is one of the most visible
and I think probably one of the most active Buddhist leaders in the world.
In many ways, certainly he's been this way for me,
he is not just a living symbol of Tibetan Buddhism,
but really for many people he's been a symbol of Buddhism itself.
We'll give separate attention to all these major varieties of Buddhism
in these different cultural areas
and we'll conclude our course with a brief look
at the way Buddhism has become part of the religious world
we know in our own neighborhoods in Europe, North America
and other parts of the contemporary world.
Today, Buddhism has spread through much of the rest of the world,
including Europe, Australia and the Americas.
I was climbing Mount Kosciusco,
the highest mountain in Australia,
whether we call this great or not, we'll have to discuss,
but it's certainly a formidable and an interesting mountain
on a trip to Australia last year
and as I was staying in one of the hostels
that hikers and climbers and skiers used
before they go off to climb the mountain,
I ran into a group of Australian Buddhists.
I was happy to know that Tibetan Buddhism was alive and well
and functioning very actively
and actually in quite a sophisticated way
in Sydney and in some of the other cities of Australia.
So Buddhism has really become a part of our modern world
and we rub shoulders with it in all sorts of ways.
In America, Buddhism in some places
is strongest in ethnic communities,
as it is in the Sri Lankan Buddhist Sangha,
the Buddhist community in Los Angeles,
or in the Buddhist churches of America,
an important Japanese-based Buddhist community
that is centered particularly in California and in Hawaii
but also has centers in New York and on the East Coast.
It also has become extremely influential
with communities of American converts.
One of the most intriguing developments
that we'll discuss in my final lecture
has been the appearance of a whole new generation
of indigenous European and American Buddhist leaders.
Some of these leaders, like the 19th century Theosophist,
who was known as Colonel Olcott,
and others, like the Boston Buddhists,
who were led particularly by Ernest Fenelosa,
have not only shaped the development of Buddhism here in America,
but also in very curious and important ways
shaped the modernization of Buddhism,
shaped the development of Buddhism in Asia as well.
Colonel Olcott not only helped bring Buddhism to America,
but he shaped very much how the Sri Lankans
understood their own tradition,
and the Boston Buddhists Fenelosa and some of his colleagues
helped members of the Japanese Imperial Court
appropriate and protect aspects of their heritage
that had fallen out of fashion in the late 19th century.
So as we study American Buddhism,
we'll be studying also in a funny way
the internationalization of Buddhism
and the feedback, the relationship
between American Buddhists and the Buddhists of Asia.
So as you can imagine,
this long and complex history
has made the Buddhist tradition extraordinarily diverse.
This will be one of the issues we'll have to confront
in the course of these lectures.
Some Buddhists, for example,
uphold the very austere tradition of self-reliance
found in the early Buddhist monastic community,
relying simply on yourself
in order to achieve the experience of Nirvana
that the Buddha himself achieved.
One example of this is the monastic practice
in the Theravada Buddhist countries of Southeast Asia,
particularly Sri Lanka,
where the center of Buddhist activity
lies largely in the monastery,
among a group of yellow-robed monks
who go out in the morning in a very austere
and simple way with their begging bowls,
walking from house to house,
holding out their bowls,
taking off the lid,
and inviting members of the lay community
to provide them with the alms
that will sustain them for that day.
One of the classic rules in traditional Buddhism
is that monks can't carry food from one day to the next,
so every morning those monks have to go out
in their robes with their bowls to beg their food.
That austere, simple tradition is a tradition
that really grows right out of the experience of the Buddha
from the earliest stages in the growth of the Buddhist tradition.
You find the same kind of self-reliance
in the Zen tradition in Japan.
I was just visiting in Japan a couple of weeks ago
as part of a conference,
and I went down to Kyoto,
the great imperial capital of Japan,
and visited with a wonderful Zen abbot
who was the head of one of the monasteries
and one of the monastic compounds
in the monastery called Daitokuji.
I was speaking to him and taking his photograph,
and as I focused my camera on him,
I told him how important it was going to be for my students
to be able to show them a picture of a Zen master
who was clearly so accomplished,
who had clearly embodied in a powerful way
the truths of that tradition.
He looked me straight in the eye and he said,
Now, I want you to tell them
when you speak to them about this tradition
to be courageous, to stand up straight,
and to rely on themselves.
And I found myself, you know,
I, like many people in my business,
have a little bit of a scholar's stoop,
and I found myself just standing up a little straighter,
trying to imagine in some way
that I had imbibed the courage
and the sense of self-reliance that he was attempting to teach me.
That, of course, is a deeply rooted aspect of the Buddhist tradition.
It grows right out of the Buddha's own experience,
and it's one of the ways of being a Buddhist in the world.
It's not the only way.
There also is another important aspect of the tradition
that insists that it's not really possible
and perhaps not even desirable
to achieve salvation purely on your own merit,
purely on your own, relying on your own power,
but instead to rely on the power of some deity,
some figure who is infinitely greater than you.
One example of this that we'll study in some detail
as the course goes on is the worship of the Buddha Amida.
Amida Buddha by Pure Land Buddhists in Japan.
Pure Land Buddhism has, of course, come to North America,
like many other varieties of Buddhism,
and in some of its manifestations in this country in particular,
it looks an awful lot like Christian devotion.
I was visiting not so long ago
in one of the Pure Land Buddhist temples in Hawaii,
and being the curious scholar that I was,
I opened up a little hymnal in the back of the temple
and looked at, I think it was the first hymn,
perhaps it was the second,
and it had words that seemed mysteriously familiar to me.
It began, Buddha loves me, this I know,
for the sutras tell me so.
You could probably sing that along with me
if you wanted to do that.
I suspect you know the tune.
It, of course, is not a traditional Buddhist hymn,
but a way of simply mapping Buddhist devotion
into a form that would be familiar to people,
especially to children in American culture.
Another example of Buddhist devotion
that will occupy some of our attention here
in the next few lectures is Chinese Buddhist devotion
to the Bodhisattva, or the future Buddha,
not a Buddha per se,
but a deity who will become a Buddha in a future life,
the Bodhisattva Guanyin.
Guanyin is often pictured
as a beautiful standing female figure holding a baby,
and in Chinese civilization,
Guanyin is viewed as being the embodiment of compassion,
but compassion particularly associated with
the development of a healthy and happy family
and the gift of children.
So when I was visiting at a Chinese Buddhist pilgrimage site
on an island off Shanghai a couple of years ago,
I ran into a group of Chinese Buddhists,
ethnic Chinese Buddhists, who came from the Philippines
and from Indonesia.
I asked them why they had made the long and rather arduous
and rather expensive trip to come to this island
to pay homage to the deity Guanyin,
and they said that it was for the welfare of their family,
and particularly as a way of fulfilling the hope
to have children, happy children themselves.
This is an aspect of Buddhism that for many people
might seem unfamiliar,
but it too is deeply rooted in the practice
of the Indian tradition,
and will need to occupy some of our attention.
In Tibet, one of the most important aspects
of religious devotion is focused,
not necessarily on these great celestial figures,
but on the human beings who embody their power.
The Dalai Lama in particular is one of these.
People think of the Dalai Lama sometimes
as being a living Buddha.
Technically, that's not correct.
He's a living manifestation of the compassion
of the same bodhisattva who is manifested as Guanyin in China.
But he too has an extraordinary ability
to make the power of compassion present for people.
I remember a moment, for example,
a few years ago when the Dalai Lama
was making a visit to Middlebury College in Vermont,
and a lot of people had come together as you do
in settings like that on a whole mess of folding chairs
spread out in the fieldhouse at Middlebury,
and as we were waiting for the Dalai Lama to come,
we were buzzing in conversation as you do.
There was this sort of hum of anxious expectation
in the room as we were waiting for him to arrive,
and then we heard the door open in the back of the fieldhouse,
and there was a hush that settled on the audience.
We all turned around and looked back to see what was coming,
and there the Dalai Lama wrapped in his red robes
and surrounded by his retinue of monks came into the room,
bending over slightly.
He has a remarkable way, actually,
to embody a certain quality of humility.
He had his hands folded in front of him
in that gesture of respect that's common
in the Indian and Tibetan tradition,
and with a lovely half-smile on his face,
he searched the eyes of the people there in the audience,
and in some remarkable way,
managed to make eye contact with each one of us.
And I think no matter how skeptical we were
or how unfamiliar we were with the traditions of Tibetan Buddhism,
we could feel some of the power of compassion
that is associated with that person.
That, too, is an important aspect of the Buddhist tradition,
not just relying on yourself,
but in a sense opening yourself to the power
that comes to you from a figure
who in some way embodies an influence that is much greater than you.
Now, if we're thinking about the diversity of the Buddhist tradition,
it's also important to remember
that not all Buddhists are devotees, monks, nuns,
or for that matter,
embodiments of extraordinary otherworldly powers.
Buddhism also has been concerned very deeply
in ways that might be surprising to many of you
in political life in Asia.
King Ashoka, an emperor in the Maurya dynasty
who reigned in the third century
before the common era, converted to Buddhism
and became a protector of the Buddhist tradition
and established in Buddhist history
an ideal that's known as the Dharma Raja,
the righteous king,
who is a protector and a promoter
and a defender of the Buddhist tradition.
Ashoka's ideal has been imitated in traditional Buddhist societies
as different as Thailand and Indonesia, China, Japan,
very important actually in the expansion of Buddhism
into each of those cultures.
And it's alive today in quite a fascinating way
in the figure of Aung San Suu Kyi
who is a politician, a political leader,
a leader of a protest, a democratic protest movement
in Myanmar, which is formerly known by the name of Burma.
We'll discuss some of her life.
She was a recipient of a Nobel Peace Prize
and is a remarkable embodiment of what you might call
modern contemporary democratic Buddhist political values.
So a full description of a Buddhist society
would have to include not just monks, nuns and devotees,
but all the kings, queens, donors, supporters
who have oriented themselves in one way or another
to the ideal of the Buddha
and supported Buddhist institutions
and helped spread Buddhist values throughout the world.
Now, as we move through our discussion of Buddhist teaching,
we'll see that the diversity of the Buddhist tradition
should come to us as no surprise, really.
The Buddha himself said that everything is impermanent,
all things pass away.
So the evolution of the Buddhist tradition itself
exemplifies this fundamental truth.
It constantly changes.
There's nothing that seems absolutely to be set in stone.
It constantly evolves.
And we ourselves will want to begin to feel the dynamism
of that evolution, that process of change.
The Buddha also said that nothing has any permanent identity.
This is the famous Buddhist doctrine of no self.
So as the Buddhist tradition has changed
and adapted to new situations and needs,
it sometimes seems to have changed so radically
that it's hard to know any more what makes it Buddhist.
So the question for us, really,
is in the face of this incredible diversity,
is there any way for us to say what Buddhism actually is?
What is it?
What is it that we're going to study in this course of lectures?
It probably, to be honest,
would be difficult to answer that question
in a way that would satisfy everyone
who has looked to the Buddha for guidance
or everyone who has thought of himself or herself
as being a Buddhist.
But I'm convinced that the best way for us
to understand this tradition
is to see it as the continuous unfolding
of a set of stories.
Buddhists love to tell stories,
and I love to tell stories,
and I suspect that's true also of many of you.
So that this course will begin
by telling some of the stories
that gave a distinctive character to Indian civilization.
It'll move on to the story of the Buddha
as that story was remembered
and then transformed by generations of his followers.
Then it will move on to the stories of a few of the people
who have used the model of the Buddha's life
to shape their own lives
and to shape, in a profound way,
the civilizations where they live.
Finally, I hope that the story of the Buddha
and the story of Buddhism
will in some way become your story as well.
Buddhism can be a great challenge
to people who have grown up in the Western world
and think that religion has to do
with the worship of a single, almighty God.
The Buddha didn't accept the existence of a single God
who created the world,
and for that matter,
he did not accept the idea of a permanent self.
Some people think, in fact,
that Buddhism is so different from all we know
of a religion in the Western world
that it should be called, perhaps,
a philosophy of life rather than a religion.
Either way, Buddhism challenges us
to think in new ways,
to think in new ways
about the nature of the world
and about the possibility
of a satisfying and productive human life.
I think that you will find it's well worth spending a few hours
learning to look at this world through Buddhist eyes.
