Welcome once again to our course on the history of Buddhism.
In this lecture, I'm going to begin with a few comments about some of the distinctive
features of the life story of the Buddha.
Then I'm going to trace these distinctive features back into the early religious history
of India.
And the point of this little historical exercise is to understand really where the Buddha was
coming from, why he chose to analyze the problems of human life and the way he did, and why
he came up with such a distinctive and such a powerful solution.
But my second motivation is a little bit of a sneaky one, I've got to confess.
I'd really like to tell you something about the religious life of India more generally.
India is an extremely rich and creative place in a religious sense.
It's conceivable, I don't know how you could really do the numbers for a claim like this,
but it's conceivable that if we were speaking in terms simply of the largest number of people
who have been affected by different religious traditions, that India has generated more powerful
religious traditions and affected the religious lives of more religious people than any other
region in the world.
Certainly, it has been the most powerful of the great civilizations in Asia in that respect.
The only exception, of course, in our world would be the Middle East, with its combination
of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam.
It's worth knowing in any case, I think, some of the ways that Buddhism is a distinctively
Indian religion before we begin to trace its development and its impact on other civilizations
in Asia.
Now to begin with, Siddhartha Gautama, the man who was recognized as the Buddha and the
founder of the Buddhist tradition, lived in Northern India, as I mentioned in my first
lecture in the fifth century before the Common Era.
The young man was raised as a prince, he was married, he had a child, and then he chose
to renounce his life in the palace and to leave his family, to become a wandering ascetic.
And you can see ascetics and monks like this in India today, wandering the streets with
very few possessions, sometimes with rather few clothes actually, begging their food,
dedicating their lives to religious teaching and study, as the monks do in Sri Lanka and
as Buddhist monks do throughout the Buddhist world.
After a period of meditation and study, Siddhartha Gautama sat down under a tree, really, I suppose
if I were speaking in my own classroom back home at Boston University, I'd try to bring
a tree into the classroom and sit down underneath it, although I can't quite sit the way a Buddha
did, and I'd try to pretend that I was doing something that also was important in the story
of the Buddha, that I was waking up to the truth.
As the Buddha sat down under that tree according to Buddha's tradition, he woke up to the
truth about himself and the truth about the nature of the world.
This experience of awakening is known in the Buddhist tradition as his bodhiti, his awakening.
And Siddhartha Gautama is known to his followers, of course, as the awakened one, or the Buddha.
Now this basic outline of the story of the Buddha is pretty familiar to all of us.
In fact, it's so familiar, I think, that we can really take it for granted.
But the question we should ask ourselves when we start our study of this tradition is why
would a prince, a successful young man, all the pleasures of life available to him, really
in the prime of his life, young child, beautiful family, why would he choose to leave his palace
in the prime of his life and take up the harsh, difficult, and demanding life of an ascetic,
what was he looking for?
What was he seeking?
And what did it mean to say that he had awakened to the truth?
What does this metaphor mean in that kind of a setting?
To understand the Buddhist answers to these questions, we need to know something really
about Siddhartha Gautama's religious background and the religious world of India in the sixth
and fifth centuries before the Common Era.
Now to unpack the religious history of India, we turn first to a body of texts known as
the Vedas.
These are the most authoritative texts in the Hindu tradition and the oldest surviving
religious texts in India.
The earliest hymns in the Vedas can be dated to about 1500 to 1000 years BCE.
They are some of the oldest religious literature in the world.
According to the Hindu tradition, the Vedic hymns were heard by sages known as rishis
and then passed on through an unbroken chain of oral tradition down to the present day.
This is still done today in India and was done even more extensively in previous generations
as Brahmin priests would take their young boys aside and lead them through the rote
recitation of the hymns of the Vedas.
There are some films around available in our world that show what this process looks like
and it's really quite remarkable, it's a reminder actually that the capacities for memory of
young children can be quite extraordinary.
These young men would start memorizing the texts of the Vedas as early as five years
old but of course even when they were younger than that they'd be hanging around when their
older brothers would be memorizing and chanting the texts and would already have many of the
texts passively recorded in their memory.
So they were capable of remembering and passing on through an unbroken chain of oral tradition.
Hymns that go back perhaps 3500 years, it's really a remarkable oral tradition and oral
transmission of religious material.
These hymns were composed or heard, if that's the correct verb to use, in an early form of
the Sanskrit language.
This is a language that is closely related to Latin and Greek and to many of the languages
of Europe.
We'll use a certain amount of Sanskrit of course in our own study of Buddhism because
classical Indian Buddhism was discussed and developed often in the Sanskrit language.
It may seem quite unfamiliar to you, that is perfectly acceptable if that turns out
to be the case, but you might be comforted to know that it's related to English and to
the other European languages, not to all, but to most modern European languages.
The people who spoke Sanskrit, for example, called themselves the Arya, A-R-Y-A, the Arya.
This word in classical Sanskrit means simply a noble person, but it's found in the names
of two countries in the modern world.
You might ask yourselves whether you can think of them before I say them.
One is the country Iran, one of the traditional countries of the Arya, of the Aryans.
And the other, this is really surprising, in fact it's so surprising to many of my students
that they tell me I must be crazy if I think this is true.
The other one is Ireland, that great land of the Arya that lies out there on the western
edge of the continent of Europe, just on the edge of the North Atlantic.
Much of European civilization, like the civilization of India, is derived from the traditions of
these ancient people who migrated out of Central Asia in the middle of the second millennium
before the common era and settled as far west, as Ireland, and as far south, as India.
Now the hymns of the Vedas were sung in ritual actions to invoke and to praise the gods,
who were known in the classical Indian traditions as devas, a word that is cognate, it's related
to our word divine, to deus, theos, and to all of the words in the European languages
that are derived from that basic root.
Many of these gods are also closely related as individuals to the gods of classical Greek
and Latin mythology.
The Vedic god Dyaos, for example, who is a great god of the heavens, is related to Zeus.
The god of rain is known as Indra, the god of rain and the thunderstorm, like Thor, I
suppose, in Nordic mythology.
And the god of fire is called Agni, which is cognate with our word ignite.
So these gods are really part of a recognizable pantheon of deities that has a history in
European civilization as well.
The hymns of the Vedas were sung by the priests or the Brahmins as part of a complex sacrificial
ritual, which the Brahmins moved from site to site very often, establishing temporary
altars constructed according to a very careful plan, built fires, made ritual sacrifices,
sacrifices, usually plant materials of one sort or another, but in some cases also of
animals in order to invoke the aid of the gods.
And as they did this, they used these hymns to touch the power of the gods and to make
the gods present in their sacrifice.
These sacrifices still go on today in India, as the Vedas are still chanted today in India,
and they are, in a sense, the core identity of the Brahmin caste in India.
Because the Brahmins really are this ancient priestly caste that was at one time, and in
many respects still today the custodians of the great religious traditions of ancient
India.
Now one of the last hymns in the Vedic collection posed what I like to think of as the classic
Vedic question, a question that really troubled these Brahmins as they thought puzzled over
the meaning of their sacrifice and tried to find ways to make it more powerful and to
connect it more deeply to the realities that they were attempting in some way to touch.
Let me paraphrase this hymn a bit, or at least some portions of it, so that you can get an
impression of the content of these hymns and also begin to feel the force of the Vedic
question.
There was then neither non-existence nor existence.
There was no sky, there were no heavens.
What was it that covered everything?
What was its protection?
Was there a bottomless depth of waters?
There was neither death nor immortality then, neither day nor night.
The one breathed, though uninspired by breath, by its own potentiality.
Beside it, nothing existed.
Who is there who knows, who knows, who can tell its origin, who can tell the source of
this creation?
The gods are on the far side of the creation.
Who knows then where it came from and how it came into being?
Where this creation came from and how it came into being, perhaps the highest overseer in
heaven knows, or perhaps even he doesn't know.
This is hymn number 129 from the 10th book of the Rig Veda, one of the late hymns in
this early Vedic corpus.
Now you can see, if you listen carefully to the words of this hymn, that these early priests
are asking questions about the origins of the world, clearly, about where it all came
from, where the diversity of the world first arose.
And the questions are taking them, this is what's in some ways curious for us in the
western world as we first hear these words, the questions are taking them beyond the gods.
Where did all of this come from, including the diversity of the gods themselves?
They want to know where everything came from, and the emphasis in this sentence is really
on the word no, they want to know it.
And you can feel, just like a suggestion in these words, it's not stated explicitly,
you can feel that they are convinced that if they know the source of this creative impulse,
that it will somehow connect themselves as individuals back to their source, and it will
give them a sense of power and control over the nature of the cosmos itself.
So this hymn is just, in a sense, a fragmentary expression of the Vedic imagination, but it
helps us feel, and to get a taste, I think of that impulse that drove the Vedic Brahmins
to probe the origins of the cosmos, and to make the origins of the cosmos in some way
available to themselves as actors in this religious world.
Now as the Vedic tradition evolved, the original hymns of the Veda attracted a large body,
as you can imagine, of commentary and explanation.
The final level of commentary in the classical corpus is found in the Upanishads, a body
of texts that are known sometimes as the Vedanta, a word that perhaps may be familiar
to many of you, a word that means simply the end of the Veda, the end of the Vedic collection.
The Upanishads tell stories of priests who tried to find unity in the fragmented world
of the Vedic ritual.
And they focused their speculation on three areas of life.
They identified first the essence of the external world.
They looked out beyond themselves into the forces of nature, to the wind, into the sun,
into the power that made the plants grow, and they attempted to touch the essence that
gave that its reality or its life.
The word they used to name this, we translate as sometimes as being, sometimes as reality.
The Sanskrit word itself is simply satt, S-A-T, satt.
It's actually the present participle of the Sanskrit verb to be, which is the same as our
word is.
This may not seem terribly recognizable to you, but the s in the word satt is the same
s as the s in our word is.
So satt is is-ing, it is being, it is existence, it's reality.
That's the reality of the external world.
Then they looked inside in their own personalities, and they tried to put the finger somehow
on what it was that made themselves what they were, that was the essence of their own personality,
and they spoke as people often do in India about the power of breath.
Breath is important in the practice of lots of different types of Indian meditation.
To focus on your breath is to focus in some sense on the source of your life.
So a lot of the speculation in the Upanishads spoke about breath as the source of energy
in the personality.
But as they worked with the concept and worked with their own awareness of themselves, they
came to speak of something that went even a little deeper than the mere movement of
the air, of the breath, of the energy in and out of the body.
They spoke of their own atman, their own self.
So the essence of the personality in the classical Upanishads is called atman or self.
And then these were priests.
These were people who engaged in sacrificial rituals.
That was important for them.
That was really the locus where a lot of the speculation went on.
So they were concerned to find out what the essence was also of the prayers that they spoke
and of the ritual gestures and actions that they performed.
Again there were many possibilities.
Atman was a particular sacred syllable, the sacred syllable om that often appears and
often is used in Vedic ritual.
But again they focused on something that was even more fundamental.
It was the word brahman, a word that originally referred to the prayer itself and then came
to name the power that lay behind the prayer.
So they had worked on three separate areas.
The external world, which you might call the macrocosm, the cosmos in the largest sense
in which we can conceive of it.
The personality or the microcosm, our own micro world, the micro world of our own selves.
And then this world of ritual that mediates in some way between the personality and the
larger world, the world of ritual, the world of sacrifice, I like to call it simply the
mesocosm, the world that lies in the middle between the personality and this larger structure
of the cosmos.
Once these three essential realities had been identified, the Upanishadic sages made
an enormous imaginative leap, a leap that was really just profoundly significant in
the history of Indian religion.
They said that all three were aspects of the same thing.
When I speak to classes about this in my own classroom, I turn around and I rush to the
blackboard where I've put down Atman and Sutt and Brahman on the board and I draw little
equation signs between each one of these things to show that each one of these is identified
with the others.
All of these are words in the Upanishads that name a single reality, one great reality out
of which all of the world comes.
This doctrine of one reality is called Upanishadic monism, the view that all of reality is one.
Now, Upanishadic monism, this great doctrine in the Upanishads, can be expressed in a number
of different ways, ways that are important to know about and give you some of the flavor
of this tradition.
One way is simply to assert it positively as the nature of your own self.
One of the classic sources of this way of expressing Upanishadic monism is in a story
of a father and a son, a Brahman priest, a Vedic student.
The father's name is Aruni, the son's name is Shweta Ketu.
Aruni says to Shweta Ketu when he reaches a certain age, it's time for you now to get
going.
To get on out there, go to school and study the Vedic tradition.
You need to become a learned Brahman like the other members of your family.
Shweta Ketu goes off, does his study, comes back at the age of 24, as the text says, puffed
up, full of self-importance, can't imagine that would happen to any of you, but full
of self-importance, full of a sense of confidence in his own knowledge, and his father sits
him down the way fathers do and says, okay, kid, tell me what you know.
Have you heard anything about the principle of substitution?
You can hear this moment of puzzlement in the text as Shweta Ketu says, well, they actually
didn't mention that to me in school.
That wasn't part of our curriculum, and Aruni then sits Shweta Ketu down and begins to instruct
him about the ways he can sew together all of the diverse pieces of his knowledge into
a sense of the unity of the cosmos.
He begins like this.
He says, okay, Shweta Ketu, it is like this.
By means of one lump of clay, one must perceive everything that is made of clay.
The transformation is a verbal handle, a name, while the reality is just this.
Everything made of clay is just clay.
And then he takes this intuitive principle and he applies it to different areas of life.
In one particular passage that's widely quoted in discussions of the Upanishads, it becomes
almost like a kind of philosophical poetry.
He says, the bees, my dear son, prepare honey by gathering the nectar of different trees
and reducing that nectar to a unity so that the nectar from each different tree is not
able to differentiate, I am the nectar of this tree or I am the nectar of that tree.
In exactly the same way, my son, when all creatures merge into reality, they are not
aware we are merging into reality.
No matter what they are in this world, whether they are a tiger, a lion, a wolf, a boar,
a worm, a moth, a gnat, a mosquito, they all merge into that reality.
That finest essence here is the self of the whole world.
That is reality, that is the self, and that art thou, Shweta Ketu.
This phrase is considered one of the greatest phrases of the Upanishadic literature and
in some ways one of the foundational phrases of Indian civilization, whatever that reality
is that is out there, outside yourself, out of which the whole world comes, whatever that
reality is, that is you, that art thou, Shweta Ketu.
This is a positive assertion of the doctrine of Upanishadic monism, a way of sewing together
the pieces of the world in a positive way.
But of course if there is no, if all is one and there is no duality, then in some ways
it makes more sense to speak about this monistic concept in a negative way by denying distinctions,
by saying if you see a distinction in the world, you should know that that is not the
way to speak about the unity of Brahman.
So an important expression of Upanishadic monism, equally important really as the one
I've just mentioned, is found in an Upanishad called the Brihadaranyaka, about this self
it says, it's one of the greatest Upanishadic sages speaking, about this self one can only
say that it is not this, it is not that.
If you've identified it as being anything in particular, you've mistaken the unity
that this text is attempting to convey.
The goal of the Upanishads, as was true also with the goal of that Vedic hymn that I mentioned
a few minutes ago, is to know this reality, to know it, not to trust it, to have faith
in it, not to be emotionally connected to it, not to love it, not to do any of those
other things that are sometimes spoken of as being so important in religion.
What you need to do in this tradition is to know that reality and embody it somehow in
yourself, to know that connection to ultimate reality.
Now the Buddha, of course, inherited this traditional Indian quest for knowledge.
This is what he was trying to do when he renounced his life in the palace and set out on the
road in Northern India to achieve his awakening.
This quest for knowledge has three basic characteristics that are as important in Buddhism as they
are in the classical tradition of the Upanishads.
The first is to bring unity to all of the different areas of life.
The Upanishads disinvolved external reality, the self, and the world of ritual that mediates
between these two.
That's quest for unity is present in Buddhism as well.
Another characteristic of this quest for knowledge is that it is not merely intellectual.
It's not really the kind of knowledge that you convey by writing something down on a
blackboard, no matter how energetic or how imaginative you are in making the connection
between all of these different things.
It doesn't just change the way a person thinks or a person acts.
It changes the kind of person they are.
It changes their very identity.
As it says in the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, if a person knows I am Brahman, if you know
you are Brahman, in this way you can become the whole world, so it changes the way you
live in the world.
Finally, this is the last of the three characteristics.
This knowledge has to do with overcoming the power of death.
That's not obvious from the passages that I've just spoken of, but it's clear in other
passages of the Upanishads that we could explore together, particularly in a Upanishad known
as the Kata Upanishad, where a young Vedic scholar by the name of Nachiketas is consigned
to the Lord of Death.
He goes to visit death, and death isn't home.
Exactly why is that clear?
He isn't home, and Nachiketas has to wait three days for Yama, the Lord of Death, to
come and greet him.
Yama is embarrassed by this.
This boy has been waiting, so he gives him three boons, three choices that Nachiketas
can choose to be granted.
One is to be greeted warmly by death when he arrives at his own death.
Another is to live among the gods.
The third and the most difficult is to know the secret of himself, to know what he is.
And Yama at first tries to avoid having to speak this to him, and then he tells him the
nature of himself.
This knowledge about the nature of the self gives Nachiketas power over death.
And it's this power that the Buddha himself was seeking when he renounced his palace and
went out on the roads of northern India.
