Lecture 3 The Doctrine of Reincarnation
In our last lecture, we talked about the classical Indian quest for knowledge.
In this lecture, I want to put one more crucial piece in place in our understanding of the
Indian religious background and the time of the Buddha so that we can begin in the next
lecture to study the life of the Buddha and the Buddha's teaching themselves.
This one final remaining crucial piece has to do with the Indian view of the afterlife
and the doctrine of reincarnation.
If we look back into the early Vedic literature that we talked about last time, the tradition
particularly of the early Vedic hymns, we find that the view of the afterlife is really
quite similar to the view that's found in some of the European traditions that are really
familiar to us.
It's a familiar view and one probably that belonged in some way to all of the people who
called themselves Arya and who migrated across Europe and down into India.
This view is that people who live a virtuous life, live a good life in this world, play
by the rules and perhaps express themselves in some sort of heroic way or achieve some
sort of particular eminence, go to live in the land of the ancestors when they die.
This belief persists in some aspects of Hinduism today because Hinduism is a complex tradition
that really involves many layers.
The families make their pilgrimage to the sacred city of Banaras on the river Ganges
in North India.
They make offerings to feed the ancestors and to ensure their prosperity in the afterlife.
This ancient ritual goes back into the early traditions of the Vedas and it's related of
course to this view that the ancestors have moved into another realm and they need to be
fed in order to ensure their prosperity.
Sometime during the first half of the first millennium before the common era, this ancient
view began to be replaced by another one, we call the doctrine of reincarnation.
By the time of the classical Upanishads, Indian sages, the sages of the Upanishads, took the
position that human beings didn't live just one life but cycled around again and again
life after life, if you want to draw this for yourselves by making gestures in the air,
you would simply draw circles.
They cycled around life after life, death after death, in a process of death and rebirth.
In the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, there was a sage named Yajnavalkya, one of the great
heroes of the Upanishads, I don't talk about him very much because his name is so hard
to pronounce, but he was one of the really remarkable figures in that Upanishadic literature.
He compared the succession of human lives to the movement of a caterpillar from one blade
of grass to another, it's a very nice metaphor actually to express this movement of the soul
from one life to another.
He said, it's like this, as a caterpillar when it comes to the tip of a blade of grass
reaches out to a new foothold and draws itself onto itself, so the self after it has knocked
down this body and rendered it unconscious reaches out to a new foothold and draws itself onto it.
Nice image, a caterpillar crawling from one blade of grass to another.
Later in the same text, it talks more about the mechanism of the doctrine of reincarnation.
It says that when human beings are cremated, the smoke from the cremation pyre rises up into the
sky and there the soul can move in three different directions on out of this world into the realm
of Brahman back into this world as a human being or into one of the lower realms of rebirth as
into the body of a worm, an insect or a snake, one of those things that cross along the ground.
In fact, I won't bore you with this, but there are some quite nice descriptions in some of this
literature about what it's like to be reborn as a worm in a dung heap.
They say that if this is your, this is the faith that is reserved for you that the dung heap will
begin to smell extremely attractive as you're making your way through the the intermediate
state of the afterlife. Now, this doctrine, this idea of reincarnation is known in English as,
by a number of different words, reincarnation is simply one of them. We also speak in English of
transmigration, to transmigrate, to move across into some other world, or we speak of rebirth.
In Sanskrit, in the language of ancient India, this phenomenon is called by another word,
samsara. The word samsara means simply to wander from one life to the next. And it already begins
to suggest to you what the emotional valence is that's associated with this idea in classical India.
Here we're not talking so much about a direct straight line where you're marching through one
life after another in order to achieve a particular goal, but actually an experience of wandering
as you're tossed around from one life to the next, not knowing fully how it is you got where
you are or where it is you're really going to end up. Now, this doctrine of reincarnation
affected Indian religious thought in two important ways that I think are really important for us to
think about together in order to understand the emotional drive that motivates Indian religion.
Because we, I suspect, coming from a western religious environment or a western cultural
environment, are likely to think of reincarnation in a certain way, perhaps as a possibility that
would allow us to come back into this world and experience, again, something that we really missed
in this life, something positive, something really to be sought. It tended not to work out that way
in India for two rather important reasons that separate the Indian view of reincarnation from
any view that you're likely to have encountered in contemporary American religious life.
In the earliest texts, this doctrine is depicted as being a rare and secret teaching. So at first,
it was not something that was accepted by everybody, but very quickly, by the time of the Buddha,
it became what I think we have to understand is the fundamental assumption of Indian religious
life. It's not a doctrine that you can take or leave. It's not a doctrine that you can pick or
choose. It's simply the starting point for Indian religious reflection. This is very difficult for
new students of Indian religion fully to grasp. And I must say that I even myself have trouble
grasping the full significance sometimes in my own conversations with Buddhists.
I think everyone, when they go to India for the first time and have studied a little bit
of Indian religion, try to find some moment when they can sit down with an Indian religious teacher
and say, well, Swamiji or oh great guru, I've heard a little bit about this doctrine of reincarnation.
There's nobody listening. We can close all the windows and we won't record anything that we're
actually talking about here. Tell me, do you really believe that? Do you really believe that
when you die, you're reborn in another body and that this life that you have now is the result of
infinite numbers of lives that have extended on into the infinite past? And I found when I first
asked this question, I was as naive as anybody else when I went into India and began to try to
unlock some of the meaning of some of these things for myself. When I first asked this question,
the particular monk I was speaking to looked at me as if I had just stepped out of a spaceship.
He said, you mean you would question that? You mean that's something that you would doubt?
It's so obvious in a way as the starting point for Indian religious thought, of course,
Buddhist thought beyond India as well, that it's almost inconceivable that one could question it.
It's really where Indian religious life begins. So as we try to think and feel our own way into this
remarkable and complex tradition, we have to begin to think of reincarnation as really the
starting point for Indian religious thought. Now, there's a second feature of this doctrine,
two that's important for us to come to some understanding of. In the West, we sometimes
think that reincarnation is an opportunity to have something that we may have missed this time around.
For a long time, I used to think of myself as a frustrated baseball player as a shortstop in the
making who really didn't have the physical skills or the body to go out and be a great success on
the baseball field. And instead, I had to settle for second best and become somebody who made his
way by crawling from the tip of one grass blade to the next in the stacks of Widener Library at
Harvard. And I thought maybe if I came back in another life that I could be a great baseball
player that I wanted to be in this life strikes us that way. Why not if we're reborn in another life?
Wouldn't we try to manipulate our lives in this world so that we could come back in a form that
would be more attractive or more pleasurable to us? In India, for reasons important to think about,
the doctrine of reincarnation didn't work out that way. It came not to be viewed as being an
opportunity, but to be viewed instead as a burden. And part of the reason for this is that Indian
civilization in the centuries that began to lead up to the life of the Buddha came to view reincarnation
not as a single life or as two or three lifetimes strung together, but on a timescale that involved
millions and millions of lifetimes. So that whatever those challenges were that you wanted to meet
in some new life that you wanted to come back in order to confront, perhaps to overcome began to
seem very small in the large scale of personal and cosmic history that you were involved in.
One of the best ways to get a sense of the emotional impact of this idea is to consider
one of my favorite stories. It comes out of a body of Hindu texts where
stories are elaborated about things like the doctrine of reincarnation. It's a story about
the god Indra and the Brahmin boy. The story starts like this. Indra has just won a great
victory. He's actually slain a demon that held the waters of creation in its belly and he has
released the waters of creation over the world and begun to bring the whole process of creation
in motion. In order to celebrate this he decides to build a palace like William Randolph Hearst
at San Simian. He gets the divine architect Vishwa Karman to design for him the most perfect throne
room in guest houses and kitchens and palatial dining rooms and all of that sort of thing and he
builds and builds and builds so that Vishwa Karman the divine architect eventually simply becomes
tired of all of this. So he goes to the god Brahma and asks him for help just to cool down some of
the enthusiasm that's driving Indra on this massive building project. Brahma manifests himself
as a Brahmin boy as a child and he goes like Nachiketas to visit Indra in his palace and Indra
is required by the custom of that of that culture to provide lavish entertainment and a beautiful
welcome for the child. So he brings out food and music and entertainment and all of that sort of
stuff presents it to the child and the boy begins to weep, looks down at the floor and he breaks out
into tears. Indra is stunned by this so he looks at the boy and he asks what's wrong
and the boy points to a line of ants running across the floor and he says Indra each one of
those ants was an Indra just like you in a previous life and not just one time but millions and
millions and millions of times and that will happen to you. You too someday will fall down from your
position as the king of the gods and you'll be an ant crawling across the floor of someone else's
throne room and Indra of course is stunned by this new vision of himself in this vast scale of time
in which even the most extraordinary achievements eventually decay and slip away. So there's a
lot obviously about this doctrine that's important for us to consider intellectually but I think it's
important at the very beginning to understand it emotionally and understand the emotional impact
of reincarnation when it's visualized on this massive time scale. It becomes a burden to be born,
a problem to be solved rather than an opportunity to be exploited by looking forward into a future life.
So we begin our study of Indian religion in part with this fundamental problem,
the problem of reincarnation. It's fundamental, it's burdensome. What can we do about it?
What do we do to lift this burden? The answer to that question in India comes from considering
something that we call the law of karma. It's really the law of retribution that governs and
drives the cycle of transmigration. The word karma is a word that's pretty common in our world. I
haven't looked it up in the dictionary recently to see whether it's made its way into the discourse
of the dictionary but it certainly is in the discourse of our culture. You know what it means
to say that somebody has bad karma. It means something like bad luck. It probably springs from
something that they've done in the past either in this life or in some previous life. In India,
the word karma simply means action. So bad karma is a bad action, good karma, a good action that
then bears its result. It sticks with you and it bears its result in this life or the next.
So the cycle of death and rebirth, the cycle of samsara, is driven by an inexorable law.
What you do now will bear some result in some future life. You have to find some way to work with
this law in order to permit some positive solution to the problem of samsara.
Now you might ask, as we talk about the law of karma, where karma can lead you? That's a perfectly
legitimate question to ask about India. What are the possible realms of rebirth? There are somewhat
different pictures of this and different aspects of the Indian tradition, but generally it's possible
to think of six realms into which you can be born. You can be born as a god, as a demigod,
a lesser category of god, sometimes referred to as a demon, but it actually is just one more
category of divine figure, as a human being, as a ghost, as an animal, or as a spirit in hell.
Sometimes people are surprised when they hear that hell is an important concept in Buddhism,
or in Indian religion more generally, but it is very traditional, it's very important in the
overall structure of Indian religious life to realize that there are places where you can go,
and they're quite elaborately described in some literature where you can really be punished.
So if you perform bad actions in this life, there really are some important ways in which
you will suffer for it in some future life. Now the law of karma allows two strategies,
two possible ways to deal with the problem of samsara. You might almost be able to think of
them yourselves if you begin to work theoretically with the law of retribution that I've just laid
out for us. One of these I call the ordinary norm, just the ordinary way of doing things.
It's followed by most Indian people, and it's the most obvious way of responding to the challenge
that we've been talking about. If you're an ordinary Indian person, what you try to do is
perform good actions to get a good rebirth. What could be more simple than that? Do your duty,
do the things that are specified for you as a member of Indian society, as a member of the
Brahmin caste, or the princely caste, as a father or a mother, as a son or a daughter,
a student, a teacher, whatever that is, there are special duties that accrue to you in that
part of the world. You should make sure you do them right, and if you do,
then good things will happen to you in some kind of a future life. The best thing that you can get
in a future life would be rebirth in heaven. That's as high as you can go. You can be up there
with Indra as one of the gods in heaven. But as in the story of Indra and the Brahmin boy,
the problem with this approach to the law of karma is that it's impermanent. It slips away.
If you go and live with the gods in heaven, you, like all the other gods, eventually begin to lose
your luster. The impact of your karma begins to wither and fade, and you begin to fall down into
the cycle of transmigration all over again. So it's possible to be reborn at a high level and to
live a pleasurable life as the result of your past karma, but it's impermanent and it slips away.
It's not something that you can hold onto forever. It's possible in rare instances to follow another
norm, to approach the law of karma in a very different way. The challenge is a lot of our
presuppositions about the way religious life works. I call this the extraordinary norm.
This is open only to a few people, or shall we say chosen only by a few people. It may very well
be open to everybody, but only a few people choose it. According to this norm, someone would attempt
to perform no action, not good action, not bad action, but no action at all, either good or bad.
And the goal of this mode of action, this extraordinary norm, is not to get a better
rebirth, not to kind of win on the scale of transmigration or reincarnation,
but to get no rebirth at all, and bring the cycle of transmigration completely to an end.
It's a very distinctive idea, as you can see, just to bring the cycle of transmigration to an end.
This state of no rebirth, the end of the cycle of samsara, is called commonly in Hindu literature,
moksha, that means liberation, so you'll hear it referred to that way, often in the religious
literature of India. Buddhists refer to it as nirvana. So this, of course, is the great goal
that the Buddha was seeking in his meditative and contemplative life, to seek nirvana,
the end of the cycle of transmigration. Once a person has achieved this state, once you get there,
there is no return in the cycle of death and rebirth. That means it's permanent,
it doesn't slip away from you. So if you want a solution to the problem of samsara,
this is what you've got to do. You've got to find some way to bring this cycle completely to an end.
Now, if you think about this, with these two norms, then, come two very distinctive styles
of life in Indian society, two very different ways you can live as a religious person in Indian
civilization. People who follow the ordinary norm situate themselves in a network of duties
and responsibilities. They live the life of ordinary people, their mothers, fathers, teachers,
students, priests, kings, and they're bound by all the rules that govern these social roles.
People who follow the extraordinary norm renounce all of this. And I use the word renounce here
in really a technical sense. They give it all up. They engage in an act of renunciation
so that these duties no longer apply to them, and they no longer occupy any distinctive place
in the established structure of Hindu society. In other words, they really turn their back
on all the social duties that would normally accrue to someone in that world. These renunciants
are called by various names. Sanyasi is one that's commonly used in the Hindu tradition,
although it could be used for Buddhists as well. Buddhists refer to bhikshus, the word we translate
as monk. It originally meant simply to beg or bhikshuni, a nun, a woman who is engaged in the
same act of renunciation. They have very few possessions. They beg for their food and they
live lives that are deliberately simple in order to escape the network of karma that ties them
in the cycle of samsara. Now you might find it interesting to
attempt to visualize for yourself what somebody like this would look like. I've given an
abstract description to you of the possibility of sanyasa. What does it look like to meet a
sanyasi on the street? And what would it be like to try to become a sanyasi for yourself?
The story that I often use to introduce students to this ideal in Indian life is
one that I think is in some ways a little bit odd but is rather distinctive and amusing.
There was a man once, let's start out with, once upon a time. There was a man named Leopold Fischer
who was born and grew up in Vienna in Austria before the Second World War and he showed
an unusual aptitude for Indian languages. I'm sure he must have imagined or others might have
imagined for him that this was the result of some previous connection with that great civilization.
Anyway, he came of age during the Second World War and joined the Nazi army, the army of the
Third Reich and was assigned to the Indian Legion to defend the Normandy beachhead against the
invasion by the Allied forces. He was captured with his Indian troops and was repatriated,
I put this word in quotation marks, he was sent with his troops back to India even though he had
never actually lived there himself. And when he got to India he tried to imagine what to do.
Now he was there and he could speak the languages and was at home with his Indian troops.
He went up to Benares on the Ganges and tried to find a teacher who would initiate him as a
Sanyasi. Initially his attempts to do this were not terribly successful because people were reluctant
to initiate foreigners into this institution and this style of life but he found finally someone
who would do this for him. So the guru, the teacher, took him down to the Ganges, to the bank of
the Ganges, to the cremation ground where the bodies are burned along the shore of the river
during the dark of the moon and he asked him to go through a very simple ritual that involved in
effect a ritual death. There was a cremation pyre that had been set up for him. He stripped off
all of his clothes, took off all the marks of his previous identity and laid down on the pyre
and was symbolically cremated to indicate in effect that he no longer was the person that he was.
He rose up from the pyre, went, took a bath in Mother Ganga in the Ganges, came out of the river
and was wrapped in the robe of a Sanyasi and given a begging bowl and a new name and set off
to walk the roads of India as a renunciant and an ascetic. His new name was Agaihananda Bharati.
Homeless, Agaihananda means homeless bliss. He went on then to have a very distinguished
and interesting academic career in India and ended up as a professor of anthropology at Syracuse
University. So it doesn't always work out quite the way you would expect. But the story itself
is extraordinarily vivid and it shows you something important I think about the idea of Sanyasa in
India that it involves ceasing completely to be the person you were, to stop the cycle of
transmigration. So you could imagine, I suppose, if you wanted to speak about this intellectually,
that the goal of this form of religious action in India is to negate karma, simply to stop it.
And you could, you'll have to do this with your mind's eye, not with anything that I can present to
you here either verbally or on the screen, that I've written on the blackboard. Imagine that I've
written on the blackboard the phrase, I act. I produce karma. That's what you want to stop
if you want to escape the cycle of transmigration. And you can, of course, cross out the word act,
if you want. You can really diminish the number of things that you're responsible for in this
world and the number of things you do. Not a course is something that Buddhist monks do.
They have few possessions. Why? There's less that they have to protect, less that they have to worry
about and be responsible for. They beg food every day. Why? Because they don't want to have to cook,
want to have to be responsible for that kind of sustenance in their life. So you try in a
quite a serious way to diminish the number of things that you do and that you must do in this
world. But a more fundamental way to erase that phrase, to negate the concept that I am performing
an action, is to negate the I. To take the word I off the blackboard so that it no longer is you
who performs the action. There no longer is a you there who is connected in some responsible
way to the actions of this world. That's what Argehananda Bharati did, of course,
in that symbolic action by the Ganges when he laid down on the cremation pyre and was
symbolically burned. But that too is a crucial aspect of the Buddhist tradition as well.
Buddhists also are trying to find a way to negate the sense of self, the drives,
the cycle of death and rebirth. And all of that will have a chance to talk about in more depth
when we talk in the next lecture about the life of the Buddha and then move on to the Buddha's
teaching.
