In the last two lectures, we've considered two of the ways Buddhism changed as it expanded
out of its homeland, out of its original homeland in northern India.
Disputes in the Buddhist community within the Sangha generated a series of sectarian
movements that were known by the name Nakhaya.
The word Nakhaya is not a particularly important technical word, it simply means school, and
it's used to designate these sectarian movements that began to spin out in the Buddhist community
after that event that's known as the Second Buddhist Council.
We also saw in the last lecture that Buddhist artists and Buddhist craftsmen, whether all
of these were artists in any recognizable sense is hard to know, but certainly craftsmen
who were working in the Buddhist tradition, developed different ways of representing the
concept of the Buddha in visual form, first of course in the an iconic images that we
discussed that are so problematic and difficult to interpret, and then of course in that full
range of physical images that have been so important as a representation of the Buddhist
tradition worldwide.
We spoke about a few of the styles that were significant, the Maturah style, the Gandharan
style, and the Gupta style, but there were more, and we'll have a chance in time to talk
about those as we move through the later historical periods in the development of the Buddhist
tradition.
Now, many of these early sects, like these early Buddhist artifacts, are really historical
objects at this point.
We can study them in museums, or we can read about them in texts, but we can't actually
meet them on the street.
They're not something that really, as it were, an active representation of the Buddhist
tradition today.
One of these early sects, however, one of these early Nikhayas is still active.
This is the Theravada tradition in Southeast Asia.
The word Theravada is the polyform of the word Staviravada that I mentioned when we were
talking about these sectarian movements.
It means simply the doctrine of the elders.
So it is, in its designation, a conservative tradition.
It preserves the doctrine of this elderly, wise branch of the community.
So it's oriented toward the preservation of Buddhist tradition.
It expanded into Sri Lanka and then out into the rest of Southeast Asia, and it maintains
for us today a pretty good vision, actually, of aspects of the Buddhist tradition as it
would have been practiced in India in those early centuries after the death of the Buddha.
Now the history of the Theravada tradition in Sri Lanka and Burma and Thailand and in
other countries of Southeast Asia is obviously going to be too difficult for, too complex
really, for us to discuss fully in only a half hour lecture.
We have other places in this course we have to visit in the northern parts of Asia, and
we've got other movements we have to consider, so we can't linger too long on this very appealing
and very influential aspect of the Buddhist tradition.
But I'd like to use this lecture to give you a taste of the history of the Theravada by
looking at three representative figures who have shaped the development of the Theravada
tradition as we know it today, and as we would encounter it if we went to visit the Buddhist
communities in Sri Lanka or Thailand or Burma, or one of the other places where the Theravada
is practiced and active in Southeast Asia.
The figures I have in mind are King Ashoka, the ancient king of the Maurian dynasty who
became the prototype of the righteous king or Dhamaraja, and whose son, according to
Buddhist legend, became the first Buddhist missionary who carried the Buddhist tradition
down into Southeast Asia.
The second figure is King Mongkut of Thailand who reigned from 1851 to 1868 and who, before
he became king, spent 25 years in the monastery as a monk, and then, when he was instituted
as king, began a reform movement to modernize the Thai Sangha.
He's a king who had an enormous impact on Buddhist life in Thailand and crystallizes
for us an important aspect of modern Theravada Buddhism.
The third figure is a figure whom I particularly admire, one of the most intriguing modern
figures in the Buddhist tradition, a woman by the name of Aung San Suu Kyi, who is the
leader of a democratic protest movement in Burma and was the recipient of the Nobel Peace
Prize in 1991, and she too shows us the Buddhist tradition in a fascinating, modern way, in
a way that I think will intrigue you and challenge you to think of the Buddhist tradition in
a new way.
So let's start with King Ashoka.
The Prototype of the Righteous King.
When King Ashoka assumed the throne in the year 269 before the Common Era as Emperor
of the Maurya dynasty, he inherited a kingdom that had already been, what would be the right
word, substantially expanded by his predecessors.
It already dominated a large portion of India.
But there was a particular kingdom that resisted domination by the Mauryas, a kingdom of Kalinga,
and Ashoka took it as his responsibility to bring the people of Kalinga into the empire,
and he waged a very bloody and very cruel military campaign to bring the Kalinga people
under his domination.
The brutality of this campaign apparently provoked Ashoka to convert to Buddhism, to
accept the Buddha Dharma, with its implicit ideal also of nonviolence, not merely respect
and interdependence, respect for others and a sense of interdependence, but also policy
of nonviolence.
After his conversion, Ashoka proclaimed himself a righteous king, a Damaraja, or a protector
of the Dharma.
Now, actually, I should pause for a moment here about one funny little inconsistency in
the way I'm speaking to you.
We've been talking about the Buddha's teaching as being his Dharma, D-H-A-R-M-A, common word,
it's word I suspect that you knew before you began to listen to this course, and then
occasionally I lapse into Pali and call it the Dhamma.
This is not because my tongue has become thick and I can't somehow wrap my tongue around
the words.
A lot of the traditions about Ashoka are passed on in Pali, particularly this concept of the
Dhammaraja, so you'll find that I use sometimes the Pali word, the Pali version of the word
Dhamma, which is Dhamma, and sometimes the Sanskrit word.
All of this confusion will end in our next lecture when we go back to Sanskrit and use
Sanskrit for the rest of our discussion of the Indian tradition.
Now, Ashoka, the Dhammaraja, advocated a policy of conquest by Dhamma, or Dharma.
It's called Dhamma-vijaya, conquest by Dharma.
Ashoka's position was recorded, interestingly and importantly for us really, on a series
of rock edicts, that is carvings on rocks that were placed at strategic parts around
his empire, strategic locations around his empire.
This is nice for us because we can still go there and read them.
If they'd been written on palm leaves and distributed in marketplaces, palm leaves would
long since have moldered away, but we've actually got these Ashoka inscriptions that come to
us directly from the time of Ashoka.
Rock edict 13 by the conventional numbering gives an account of his conversion.
I'll read it to you.
It's fascinating actually to hear in Ashoka's own words in his imperial edict about his
conversion to Buddhism.
Eight years after his coronation, King Devanam Priya Priyadarshi, his way of designating
himself, conquered the country of Kalinga.
150,000 people were deported, 100,000 were killed, and many times that number perished.
Now that the Kalingans have been taken, Devanam Priya is zealous in his study of Dharma.
Devanam Priya, and it's a word that means simply the beloved of the gods, feels sorrow
at having conquered the Kalingans.
Indeed, Devanam Priya wishes all beings to be safe, restrained, and even killed in the
face of violence, for Devanam Priya considers the foremost form of conquest to be Dharma
conquest.
This is this basic theme of conquest by the Dharma, rather than conquest by force of arms.
Other rock edicts talk about his policy to promote the Dharma, and you'll see actually
if you could dig into these edicts a little bit, you'd find it some fascinating reading
actually, that his view of Dharma is not terribly complicated, it has to do with rather simple
Buddhist values that have to do with respect for others and concern for their welfare.
King Devanam Priya, Priyadarshi says, I have had banyan trees planted along the roads to
provide shade for beasts and people, and I have had mango groves planted, it's almost
like he's the first environmentally aware king in ancient India.
And I have had wells dug and rest areas built every mile, and here and there I've had watering
holes made for the enjoyment of beasts and humans.
Of course previous kings as well have sought to please the people with such facilities,
but I'm doing this so that people may follow the path of Dharma.
So he explicitly links his concern for the welfare of the people of his kingdom with
his policy to promote the Buddhist Dharma.
Now as part of this policy, King Ashoka sent missionaries out to spread the Buddhist teaching
in India and elsewhere in Southeast Asia, and his actions have served as a model for
righteous kings throughout the Buddhist world.
What is a righteous king?
It's pretty simple.
We know already really what the elements of this policy would be, a righteous king protects
and promulgates the Dharma, important basic function.
In return, this is interesting to reflect on I think, the king is recognized or as we
sometimes say in the literature on this topic, legitimated by the religious authority of
the monks.
So the king supports the monastery, there's sort of a ritual way that the monks can designate
this guy as somebody whom people should respect and trust.
So this is an important two way relationship.
The king supports the monks, the monks in a sense support the king and make it possible
for the king to develop a sense of trust and confidence and loyalty among his people.
In some situations, the relationship takes a more combative aspect and the king disciplines
and reforms the Sangha to make sure that it adheres to proper discipline and doesn't
interfere in the affairs of state.
Vishoka himself set an example for that reformist function.
When he said in another of his edicts, any monk or nun who causes a scism in the Sangha
will have to wear the white robes of a lay person and will no longer be able to dwell
in a monastic residence.
This order should be made known both to the community of monks and the community of nuns
and a copy of this edict is going to be distributed to everybody in the laity so that they'll
have a chance to watch out too and make sure that these monks and nuns don't do the kind
of thing that will lead to some kind of fragmentation of the Sangha.
Now we'll see this ideal of the righteous king reappearing really throughout the Buddhist
world, not just in Southeast Asia but also in China and Tibet and Japan and it's an
important component for us in the complex structure of Buddhist society.
Now the next figure that I want to mention to you is 19th century king in Thailand by
the name of King Mong Kut who reigned from 1851 to 1868.
He is in my view one of the most striking examples of a righteous king in modern history.
It was known in his capacity as king as King Rama IV or as King Mong Kut.
He's remarkable in my view because he combines the role of monk and king.
He served as a monk for over 25 years before he ascended the throne so he came to his position
as king already as a person who was deeply infused by monastic practice as a member of
the monastery.
This is not common in the Buddhist world.
It's quite striking that King Mong Kut brought that background with him to the throne in
Thailand.
As king he believed that time monastic life needed to be reformed, purged of superstitious
practices and returned to the pristine model of the early canonical scriptures, the scriptures
that we call the Pali Canon.
See he was in addition to being a monk and a king also a modernist.
He wanted to reform the Sangha to bring it back to what he thought was the pristine ancient
practice of the Buddha as it was reflected in the Pali Canon.
We haven't talked much about this before but this is an important aspect of contemporary
Buddhism as you'll encounter it throughout Southeast Asia and in fact throughout the
world.
There is a modernizing impulse to strip away what people think of as being superstitious
practices, things that have been added to the tradition over the course of its history
and return to the ancient practice of the Buddha.
See this also in other religious traditions as well.
This is really the form, a form of Buddhist modernism.
Now he gave institutional expression to these ideas by creating a tamayut movement.
This is the name of his movement in the Thai Sangha, the tamayut.
During the reign of his son, King Chulalongkorn, who reigned from 1868 to 1910, as you can
see he bridged the gap between the 19th century and the 20th century.
This reform movement was extended throughout the Thai Sangha and given the status of an
official orthodoxy.
So King Mongkut created a reform movement that eventually was extended to the whole Sangha
and became, as you might say, sort of the modernizing matrix of Thai monastic life.
It's one of the reasons why the Thai monastic system has been able to adapt as well as it
has to the challenge of modernity and it still provides the ideology, the conceptual framework
for the relationship between the Thai royal family and Thai monastic life.
One continues to be an example, even today, of the close alliance between King and Sangha
in the extension and the protection of Buddhist values.
This is something that you might well keep in mind if you ever have a chance to visit
Bangkok.
It's actually a great place to be a tourist, although the traffic these days is getting
pretty formidable.
It's pretty tough to weave your way through rush hour traffic in Bangkok and rush hour
lasts pretty much all day long.
When you visit there, when you stop in Bangkok, one of the great stops, standard stops on
the tourist route is the Royal Shrine that's called the Temple of the Emerald Buddha.
And you'll see very clearly in that place this intersection of royal values and Thai
Buddhist values.
It's really a shrine that honors the monarchy and also honors, at the same time, the central
place of the Buddha within the structure of the Thai national identity.
The center of the Temple of the Emerald Buddha is a very small but quite impressive little
emerald statue of the Buddha that was discovered in somewhat remarkable circumstances back several
centuries ago, back in the 15th century, I believe.
And it serves not just as a focus of worship, but as a symbol of Thai national identity and
a symbol of the legitimacy of the royal family.
It's well worth reflecting on as a indication of the relationship between Thai Buddhist values
and the values of the royal family.
Now the last figure that I want to discuss with you is Aung San Suu Kyi of Burma, a democratic
activist and Nobel laureate.
She's another striking example for us of the intersection between religious and political
values in the Theravada countries of Southeast Asia.
Aung San Suu Kyi was born in 1945 as the daughter of Burma's national hero, General Aung
San.
He was the leader of the Burmese liberation movement in World War II and was assassinated
in 1947, just after the end of the Second World War and just as Burma was going to receive
its independence from British and Japanese domination.
Aung San Suu Kyi was educated in Rangoon, Delhi and Oxford and settled down to raise
a family in Oxford.
She married an Englishman by the name of Michael Eris, had two sons and was living a rather
comfortable and pleasant life as an academic person in England, quite far away really from
all the concerns of Burma and Southeast Asia.
Then her mother became ill and she went back to visit her mother in 1988, really to offer
her mother some comfort and some companionship in her illness.
And just at that time, by accident, the military government in Burma had declared the possibility
of an election and as the daughter of this great hero of Burmese, the Burmese national
liberation movement, she was drawn naturally into the movement for democratic reform in
Burma and became really the symbol of that party and of that movement within Burmese
life.
Despite being placed under house arrest, she was arrested very soon by the military government
when her political appeal became manifest.
Her movement won a colossal election victory in May 1990.
The military government annulled the results of the election and imprisoned its leaders.
So Aung San Suu Kyi has been held under house arrest since 1990 in Rangoon, but she's continued
to speak out in favor of democratic values and the democratic movement.
In 1991, under the impetus of some previous recipients of the Nobel Peace Prize, she was
given the Nobel Peace Prize herself for what the Nobel Committee called her unflagging
efforts for democracy, human rights, and ethnic conciliation by peaceful means.
Aung San Suu Kyi's political philosophy seems on the face of it to be pretty simple, but
there's force and eloquence in her words as there was, in the teaching of the Buddha,
powerful, strong, forceful words in favor of the democratic reform of Burmese society.
One of her most famous speeches is called Simply Freedom from Fear.
It's one that would be well worth looking up, actually.
I think you can find it on the Internet.
It's well worth reading as an expression of her political philosophy.
The speech begins by saying, it's not power that corrupts, but fear.
Fear of losing power corrupts those who wield it, and fear of the scourge of power corrupts
those who are subject to it.
Near the end of the speech, after she's explored this theme for a while, she refers to Mahatma
Gandhi's statement that the greatest gift for an individual or a nation is fearlessness.
Not merely, as Gandhi said, bodily courage, but the absence of fear from the mind.
Now, when Gandhi talked about the gift of fearlessness, he was doing something that he was actually
very skillful at.
He was referring to an ancient practice of the Buddha.
We talked, of course, last time about the tradition of Buddhist art, and you were aware,
if you had a chance to see any of those images, or if you've seen any Buddhist images in
other places, that hand gestures are particularly important in Buddhist statues.
We talked about the earth-touching gesture, where the Buddha reached down to the earth,
and the earth shook to bear witness to the strength of his meditation.
We also have talked about the gesture in which you fold your hands in your lap, placing
one hand on the other, and placing your thumbs together in a posture of meditation.
There are also other gestures, too.
One is hand extended right at waist level, that's the gesture of generosity, which the
Buddha gives the Dharma to people.
You probably, if you've been able to watch me in action here, you probably have seen
me doing this instinctively, because in a certain way, I suppose I'm giving you, or
at least attempting to give you the gift of the Dharma as I speak, so you can hear in
my words something like this gesture of the giving of the Dharma.
Another important gesture that the Buddha made is the gesture of fearlessness, where
he raised his hand up above his shoulder in what we sometimes call a traffic cop gesture.
It actually comes from a story in the Buddha's life where he was in a conflict with an associate
in the monastery who was attempting to split the sangha and stage a revolt, a stage of
protest against the Buddha.
In order to do this, he wanted to intimidate the Buddha, so he set a raging elephant loose
on a narrow street where the Buddha was walking, a raging elephant came charging down the street
and was about to run over the Buddha, and the Buddha, fearlessly, calmly, according
to the story, raised his hand in the great traffic cop gesture, and the elephant stopped
in his tracks and bowed down and paid his homage.
This is traditionally described in Buddhist culture as the gift of fearlessness.
It's an important aspect of the Buddhist tradition, and it's one of the most characteristic gestures
of the Buddha.
You might actually, I don't know if you like to use these things in your own experience,
but as professors, we often have fearful students who come into our office, and oftentimes
they come into our office, and we don't have the time to deal with all the issues that
are being dumped out onto the desk in front of us.
Sometimes it's helpful just to say, Grace, Jim, Peter, whoever you are, Fred, I can't
talk about everything you're putting out there for me today, but let me give you the gift
of fearlessness.
Take courage in your difficulties, because there will be a way for you to work your way
through the challenges that seem to lie in front of you, and come back tomorrow in office
hours and maybe we can talk about it in a little more detail.
It's the kind of thing that Mahatma Gandhi, of course, spoke about quite passionately
in his own campaigns for liberation from British control in India, and it's something that
Aung San Suu Kyi picked up on in her own campaign for democratic values in Burma, but
she gave it a little twist, a little Buddha's twist, like the twist that we've spoken of
in some other aspects of the Buddha's teaching.
She said, Fearlessness may be a gift, as Mahatma Gandhi said, and as was represented in this
classic gesture of the Buddha, but perhaps more precious is the courage that is acquired
through endeavor, through your own efforts.
Courage that cultivates the habit of refusing to let fear dictate your actions.
Now as you listen to these words, you can hear how Aung San Suu Kyi's career brings
together modern democratic values and the fundamental Buddhist values of courage, patience,
tolerance, and nonviolence.
It's a powerful mix, I think, for anyone who thinks that Buddhist values belong only
in the monastery.
Here they play a forceful and active role in political life, as they have in the Buddhist
tradition all the way through its history from the time of Ashoka to the present.
Now, you might ask, why of all the possible figures in Theravada Buddhist history, and
of course there were many great monks and nuns and donors and activists of all sort,
why of all those possible figures I've chosen to focus on these three political leaders,
King Ashoka, King Mongkut, and Aung San Suu Kyi.
There really are two reasons for this.
One is to raise the issue for us of the relationship between Buddhism and politics.
This is not something that you should normally think of as being, as it were, consistent with
traditional Buddhist values.
If we have an image of the Buddha as monk, it's hard to imagine him as a politician.
And yet the relationship between Buddhist values and politics has been a deeply rooted
theme in Buddhist life.
It's important for us to consider it in order to develop a full understanding of Buddhist
society and to see how Buddhism wove its way into the life of other civilizations in Asia.
My second reason for choosing these figures is to raise the question of modernity.
It's very easy to imagine that the Buddhist tradition is only a historical artifact, something
associated with the teaching of the Buddha, distant civilizations, distant from us, not
just geographically, but historically.
The truth is, of course, that Buddhism and Buddhist people have been involved in the process
of modernization just the way religious people have been in cultures that are closer to home.
So it's useful for us to see in King Mongkut and in Aung San Suu Kyi some of the subtle
and very powerful ways that Buddhism has been brought into relationship with the challenges
of modernity.
We'll certainly see more about that as we discuss other important religious figures who have
brought Buddhism into the contemporary world.
Thank you.
