Lecture 10 Mahayana Buddhism and the Bodhisattva Ideal
For the last few lectures, we've been working on what you might call traditional Buddhism.
Charavata Buddhism in Southeast Asia is admittedly a pretty contemporary movement, and in some
ways quite different today from Buddhist practice at the time of the Buddha, but it still represents
quite deliberately a conservative option.
And it looks back to the example of the early community.
We saw that in King Mongkut's reform movement that deliberately attempted to reappropriate
and reapply the ideal of the traditional Pali canonical scriptures.
This was really not the only option in the Indian tradition historically, and it's time
for us now to look at a reform movement that made a radical change in the way people enacted
the Buddhist ideal in traditional India.
It changed the style and the tone and the content of Buddhist practice in profound ways,
only a few centuries after the lifetime of the Buddha.
We call this movement the Mahayana, or the Great Vehicle, a movement that emerged in
the Indian Buddhist community around the beginning of the common era.
Eventually, the Mahayana, the Great Vehicle, spread to China, Tibet, Japan, Korea, and
to Vietnam.
And of course, there are many varieties of Mahayana Buddhism that are available for us
to observe, comment on in our own homeland today.
The name Mahayana comes from the literature of the movement itself.
It's a name that it applied to itself and used to distinguish itself from what it saw
as the Buddhism that came before.
Mahayana texts refer to themselves as a Great Vehicle in contrast to what they call the
Hinayana, or the lesser vehicle that preceded it.
The best place for us to look in a scriptural source for an account of the contrast between
the Mahayana and the Hinayana is in a text called the Lotus Sutra, it's a text that
we'll refer to quite often actually in our discussion of Buddhism in China and Japan
because it had an enormous influence on the development and the shape of Mahayana Buddhism
as it began to move across the rest of Asia.
The key passage in the Lotus Sutra that talks about the Mahayana is a passage that's known
as the Parable of the Burning House.
I can tell you the story and then like to comment on some of the distinctive features
of it so that we can get some sense of the shape, not just of the Mahayana itself, but
also how it distinguished itself from and expressed, distinguished itself from the earlier
tradition and how it found very distinctive scriptural expression.
Story goes something like this, there's a father who lives in a large house with a large
number of children, the father is outside, the house catches on fire and he looks up
at the house, the children are all playing in the windows and they're all ignorant, they're
not aware of the fact that the house is on fire and he wants to get them out, he wants
to save the children from the house.
You can see already that we've got here a reference to that old Buddhist idea of everything
burning.
If all is on fire then the house we live in in this world also is on fire and the Buddha
is someone who is trying to get us out of the house and help the fire go out.
So the father looks up at the children and says to them, okay kids, come on out of the
house, the house is on fire, all is burning and the kids say, well you know we're having
such a great time in here, there's no reason for us to leave, why should we come out?
And the father says, well you know, I've got some toys out here for you to play with, I've
got some big carts.
If you come out of the house you can play with these great toys, with these great, these
carts.
For some of you I've got a deer cart, for some of you I've got another kind of cart, whatever
you want I've got for you outside this house.
So the children are excited by this and they come running out of the house and to look
for the carts that the father is offering them.
And the father says to them, well it's great now that you're outside, it's great that
you've saved yourself from the fire in the house, but I want to tell you something, actually
I don't have those carts for you that I promised, I've got an even greater cart, a vehicle
that is decorated in all sorts of extraordinary ways and you're going to have a fabulous
time playing with it, so hop on and take it for a ride.
Then the text begins to offer some commentary about the story, it obviously makes the connection
that you'd expect it to make, it says that the Buddha is like this father.
And the little carts that he first promised to the children who were in the house were
those lesser vehicles, the so-called disciple vehicle and the so-called solitary Buddha vehicle
that were preached before the coming of the Mahayana and that were meant to lure the people
who were caught in the burning house of Samsara out in order to receive the real teaching
that the Buddha has to offer them.
What's that real teaching?
It's the Mahayana, it's this great beautiful cart that the Buddha finally offers to all
the children once they've escaped the house, the burning house of Samsara.
Now in the text, as it's elaborated, there are a couple of important concepts that come
out, the Buddha develops that are important for the text itself, develops actually, that
are important for us to notice.
First of all, as the story comes to an end, it says that this vehicle, this cart, this
Mahayana that has been presented to the children after they've made it out of the house is
the one great vehicle.
It's the real teaching of the Buddha.
So all those other teachings that came on, came before are, as it were, preliminary exercises
that are meant to get a person started on the path to salvation but are not meant to constitute
the Buddha's final teaching.
So one of the most important doctrines in the Lotus Sutra, especially in China and Japan
as the text was used and elaborated in those cultures, is the doctrine of the one vehicle.
The Buddha teaches in the end one particular way to salvation as it is embodied and expressed
in this text of the Lotus Sutra.
Now another concept that's important here that runs all the way through the Mahayana tradition
is the concept of skillful means.
This raises a question as it explores the meaning of this story about whether the Buddha
lies to people by presenting these preliminary teachings.
Did the father lie to the children by telling them that he has a different variety of cart
for each one of them?
The answer that the text gives is that it's not really a falsehood to skillfully lure someone
along the way to salvation.
This skillfulness is called skillful means.
It's an important concept in the Mahayana as the practice of the Mahayana was elaborated
in later Buddhist literature.
It has to do with the ability of creatively, imaginatively, using the categories of this
world to move them along the road to salvation so that they can come more and more to understand
the true nature of reality and achieve enlightenment as the Buddha intended it to be achieved.
Now you could ask, it seems to me, a pretty good question, it's a natural question to
ask when you encounter the Mahayana for the first time.
Where does this great tradition come from?
Where would such radical reform movement arise in the community of the early Sangha?
Well, one place to go for an answer to this question is to the Mahayana texts themselves.
The texts trace the origin of the Mahayana to what's called a second turning of the wheel
of the Dharma on the vulture peak in Rajagurga during the life of the Buddha himself.
In other words, the Mahayana texts claim to be the teaching of the Buddha himself delivered
to a special assembly of Bodhisattvas from which other Buddhist practitioners, the followers
of those other vehicles, the disciples and the solitary Buddhas, have been excluded.
And the Mahayana texts then go on to say that the Mahayana was concealed for several centuries
until the world was ready to receive it.
And then the sutras, the texts of the Mahayana were brought forth and promulgated across India.
So there's an awareness here in the Mahayana itself that the tradition is new.
It's not something that's known in the traditional community and the way that they can explain
the novelty of this tradition is to say, well, the Buddha really did teach it.
It's his real teaching, the one that he really intended.
But people weren't ready to hear it during the lifetime of the historical Buddha.
So it was concealed for several centuries and then brought forth and promulgated in
this world.
Now all of this is very nice, but scholars are really quite uncertain, truth be told
about what the actual origin of the Mahayana is.
There's suggestions in the Mahayana tradition that practitioners perhaps fasted and meditated
in order to receive visions and revelations from great Buddhas of the past.
It's conceivable that some of the early texts of the Mahayana came to people in this way
as visions that they interpreted as being revelations from past Buddhas.
Although this really can't be true of the most elaborate literary sutras of the Mahayana.
Many of the Mahayana sutras don't have the quality really of visionary experiences but
of literary texts, literary documents.
Some scholars have suggested that the Mahayana arose among circles of lay people who were
worshipers at particular stupas at shrines where the relics of the Buddha were the focus
of devotion.
This view has now been pretty much discredited by scholars.
It seems clear that the Mahayana had a strong monastic component right from the very beginning.
So it's not accurate to say that the Mahayana was a lay movement as opposed to a monastic
movement.
It included components of both.
So if we're uncertain about the origin of the Mahayana, what can we say about the basic
teaching of the Mahayana?
The answer to that question is a lot more clear.
The fundamental teaching of Mahayana Buddhism is what's called the Bodhisattva Ideal.
A Bodhisattva, as you recall from some of the discussion we had of the lifetime of the
Buddha, is a Buddha to be somebody who isn't a Buddha yet but somehow plans to become a
Buddha in a future life.
You can translate the word Bodhisattva as future Buddha, Buddha to be somebody who is
on the path to Buddhahood sometime down the road in a future life.
And a Bodhisattva in the Mahayana tradition doesn't attempt to go straight to nirvana
but returns to this world and attempts to help others along the path to nirvana.
This means that Bodhisattvas can include laymen and laywomen as well as monks and nuns because
all of us, whether we're monks or not, can be understood to be part of some path that
leads us to Buddhahood down the road in the future.
Bodhisattvas who come back like this into this world to help others along the way cultivate
two important virtues, which is really significant in the Mahayana, two important virtues.
One of course is wisdom, that great virtue that was discussed in the early accounts of
the Buddhist path that leads you to nirvana, wisdom that involves the understanding of
no self and frees you from attachment to this world.
But in addition to wisdom Bodhisattvas explicitly now in a way that really wasn't consciously
understood before develop the virtue of compassion.
The word is karuna, it's a crucial Mahayana word.
The Bodhisattvas do two things, cultivate two virtues, wisdom, you might call it a contemplative
virtue, a quiet virtue that has to do with understanding the nature of the self and the
nature of the world, and then compassion, a virtue that has to do with actively seeking
the welfare of others.
The Mahayana always has this double aspect, contemplation, action.
Finding the self and bringing that understanding into the world to make it available for other
people.
My old teacher of Buddhism at Harvard used to talk about the Bodhisattva path as two-way
traffic, a two-way street as opposed to a one-way street.
I like to think of it sometimes more as a circle.
When I talk about the Bodhisattva path one of the things I do very often is simply step
to the blackboard and start drawing circles.
With samsara as the beginning of the circle, nirvana somewhere along the circle, perhaps
at the top of the circle, and then the circle connecting to itself, bringing you back into
samsara after you've tasted some quality of understanding that might lead you to nirvana.
The Bodhisattva is constantly coming back into this world to help others.
Now the Bodhisattva ideal is contrasted to the ideal of earlier Buddhism by distinguishing
itself from what's called the Arhant ideal.
The Arhant was a person in the earlier community who sought nirvana in this life for him or
herself.
So an Arhant is someone who follows the one-way traffic to nirvana and doesn't come back into
samsara like the Bodhisattva.
So the Mahayana teaches the Bodhisattva ideal as opposed to an Arhant ideal.
Some people say that a Bodhisattva renounces nirvana in order to lead all other beings
to nirvana.
If you follow this model you can sometimes imagine a Bodhisattva as returning back into
the world, becoming involved with people, teaching them about compassion, helping them
understand reality in a way that's consistent with traditional Buddhist teaching.
And then finally when everyone is ready for nirvana it's like holding hands and stepping
off a cliff together.
The Bodhisattva doesn't become a Buddha until everybody is ready to become a Buddha with
him or with her.
The truth is that this is not strictly accurate because Bodhisattvas can become Buddhas.
They simply aspire to become a Buddha for the sake of all other beings.
And when they can become a Buddha in a way that really in some way perfectly serves the
needs of other people then that Bodhisattva will become a Buddha.
So the Mahayana world is full of Buddhas as well as Bodhisattvas, people who have pursued
the Bodhisattva path and pursued it to perfection.
Now Bodhisattvas described in Mahayana literature are often human beings just like ourselves.
It's a very human ideal as the ideal of Buddhist practice was in the earlier tradition.
Like to give you a couple of examples of Mahayana descriptions of Bodhisattvas so you can get
a sense of the kind of person who was described as a Bodhisattva in this classical literature.
One of the most important and one of my favorite I'd have to say in the early literature of
the Mahayana is a Bodhisattva known as Vimalakirti.
He was a wise lay person who pretended that he was ill in order to teach a lesson to the
Buddha's monastic disciples.
Let me read you just a short account of Vimalakirti from the beginning of the Mahayana Sutra that
presents his teaching.
And in the city there lived an elder named Vimalakirti who dwelt there as a skillful means
for the salvation of other beings.
For he used his measureless wealth to convert the poor and his own pure virtue to convert
those who broke the precepts.
He controlled himself with patience to convert the scornful and strove with diligence to
convert the lazy.
He used his calm meditation to convert the confused and his firm wisdom to convert the
ignorant.
He wore the white robes of a layman but he observed the pure conduct of a recluse.
He lived the household life but he wasn't attached to the world.
He had a wife and children but always practiced the religious life.
And he kept a household but always delighted in solitude.
He wore jewels and ornaments but adorned his body with the signs of greatness.
He ate and he drank but delighted in the taste of meditation.
He went to the gambling halls but he worked for the salvation of men.
He took on the ways of the heretics but never strayed from the true faith.
And he knew all the worldly texts but he always delighted in the teaching of the Buddha.
This, it's hard I suppose when I read a text like this, I'm reading simply from an ancient
text that describes a particular ideal in words that might in many respects seem remote.
It's hard sometimes to see how radical and how important the shift in values is here.
In the earlier tradition we really were talking largely about monks and nuns.
The ideal practitioners of the Buddha's path were those monks and nuns, and I really shouldn't
distinguish between the two here.
The monks and nuns who had engaged in an act of renunciation and pursued the monastic
life in the same way that the Buddha did.
Now this tradition is being opened up explicitly to lay people.
Not as a kind of compromise but really as a way of saying that lay Buddhist values and
the lay Buddhist life is a place where you can actually pursue the fundamental teaching
of the Buddha.
As you can become a bodhisattva as the Buddha once was and pursue that great path that's
going to lead you eventually to enlightenment.
And when you do that you bring into ordinary lay life all of these important values that
are significant in Buddhist practice.
Sure you eat and you drink, you go out and have a couple of beers, you may have a great
feast, you may live with your family in a big house, you may even go to the gambling
halls, maybe you go and visit Las Vegas or wherever the gambling center is that's near
your community, but you always do it in a way that's going to bring Buddhist values
in some fashion into that place to make them available for other people.
So this is the bodhisattva engaged in the world in a positive and affirmative way.
It's a crucial shift in the basic understanding of Buddhist life and it had as you can imagine
a radical effect on the spread of Buddhism throughout Asia.
Chinese were always very suspicious of monastic life because it seemed to turn its back on
the values of the family, but here in the figure of Vimalakirti you've got somebody
who really lives out the Buddhist values within the context of ordinary lay life.
So the Buddhist tradition now is shifting, the center of gravity really is moving in
a way that takes it out of that strictly monastic ideal that was present in the early tradition.
Now Vimalakirti is a pretty good example of the way this process works, but there are
others too that are important to mention and worth knowing just to see how broadly the
Mahayana ideal was extended.
There's an important queen by the name of Queen Srimala who is the focus of another
Mahayana text who is involved in all of the concerns of life of the palace.
She's a queen, there's a king, there's a lot of responsibility that she bears within
the ordinary life of the palace and yet she is portrayed in the text as being one of the
wisest followers of the Buddha and is the source of one of the most important Mahayana
doctrines.
The doctrine itself is, of course, one of the focal points in the text, but even more
importantly is the implicit claim that even this queen, Queen Srimala, who seems in many
respects to be engaged in a life that's very different from the classic life of a traditional
monk or nun, can be a locus of great wisdom and an exemplary practitioner of the Mahayana
ideal.
Another figure who is worth knowing about, I think, who becomes important in later Chinese
and Japanese Buddhism is a young man by the name of Sudhana who, teenager really, goes
out on a long quest in order to achieve some kind of religious insight.
He visits 50 different teachers, different gurus and finally at the very end he comes
to a bodhisattva by the name of Samantabhadra and is given a vision of the universe vastly
more complex and complete than anything we found earlier in this tradition.
Let me read you an example of a passage from the text that describes Sudhana's concluding
vision.
Then Sudhana, the teenager, the son of the guild master, reflecting upon the body of
the final bodhisattva in his quest, the bodhisattva, Samantabhadra, saw in every pore of that body
untold quadrillions of Buddha fields being entirely filled up with Buddhas and in every
single one of those quadrillions of Buddha fields he saw Buddhas surrounded by countless
assemblies of bodhisattvas and gradually he came to equal that bodhisattva, Samantabhadra,
in his quadrillions of vows and practices.
He came to equal all the Buddhas and he came to equal with them the pervasion of all of
the universe that he saw projected in the body of Samantabhadra, the bodhisattva.
This is a vision of reality vastly greater than anything we've seen in the earlier literature.
It has to do with an expansion of the imagination that brought the Mahayana into realms and
into practices very different from anything we saw before in the earlier tradition.
Now you could ask yourself finally as we encounter the bodhisattva ideal for the first time,
how is the bodhisattva ideal expressed in ritual and in philosophy?
The most important single concept to express the bodhisattva ideal is the concept of the
bodhicitta, a concept that I would translate as the mind of enlightenment or you might
say the mind that seeks enlightenment.
To enter the bodhisattva path it's important to generate as the texts say this mind of
enlightenment.
What is it?
The aspiration to seek enlightenment for the sake of all other beings.
So bodhisattva who enters the bodhisattva path starts with some kind of gut feeling I want
to be enlightened in order to bring that enlightenment in some way to others as these two components,
the component of wisdom, the component of compassion.
And this mind of awakening or mind of enlightenment is then generated and cultivated as the bodhisattva
path proceeds.
Now as you see this evolving in Mahayana literature and Mahayana practice it becomes quite a complex
and subtle concept.
You can see at the very beginning that in some respects it's a moral aspiration, I want
to help others, I want to develop myself in a way that's going to be helpful to other
people but you can also see that it has what you might call a cognitive component.
It involves a perception of yourself as being connected in a relationship of interdependence
with all other beings so that you become aware of yourself in a different way at the same
time that you express this moral aspiration.
It also has what I would call I suppose an ontological component in the sense that it
has to do with an awareness of your own being.
In Buddhism your mind in the end is you.
Whatever you are is the cultivation and the evolution of your own mind.
So if you express this mind of enlightenment, if you feel this aspiration to help others,
what you feel is an expression of your own Buddha nature arising from within you.
So it has to do with the transformation of your own personality, your own being as well
as a moral aspiration to help others and then it also is complex and I think rather subtle
in one further respect to arouse the mind of enlightenment is a pretty simple thing.
We could do that today, in fact we probably have aspirations that are similar to that
very often in the flow of our daily lives.
Geez, you know I'd really like to help others in some way and develop the moral capacity
and the insight that would make that effective, it's pretty easy, it's a pretty simple feeling
to have and yet it contains within itself implicitly the full enlightenment of the Buddha.
It's the preliminary stirring of your own Buddhahood arising out of your own simple moral aspiration
to help others.
So the Bodhichitta is an important concept in the Mahayana, it's complex, it's subtle
and it involves, evolves in all sorts of fascinating ways.
Finally I should mention that the Bodhisattva path is divided into a series of formal stages.
It's not merely an aspiration, it's something that takes a very particular form as the path
did in the earlier tradition.
One way to divide it is into six perfections, the perfection of generosity, the perfection
of moral conduct, patience, courage, mental concentration and wisdom.
So a lot of Mahayana texts discuss a passage through six stages to reach the experience
of full Buddhahood.
There are other accounts that divide the path into ten stages but they're not radically
different than the path that I've just outlined for you, beginning with the experience of
generosity and ending with the experience of wisdom.
So we can see here just in this first glimpse of the Mahayana that the Bodhisattva ideal
opens up the practice of Buddhahood to lay people as well as to monks and nuns and involves
a far more expansive vision of the cosmos than anything that we've seen before.
In that expanded vision also are celestial Buddhas and Bodhisattvas that will be the topic
of our next lecture.
