In the last couple of lectures, we've talked about the origin of the Mahayana.
We've talked about the Bodhisattva ideal as something that ordinary people can practice
in this life, and then we took an excursion into the heavens and talked about celestial
Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, and also talked about how the devotion to those celestial Buddhas
and Bodhisattvas constituted a really important part of the Mahayana revolution in the Buddhist
tradition.
Now, obviously, we've seen that the Mahayana introduced a lot of important changes into
the Buddhist tradition by adding these values to that complex tradition that we already
now have studied in some detail.
But no change was as profound or as far-reaching as the concept that we call emptiness.
This is a concept that, in a negative way, challenged or undermined many of the rigid
categories of traditional Buddhism.
In lots of respects, it seems to pull the rug right out from under traditional Buddhist
practice, but also in a more positive way, as we've become accustomed to seeing in the
Buddhist tradition, all negative ideas seem to have their positive side.
In a more positive way, the concept of emptiness introduced a spirit of affirmation and almost
of infinite possibility that wasn't present in the earlier tradition, a spirit that we
saw present to some degree in that vision of the cosmos that Sudhana had as he gazed
on the body of the Bodhisattva, Samantabhadra.
So our challenge in this lecture is really to develop for ourselves a balanced understanding
of this difficult Mahayana concept, the concept of emptiness, a balanced understanding that
will help us account for both its positive and its negative dimensions.
I'd also have to say in passing that this is the concept that I've spent most of my
adult life studying.
This is really where I put my feet down, most firmly, in the study of the Mahayana.
So I present this to you not just with a kind of theoretical interest, but something that
sort of strikes me in the gut.
The doctrine of emptiness, I think, in a lot of ways is one of the most profound and
challenging religious concepts in the world, and one that if you can grasp, if you can
even just get a taste of, will help you see not just the basic categories of Buddhism,
but also lots of other important categories in life in a radically different way.
So let's start out with a basic analysis of this concept of emptiness.
Emptiness can be understood, I think, as a radical extension of the concept of no-self
in traditional Buddhism.
This is a concept that we've already talked about.
And let's lay it out for ourselves somewhat methodically.
We asked ourselves now, as the lectures are moving slowly through the study of Buddhism,
what concepts of the self have we already learned?
Well one, I suppose, would come from the Upanishads, that old Hindu idea of the eternal self that's
identical to Brahman, and identical to the one reality that underlies the unity, the
diversity of this world.
So in the Hindu tradition, the self is identical to Brahman, and it is eternal and permanent.
The Theravada tradition expresses traditional Buddhist view that undermines this old Hindu
vision of the permanent or eternal self.
In traditional Buddhism, there is nothing permanent that endures from one moment to
the next, so traditional Buddhists say that there is no self.
There is no permanent identity that endures from one moment to the next.
All that we see in reality is just a series of momentary phenomena bound together to give
the illusion of some kind of continuity, like the flickers in the flame of a candle, or the
moments in the flow of a river.
So the self, according to traditional Buddhism, was made up of a series of momentary phenomena
known as dhammas in Pali, or as dharmas in Sanskrit.
This is the use of the word dharma that we haven't talked about before.
It's dharma as fundamental constituent of reality.
So the self in traditional Buddhism is simply a flow of momentary phenomena called dharmas.
Now the Mahayana took a step further.
They went beyond this traditional Buddhist idea of the self to deny the reality not just
of an enduring self, but to deny the reality of the moments themselves.
So they said that these momentary phenomena, these dharmas that make up the flow of life,
like the flickers in a candle flame, are empty of identity, empty of reality.
That's the way they express this insight.
All dharmas are empty of reality.
The word empty here is sunya, and from this comes the doctrine of emptiness.
What is the nature of all things?
It is their emptiness, the fact that even as momentary phenomena, they have nothing
that you can hold on to that gives them any kind of identity.
Now by rejecting the idea that the personality or the flow of existence is made up of real
moments, the Mahayana completely reoriented and changed the conceptual system of Buddhism.
Now this may come to you as a rarefied and rather abstract concept.
So let me see if I can give you a tag that you can hold on to to compare the doctrine
of emptiness with the stuff that we've talked about before.
You could say that traditional Buddhism adopts a view that is a little bit like Heraclitus'
view of all of reality being made up of simply a flow of phenomena.
Heraclitus said you can't step into the same river twice because the river is constantly
flowing.
Well what does the Mahayana say?
Not just that you can't step into the same river twice, they say that you can't step
into the same river once.
Because in reality there is no identity in the momentary flow of the river.
You can't step into the same river once.
That's the doctrine of emptiness in the Mahayana.
Now that I think is a pretty abstract concept and pretty puzzling I suspect when you come
to it for the first time.
So it's important for us to reflect I think on the consequences of the doctrine to try
to get some understanding of how it worked out in the larger scheme of the Mahayana tradition.
So let me, if I can, just draw out some of the implications of this basic Mahayana concept.
First of all, the doctrine of emptiness results in a concept of non-duality.
If everything is empty of any real identity, then there can't be any real difference between
any two things.
And as a result, Mahayana texts often equate emptiness with a doctrine of non-duality.
What does this mean?
If everything is empty, then there can't be any difference or duality between nirvana
and samsara.
And there can't be any difference between us and the Buddha.
What that means, it's interesting to think about here, what that means is that nirvana
is right here at this moment.
Right now, if we can only understand it correctly, and it also means that we are already Buddhas.
If we understand the nature of ourselves as being no different from the nature of the
Buddha.
Now this is a pretty significant reorientation of the ideals of traditional Buddhism.
Traditional Buddhism, sure, there was no permanent reality in everything.
Everything was in a process of flow, but there was no way of confusing nirvana, which was
out there at the end of this process of evolution from the samsara that began it.
Now this distinction is stripped away.
Nirvana is right here, right in the midst of that flow, if we can begin to perceive it
correctly.
So one of the important consequences of emptiness is this doctrine of non-duality.
A second important consequence has to do with the practice of the bodhisattva.
I've said before that the bodhisattva returns in this world, comes back in samsara, comes
back from the pursuit of nirvana for largely altruistic reasons in order to help other
people pursue the path to nirvana.
That's still true.
Bodhisattva has compassion for others.
That's the basic motivation of the Mahayana tradition.
But you can see here now, when you confront the doctrine of emptiness, that a bodhisattva
doesn't come back just for altruistic purposes.
It's not just altruism that drives the bodhisattva back into this world.
Why?
There isn't any difference between nirvana and samsara.
And if there's no nirvana out there to seek that's different than what's going on in
this world, you can only find it here.
You've got to come back.
There's no place that you can escape from where we are right now.
So the bodhisattva, sure, is back in the world of samsara to help other people, but the bodhisattva
is also back here for reasons that have to do with the bodhisattva's own awareness, the
bodhisattva's own sense of himself or herself, to know nirvana right here in the experience
of suffering in this world.
Now another point about emptiness that's important to grasp, especially if you want
to move into something that involves a more technical understanding of the concept, is
to see emptiness as connected to a doctrine of what we call two truths, or two separate
perspectives that you can take on any ordinary aspect of our experience, from a conventional
point of view, from the point of view of ordinary experience, you have to take it seriously.
Now you wake up in the morning, you've got a job to do, you need to bring a paycheck
in at the end of the week, you've got people whose lives make a demand on you, brothers,
sisters, mother, children, they've all got questions that you've got to do something
to try to solve, and no matter how much you try to separate yourself from all of those
issues, they are there, man, and if you step away from them, you're going to bear all
certain consequences that are going to be painful to you, that's conventional reality,
that's ordinary reality as we face it in our ordinary experience, but ultimately, according
to the doctrine of emptiness, that does not exist, it just isn't there, it has no identity,
mother, who's she, brother, who is he, this place that we're sitting in, this classroom
what's that, where are we, there's nothing here, who am I speaking, whoa, I'm not here,
that's all an illusion, it's empty, there's nothing here for us to talk about, these are
the two truths, conventional truth gets us in the gut, it's real in terms of our ordinary
experience, ultimately, what is that, nothing, it's empty, it's not there, now a true understanding
of emptiness holds both of these two together simultaneously, this is what we're thinking
about, this is a pretty good thought experiment that pretty soon becomes a life experiment,
to hold both of these two things together simultaneously, to take seriously all the
conventional issues that we've got to deal with in the world and realize at the same
time, it isn't there, it's not there, you see this really clearly in a lot of the terminology
of the Mahayana tradition, someone was asking me a little bit earlier about how a bodhisattva
has compassion for other people if there is no self, question like that, how do you have
compassion for other people if there is no self, in the Mahayana tradition you have that
kind of compassion by walking right straight into this paradox, right through the door
into this paradoxical world, the text says, may I achieve salvation, may I achieve awakening
for the sake of all other beings and may I understand that there is no awakening to
achieve, no other being for me to have compassion on and I myself don't exist, both of those
two things simultaneously are necessary to be able to work out the bodhisattva ideal.
So that's the doctrine of two truths, it's one of the ways of speaking in a technical
sense about the concept of emptiness, now another thing that you can say about it is
that the relationship between these two truths is not a static thing, it's not that you kind
of got conventional truth over here on this side of the room and you got ultimate truth
over here on this side and you kind of bend down, you take a little bit of ultimate truth
for a while and then you go over and you take some conventional truth and try to find some
kind of a balance between them, the truth is you've actually got something that's more
like a process, a process of thought and a process of life where you move from the conventional
to the ultimate and back to the conventional again in a way that brings a taste of one and
mixes it with a taste of the other and you often see this in a technical way in Mahayana
writings where the bodhisattva begins by affirming the distinction between things, thinking
here I am in samsara, here I am and I'd really like to get to nirvana and let me see what
I can do to try to get there, start out with some sense of distinction and then as you
study emptiness you realize that there's no difference between samsara and nirvana and
nirvana is no longer any kind of a goal that you have to reach that's different from where
you are, that's all well and good. But then you have to ask yourself whether there's
any difference, I hope you can stay with me on this one, whether there's any difference
between that second stage of thinking and the first, right? The first stage is the stage
in which you distinguish between nirvana and samsara, the second stage you don't distinguish
between nirvana and samsara, well what about the distinction between these two stages?
Is that distinction real or isn't it? When you ask that question for yourself, what
happens is that you come back into the first stage, there is no distinction between the
two stages, I hope this doesn't sound too confusing, there is no distinction between
the stage of no distinction and the stage of distinction, which means that you've got
to hold the distinctions and the no distinctions together in the same awareness of the world.
Now this, I'm sorry, I'm presenting it to you in a way that sounds absurdly abstract
but let me if I can distill it into a couple of aphorisms and into a typical experience
of the understanding of emptiness. First of all an aphorism, it's often said in this
end tradition when people study the tea ceremony and they learn to handle a bowl and to handle
tea in a certain carefully prescribed way that's meant to express a certain understanding
of experience and to bring real in a ritual way the experience of emptiness. So they say
at the beginning for an ordinary person, you and me, a bowl is a bowl and tea is tea. We
can agree on that. A bowl is a bowl and tea is tea. But when you start to study Zen, a
bowl is no longer a bowl and tea is no longer tea as you come to understand the emptiness
of each of these entities and for that matter the emptiness of any category in ordinary
experience. But then when you are awakened, when you close the circle, when you come back
into the conventional awareness of things, a bowl is a bowl and tea is tea. So the process
of meditation that's involved in this tea ceremony is meant to take you from ordinary
experience into an experience of emptiness and then to bring you back to experience in
this life so that will make it possible for you to be fully present to each moment in
and of itself. This closes the circle between the two truths. Let me give you another example
of this. I can't, I won't claim that any of these is going to completely express what
I'm trying to get at here. Let me give you another example. When I was teaching in Harvard
a few years ago, we had a visit from the Dalai Lama who is one of the great exponents of
the doctrine of emptiness in addition to being a great bodhisattva. And he built his talk
as an explanation of the Buddhist doctrine of self. He was going to tell us what we were.
Can tell us about ourselves. And I'd say about 500 people showed up in Sanders Theater
at Harvard to hear all of this. Sanders Theater is an old theater. It's a wonderful place
and holds lots of people who wanted to hear the Dalai Lama tell them something about themselves.
I gave an introduction to him, explained that he was coming to do such and such and told
him how happy we were to hear him. And then I sat down and joined the audience and listened
to him expound selfhood in the Buddhist tradition. We started out with a conventional view of
self. He said, all you out there, you want to know what it means to be aware of yourself
to discover your own identity, you might say, be compassionate to other people, help them,
love them. That's the way you live out the bodhisattva ideal. He did this in English
and it seemed very simple and I would say on one level extremely convincing. You want
to know yourself, be kind to others, know your identity in that way. It's classic expression
of the bodhisattva ideal. And it's based on an assumption of difference. I am who I am.
I'd like to know who I am perhaps a little bit better and there is my neighbor over there
and let me try to help him in some way. Let me try to remove that person's suffering.
And then he said, you know, in that kind of sly way that you do at the beginning of a
talk like this, but you know, his doctrine himself is a little more complicated than
that in the Mahayana tradition and I can't really explain it to you in English because
I'm not all that good at it. So I'm going to shift to Tibetan and I'm going to give
you the seven different reasons why there is no identity in anything. He may even have
lowered his voice a little bit and said, well, I'm going to give you the seven reasons why
everything is empty of identity. And a translator who was translating this for him in a fairly
mechanical but very impressive way because it was a technical form of Tibetan that's
not all that easy to translate. And he showed us the seven different reasons why we did
not exist as selves and that neighbor whom we were attempting to help also did not exist
as a self. And in fact, the seven different reasons why everything was empty of any kind
of identity. There was no self in anything. And then he paused at the end of the lecture
getting a little close to the end, you know, we were expecting him to bring it to a conclusion
and he began to smile a little bit and he said, well, you know, if there isn't any self
and there really isn't even any no self, there's nothing for us to talk about. Who is it? Who
told you all of this? Who told you this? Who delivered this lecture to you? And he smiled
a little bit more. And he used a phrase in Tibetan that I still very vividly remember
duck some duck some the translator translated it as mere eye, mere eye. The Harvard Crimson
reporter heard this and went back to the newspaper and wrote an article explaining that the Dalai
Lama thought the personality was right here in the eye, right here in the eyeball. But
obviously, I mean, if you think about this bit, he wasn't talking about the eye, EYE,
he was talking about the eye, the letter I, the mere ego. And I think to capture the real
drift of the real force of the Dalai Lama's words at that moment, you wouldn't want to
use a technical phrase like mere eye. You would want to say something like just me. Who is it
who's delivering this to you? Just a little old Dalai Lama. Just me. That's the spirit, I think, of
this third stage. That's really where the doctrine of emptiness is trying to take you. It involves
a wise, somewhat humorous, perhaps, appropriation of the categories of the conventional world to
speak again abstractly as we were speaking before, but to appropriate them with a sense of freedom
and a sense of lightness. I often talked in the Buddhist tradition about buoyancy, about lightness
and about freedom. Emptiness in the end is that kind of feeling. It's the appropriation of the
categories of the conventional world with a sense of freedom, wisdom, buoyancy, humor, and a smile.
Now, if that's true, what effect is it going to have on us in this world? A lot of people think
that if everything is empty of any kind of identity, then there's no reason for us to take
seriously anything that we do. In fact, they find it a very depressing idea. A lot of the stuff
that they thought was so important to them no longer is significant anymore. This is that old
negative fear that just seemed popping up from time to time in the Buddhist tradition throughout
all of its history. But if you can feel the doctrine of emptiness as I've been trying to express it
to you here with the lightness of the Dalai Lama's smile, what you sense is not a feeling of negativity,
a feeling of depression, a feeling that something important has been taken away from you. In fact,
you feel some sort of a surge of infinite possibility. Often the doctrine of emptiness is
expressed as power in the Mahayana tradition, not as disability, but a sense of being genuinely
empowered. Because if nothing has any kind of identity in its own right, then there is really
no barrier to accomplishing anything that you want to accomplish. And you can bring to bear an
ordinary experience, a sense of freedom, and a sense of directness, and a sense of empowerment
that would be difficult if you were in fact caged in this world of frozen objects that are what
they were and couldn't change. So the doctrine of emptiness is often expressed in the Mahayana
tradition by saying, by a phrase that was provided to us by the philosopher Nargarjanam,
everything is possible for someone for whom emptiness is possible, accept emptiness and accept
an spirit of infinite possibility. Now, if this is true then, how would we express emptiness
in the context of a Mahayana ritual? Spoken about emptiness now as an abstract concept,
I've tried to give you some stories that allow you to get the feeling in some way of how this
concept works itself out in everyday experience. How is it ritualized in the Mahayana tradition?
That is, how could we bring it into the concrete texture of Mahayana religious life? Well, one
of the most interesting ways this is done in Mahayana devotion, in the practice of Mahayana
worship, is through a process of visualization. Let me describe it to you as if we were doing it
for ourselves here together. Say we want to worship a Buddha, something that you do in this
tradition. You want to pay homage to Avalokiteshvara or pay homage to Amitabha. Now, to do that,
of course, we could get on a plane, we could go to Japan, we could worship in one of the great
temples of Amitabha, temples that we'll see pictures of or describe later on in our lectures
when we come to Japanese Buddhism, and we could go to a flower market, we could buy some flowers,
we could perhaps get some gold leaf to add to the Buddha's form, and we could go to the temple,
make an offering of the flowers, and light some incense. That's worship. It would be great.
It would be meritorious. It would allow us to reflect on the compassion of Amitabha Buddha,
and it would all push forward in some way our practice of the Mahayana tradition.
But if everything is empty, why not do it now? Why go to Japan to do that?
Let's imagine in front of ourselves at this moment, right here, right here in front of us,
a golden Buddha, his body glowing with golden rays, and out of each pore of the body come
thousands of rays, and at the end of each one of those rays, there are other Buddhas that are glowing
golden too, and they're out of their pores come even more rays so that the whole world is full
of Buddhas. And let's imagine that we go to a flower market somewhere, wherever it would be,
go down to the Boston flower market, and let's gather up with thousands of arms, all the flowers
that are in that market, and let's bring them back here and place them in front of this golden Buddha,
and bow down to that Buddha and say, oh, I praise you, Amitabha Buddha, for all the compassion
that you brought to people in this world. Lift us up with your compassion and take us
to the Pure Land. My question would be, we've just done that, it's a nice little bit of Mahayana
worship. Did we do anything? Was that a religious action? Did we praise the Buddha?
Mahayana answer to that would be, yeah, we did. We did that. In fact, we did it in pretty elaborate
form. Actually, we didn't praise just one Buddha, we praised millions of Buddhas, and we brought in
millions of arms, flowers to pay homage to that Buddha. But then of course, the worship is done
in a way that underlines for us at the same time that we didn't really, because there is no Buddha
to worship, and there is no us to do the worship. So at the same time, we made an infinite store of
merit and realized very concretely that all of that merit was empty. So the exercise itself,
the ritual, becomes a way of offering to the Buddha the kind of offering that builds merit in the world
in almost an infinitely expansive way, and also at the same time becomes a concrete realization,
the understanding of emptiness. In that action, I think in a way, in a simple way really,
we step right into the heart of the Mahayana tradition.
We hope you've enjoyed these lectures from our great courses series.
Our courses are now available to order online. Visit our website at www.teach12.com
or call our customer service representatives at 1-800-TEACH-12. That's 1-800-TEACH-12. Thank you very much.
