Lecture 15, The Theory and Practice of the Mandala
In the last lecture, we saw that the goal of tantric practice was to understand emptiness,
to come to some kind of direct awareness of emptiness by achieving a union of opposites.
This union was expressed by a series of symbolic pairs. We talked about the symbolic distinction
between wisdom and compassion, male and female, and so on and so forth. All embodied, expressed,
represented in various ways in tantric art and tantric symbolism. These pairs applied to the
personality, to each individual person, to ritual action, to the tantric gestures and
rituals that are used to embody these images and to understand their significance, and also to
the cosmos as a whole. In this lecture, we're going to discuss a system of tantric symbolism
that's based not on the number of two, not on the idea that you unify reality by unifying
simply pairs of opposites, but on the number five as expressed in the symbolism of the mandala.
And as before, the goal is going to be to overcome duality by sewing the complex reality of human
experience into a single unified whole. So the symbolism of the mandala is another important
expression of the tantric tradition and a very common way in which people encounter
tantric Buddhism in the practice of Buddhism. So let's start out with a basic question.
What is a mandala and what does it express? The word mandala itself is a pretty simple word.
It means simply a circle. So a mandala, as complex as it can often become when it's elaborated
symbolically in tantric art, is basically a circle. In its most simple form, a mandala
consists of five major points, north, south, east, and west, and then the point at the center.
In tantric art, tantric symbolism, and tantric practice, a separate Buddha can be associated
with each one of these points. These five Buddhas, the five Buddhas of the mandala,
are known as meditation Buddhas or dhyani Buddhas, Buddhas who are often used in meditation and often
of course expressed in the artistic representation of a mandala. The identity of these Buddhas is not
fixed. It's one of the things that makes the study of the symbolism of a mandala so complex.
Different Buddhas are often associated with different mandalas and different rituals,
and Buddhas often change places in the mandala depending on the practice of the person who
approaches the mandala or uses it for a specific purpose. But a Buddha who often occupies the
center of a mandala is the Buddha Akshobhya. This is a Buddha we haven't encountered before,
an important Buddha, particularly in the tantric tradition. His name means the unshakable.
So Akshobhya Buddha is the Buddha who sits at the center of the mandala and is unshaken.
He symbolizes consciousness and he also symbolizes the element of space.
Now you could say, I think, when you encounter the mandala for the first time,
it's useful to think of it as functioning in a rather simple ritual way. It simply draws a line
around some ritual space, demarcates it and separates it from the profane space that lies
outside, and then it suggests in some way that you can walk around this space, perhaps circumambulate
its perimeter, and then encounter reality directly by moving right straight to the center of the
mandala. So a mandala, you might say, draws a circle around space and it suggests to us that the
movement of our consciousness, perhaps the movement even of our physical journey, is to go around
the mandala, encounter its diversity, and then unify reality by going right straight to the center.
Now the five Buddhas of the mandala help a person carry out this process of symbolic
unification by being connected, by connecting themselves to other lists of five. We saw this
occur also when we were talking about basic tantric symbolism that has to do with the
unification of opposites, or many different opposites that could be unified symbolically
together. And the same is true in this system of sets of five. There are five Buddhas in the
mandala. What else are there five of in the Buddhist tradition? Actually, I sometimes think that it
would be fun to have a test for graduate students and ask them in Buddhism, what is there one of,
two of, three of, four of, five of, and see how high you can go in your classification of Buddhist
lists. Fortunately, well, we did get up to the twelve-fold chain of dependent origination not so
long ago, and we talked about the eight-fold path, but fortunately our numerology in Tantra stops at
five, with the addition sometimes of a sixth. In any case, what are the five that we're talking
about here? Well, there are five aggregates, the five constituents of the personality. We talked
about that when we talked about no self. So each of these Buddhas is associated with one of the
aggregates that begins to suggest to us how these Buddhas function. There are five forms of consciousness
in this tradition, five different ways of knowing that can be symbolized by each of the Buddhas
and invoked in a certain way. And with the forms of consciousness, because this is a Tantric tradition
where wrath and serenity go side by side, there also are five unfavorable, evil states of consciousness.
They too are symbolized by the Buddhas in their wrathful manifestation. Each one has a different
color. So there are five colors, there's a green Buddha and a blue Buddha and a white Buddha and
a red Buddha, all of which you can map when you work your way through the mandala. Five directions
of the cosmos, north, south, east and west, and then of course the center, the place where
you're, that is the goal of your meditation. There are five female Buddhas or yoginis because each
of these male figures is connected in some way with a female figure. Five Bodhisattvas,
five watches of the day, five times of the day that these Buddhas all symbolize,
five seasons of the year, five components of the alphabet, and so on and so on, all sorts of
different ways that these Buddhas can symbolically sew together different aspects of reality.
Now to give you a sense of what this looks like in a mandala, let me read a description of
Akshobhya Buddha to you, the Buddha who sits at the center of some mandalas, and I say that
I will describe this in some way to give you the look of the mandala in part to use the tantric
terminology itself. The tantric tradition is a strongly visual tradition, it has to do with
seeing reality in a certain way, and yet of course it wouldn't be Buddhism if it didn't convey this
to you by words, so often the tantric tradition uses words to try to paint a certain picture to
you to give you a visual sense of how the universe is constructed and unified in a certain way.
So in this description of Akshobhya the text tells us first that you should lay out the space for
the mandala in front of you and make offerings that you would typically make in a situation of
worship, offerings of incense and flowers and so on, and then engage in the practice of visualizing
Akshobhya, begin to see him sitting in the middle of this mandala, there in the center of the mandala,
one envisions the syllable PUM in many colors. Just understand we talked about mantras last
time as being important in the tantric tradition. When you're visualizing Akshobhya, the first thing
that you visualize is not his feet or his shoulders or his head or something like that, you visualize
that sound that's associated with him, it's like the seed syllable out of which you'll generate
eventually this vision of Akshobhya. So you envision the syllable PUM in many colors and this then
turns into a fair eight petaled lotus of many colors with the red syllable RUM at the center.
I almost wish we could all sit down and just do this, it sounds kind of like fun.
Anyway, this becomes a solar disk upon which is a dark blue HUM.
Once arises Akshobhya with one face and two arms in the cross-legged posture and making the earth
touching gesture, that earth touching gesture that we associated with the Buddha's defeat
of Mara and the unshakableness of his awakening or his practice that led to his awakening.
His body exhibits the 32 major and 80 minor marks of perfection. I won't list these,
you can imagine what they might be, long ear lobes, a little tuft of hair right between
his eyebrows, for it is the repository of the whole host of excellent qualities,
the ten powers, fearlessness and the rest. His body has no apertures, flesh or bone,
for it is neither true nor false like the pure light that's reflected in a mirror.
He is black in color because he is permeated with great compassion and his symbol is a black
vajra or thunderbolt which embodies the five constituents of the pure absolute.
This is a classic description of the process that visualizes Akshobhya in the center of the
mandala. Now the text goes on to say that Akshobhya is associated with consciousness, anger,
the middle of the day, knowledge, space, sound, and in the system of the alphabet,
the cha, series of consonants. Now when you put all these symbolic associations together,
not just for Akshobhya but for all of the Buddhas, the mandala gives you what in effect
is the symbolic map of all of reality. You have visualized in that mandala everything
and connected it to all the aspects of reality that you can name, constituents of the personality,
the time of the day, the time of the year, the directions of the cosmos, all of those things
have been established in this visualized system of the mandala. In other words, to use language
that we've used before in this course, the mandala serves as a miso-cosm, a middle realm,
that unites the microcosm of the personality with the macrocosm of the external world.
This union of microcosm and macrocosm is similar to the union that we talked about in the Hindu
tradition in the Upanishads when we were beginning to discuss the shape of Indian religion but it's
much more complex and detailed than anything we saw in the Upanishads. For one thing, it represents
a very precise view of the structure of the world. At the center of this world system as
it's visualized in the mandala is a mountain. I haven't talked about this before. It's a sacred
mountain that rises up in the center of the world. The name of this mountain is Mount Meru.
And around this mountain, according to traditional Buddhist cosmology, are four continents that are
triangular-shaped geographical entities. In traditional Buddhist cosmology, our home,
place where we live, is the southernmost continent that's known as Jumbudwipa or the
Roseapple Island. So we live on one of the four petals as it were, triangular shapes that extends
out of the central mountain of the cosmos, it's Mount Meru. Now you can see that this cosmology,
this vision of the world, corresponds roughly to the geography as you would expect of India.
There are mountains in the north, behind that initial range of mountains, may very well be a
mountain that's even higher than anything that we can see, Mount Meru, up there somewhere in the
north, beyond the main range of the Himalayas, and then of course extending down from this
mountainous region as the triangular shape of the Indian subcontinent. But one of the interesting
things about this Indian vision of the world, it's found in Hinduism as well as in Buddhism,
is that it's translatable and it can be rendered by some process of analogy
in other spaces as well. One of the fascinating things to do when you visit Indonesia actually
is to go to Bali, that Hindu and Buddhist island in Indonesia that still bears the
marks in so many ways of tantric ritual and see how the sacred geography has manifested itself in
Balinese life. You can imagine, even if you haven't been to Bali, that it's an island,
it's a volcanic island that has a large central volcano that's the most holy space on the island.
And a lot of the ritual in Balinese Hinduism has to do with capturing and manipulating and
processing the sacred water that flows out of that central volcano. Well, how is the sacred
volcano understood as a version of Mount Meru? So you have this image really of what the world
looks like. It's a central mountain that is, as it were, the abode of the gods. Out of that flows
various sacred influences that then have to be captured and ritually appropriated by the priests
and the specialists of the tradition. This view of the cosmos, the view of the cosmos that is
expressed in the mandala, also involves a precise view of the human personality because the body
itself is made up of a mandala. You perhaps have heard of the chakras that in some aspects of the
Hindu tradition and Buddhism as well are understood as energy centers located along the spine in
traditional tantric physiology. There are six of these running from the base of the spine right up
to the top of the head. Five of these represent the points on the mandala and then the top,
the sixth point, represents that transcendent space that transcends even the space that lies
at the center of the mandala. So the mandala can represent the geographical structure of the cosmos
it can be drawn on the ground and used as a ritual space and it also represents
the personality, the energy centers in the body. You can see that it unites the world in powerful
ways symbolically. Now if this is what a mandala is and this is a glimpse at some of its symbolic
significance, how is a mandala used in the tantric tradition? What do people do with this powerful
symbolic form? Well one thing that can be done is pretty simple. A lot of tantric ritual looks very
complex but really in a fundamental way it's actually less complex often than it might seem.
One thing that you can do is to take a plate that's inscribed with the form of a mandala
or with the form of the geographical shape of the world as I've just outlined it to you
and then take bits of grain. Each one used to designate some important piece within this structure
place it on the plate as you do it invoke whatever the object is or the reality or power is that it
represents and then take that and offer it to a deity. Well simple gesture. You know we could do
that if I had one of those plates we could all gather around the podium and we could make that
offering it might take us a while to assemble all the different pieces and to designate them for
ourselves but it's not a complicated gesture but what a powerful symbolic action because what you're
doing there really is making an offering to the Buddha or to whatever object it is you're worshiping
the whole world. You're just putting it right out there you're designating it mapping it for
yourself and then making it as an offering to the Buddha. When I offer a flower well that's great
but that's just one small part of the cosmos how much more powerful and how much more effective
to be able to take some ritual form like this and create a map of the cosmos and offer it
symbolically to the deity. That's one of the things you can do with a mandala. Another thing that is
often done as a form of worship but also as a way of meditating on all the different issues that a
mandala represents is to create a mandala using colored sand. When groups of Tibetan monks are
asked to display some aspect of their tradition to American audience especially to American audiences
that are tuned into the visual expression of Buddhism and are interested in knowing something
about Buddhist art they often create mandalas using colored sand. Sometimes relatively simple
mandalas not terribly complex and sometimes mandalas that are enormously complex that take weeks to
put together grain by grain. These sand mandalas are blessed and function as temporary palaces
for the deities of the mandala. When the worship is over the mandalas are swept up and destroyed
as a lesson in impermanence. Mandalas used for worship don't have to be just in two dimensions
because the cosmos that we're talking about here with Mount Meru at the center is also a three
dimensional structure in ways that you can imagine. So mandalas can be constructed and made as ritual
spaces and as objects for worship in three dimensions as well. In Tibet when I was traveling there
a couple of years ago in the Potala palace where the Dalai Lama lives there are several
enormous and complex three-dimensional mandalas that represent the cosmos and are used in various
ways as ritual objects. But the most impressive three-dimensional mandala I've ever experienced
myself is the mandala at the kumbhum the great temple of the thousand buddhas in Gyantse in Tibet.
Really an extraordinary place it used to be on the main trade route from Nepal into Lhasa and now
seems a little bit like a backwater really on the plateau on the high Tibetan plateau. But one I
think what I would say is one of the most impressive and extraordinary Buddhist monuments in the world.
It's a large white structure with several levels of chapels you can go into circumambulate walk around
and visit each one of these little chapels paying homage if you want to the Buddha that resides
therein but also seeing in each one of the chapels a visual representation of the particular
worship liturgy that has to be associated with each one of these mandalas. If you're
understanding this course not just as an intellectual exploration of Buddhism but maybe as a way of
getting some hints about where you like to go in the world to try to see some Buddhism I'd really
strongly suggest that you go and see this extraordinary monument at Gyantse in southern
Tibet along with Lhasa. It's one of the most impressive aspects of impressive manifestations
of Tibetan culture. So these are all mandalas that can be used in one way or another as objects of
worship or as places of worship. That's really the category that we're discussing but obviously
mandalas can be used as powerful tools for meditation. That's important too. In fact all of our discussion
of mandalas has really led us in that direction. In some rituals connected with the mandala,
Tibetan practitioners visualize the deities that are found in this sacred space and these
visualizations often as I suggested when we were talking about Akshobhya are quite detailed
and follow the form of the tantric deities as they're represented in the texts and in tantric
art. Now if you think about it, if you remember back a couple of lectures, perhaps two or three
lectures ago when we were talking about emptiness, I asked you to do a simple meditation with me in
which we visualized the Buddha in front of us, a Buddha with a golden body, many rays coming
out of the body at the end of each ray. There was another Buddha that it was glowing in its own way
and then I said that we should imagine that we were going to travel to say a flower market or
travel perhaps to all of the corners of the universe and gather together all of the flowers
that we could wrap up in some imaginative way in our arms and present as offerings to this Buddha.
I use that as an example of a meditation on emptiness, basic Mahayana practice that can
be used to explore some of the ambiguities and the perplexities of the emptiness doctrine,
but I also talked about that as a way of planting a seed that we could then nurture a little bit
when we talk about tantric practice because this is exactly what these tantric practitioners are
doing. They're visualizing the deities of the mandala in front of them and making offerings to
them that are meant to invoke their power and to make their their energy present in the world,
but they're doing something in this tradition that's a little different than what I described before.
We still, when we were talking about this visualization, thought of the Buddha as being
different from ourselves, sitting out there in front of us as the object of our worship.
In the tantric tradition, you dissolve the distinction between the Buddha and yourself.
So at the end of this ritual, after this worship is done, when you've invoked, you've created the
image of the Buddha, you've invoked its power and made it real in front of you, you've dissolved that
Buddha into your heart so that that Buddha becomes you and you become that Buddha. One more powerful
way in a meditative experience of overcoming the duality between yourself and the Buddha.
They sometimes say that the tantric tradition is a powerful way of achieving enlightenment
very quickly, if not in this life in just a few lifetimes. You can see from this ritual why that
might be possible because you're using ritual and you're using various kinds of symbolic forms to
imagine the Buddha in front of you and then dissolve yourself into the Buddha and the Buddha
into you. You become the Buddha and he becomes you. This is sometimes called in the tantric
tradition deity yoga, a discipline in which you imagine the deity in front of you and then you
become identified with it. It's one of the fundamental forms of practice in the tradition
of the mandala. Now there's another way that the mandala can be used in Buddhist practice,
that's fascinating to explore. You won't have enough time to go into it in as much detail as it
really deserves. But in the book called the Tibetan Book of the Dead, it's used as a ritual
in funerals to help guide the soul of a dead person through the difficulties of the afterlife
and also of course to provide a meditation for the living about what will happen to them
when they die. The movement of the soul or the movement of consciousness to be more precise
through the afterlife is visualized as a journey through the mandala. Not from the edges to the
center as we were talking about before, but from the center out to the edge. When a person dies
according to the Tibetan Book of the Dead, the consciousness becomes dissolved into the form
of the central Buddha in the mandala in a state of pure non-dual awareness. And if through all the
meditation that the person who's done before the moment of death, if that person can recognize that
and accept it and become absorbed into it, then person is no longer subject to rebirth. But if
there's something frightening about that experience, the person recoils from it and can't stay absorbed
in that terrifying white light, then he begins to fall out of the center of the mandala and make
a procession around the edge, seeing each one of the deities of the mandala on a different day.
And then, of course, when that's over, seeing all of those deities again in their wrathful form,
at each moment on this process, it's possible to become absorbed into that deity and to escape the
cycle of transmigration if that's something the person has prepared for, if not eventually the
person falls off the edge of the mandala and back into rebirth in this world. So the mandala is used
at least in this tradition as a way, shall we say, of visualizing the movement through the afterlife
and giving some kind of ritual form to the guidance that people give to the spirit of the dead.
And then finally, I'll just mention one more important way that the mandala manifests itself
in Buddhist practice, a way that you yourselves might someday encounter in your travels. I said
before that the mandala can represent the cosmos as a whole. It doesn't have to represent all of the
cosmos. It can be mapped simply onto a particular piece of land. Tibet itself is understood as a
mandala with a sacred center in the capital city of Lhasa. So one way of experiencing
the mandala in Tibet is to go on a pilgrimage, to circumambulate the great country itself,
visiting the shrines that mark all of these sacred spots on the mandala,
and then finally making your way into that central territory that is associated with the
capital city and then within the capital city with the central shrine right in the center of
Tibet. The shrine is called the Jokang and holds the most sacred image in Tibetan Buddhism. You
find as you make your way through these pilgrimage sites that there are always two important
elements. There always is a circumambulation, a movement around, visiting different sacred spots
along the perimeter of whatever manifestation of the mandala it is that you're encountering,
and then there's this movement into the center where you encounter some kind of symbolic representation
of reality in its unified state. So you can see that the mandala is in a lot of ways quite a simple
form. It really is just a circle, you know. It's just a way of drawing a line around the world and
indicating that at the center of that circle we might encounter reality in some more powerful and
more direct way than we would in our ordinary experience, but it is extraordinarily malleable
and translatable and it affects many aspects of Buddhist life, all of which would be fascinating,
I would have to say, to explore in much more detail than we're able to do in just this one lecture.
