Lecture 16, The First Diffusion of the Dharma in Tibet
For the last couple of lectures, we've been talking about the development of the Tantric
tradition in India, one of the last major forms of Buddhism to arise and expand and
develop in surprising ways in the later years of the development of the Indian Buddhist tradition.
Now, as you know, the Tantric tradition began as a counter-cultural movement really on the
fringes of Buddhist society. It was associated with many practices that were impure, challenging,
perhaps a bit dangerous in the traditional way of understanding religious practice in India,
so we really have to think of it initially at least as a fringe movement. But before many
centuries had passed, Tantra became an integral part of life in the Indian monasteries. It really
became part of the mainstream practice of traditional Buddhism. In the later half of the
first millennium of the common era, from about 600 to about 1200, Tantric practices and teachings
became part of the tradition of monastic learning. It was much a part of the monasteries as they were
of anything else. These monasteries had large libraries, colorful rituals, and an elaborate
monastic curriculum ranging all the way from Buddhist philosophy and meditation to Tantric
ritual and to astronomy and medicine. Unfortunately, their great strength as institutions also turned
out to be a major weakness. When waves of Afghan raiders began to sweep down across Northern India,
down across the Punjab, and down across the Ganges Basin, the monasteries were tempting
targets for plunder and for destruction. They were very rich, they were full of precious ritual
objects, they had large libraries, and they really represented in many ways one of the most tempting
manifestations of the wealth of classical India. By the year 1200, after two centuries of devastating
invasions, there was little left of Buddhist monastic culture in Northern India but a handful
of destitute old monks. So if we want to continue our study of the Mahayana in the Indian style,
we have to shift across the Himalayas to Tibet, where Indian monastic culture has been preserved
more accurately and more richly than anywhere else in the Buddhist world. The first introduction of
Buddhism to Tibet, it's known in the history of Tibetan Buddhism as the first diffusion of the
Dharma in Tibet, began in the 7th century, right about the time when Tantra was beginning to manifest
itself in the Indian Buddhist community. During the 7th century, a line of Tibetan kings who first
appeared in a valley in central Tibet known as the Yarlung Valley, brought the Tibetan tribes
under some kind of unified government and began to extend their military influence out of central
Tibet into the rest of Asia. And as they did this, they came into contact with China, of course,
to the north and to the east and to and with India to the south. And in both of these places,
they found quite sophisticated Buddhist cultures. In the 7th century, China was going through one of
the most prosperous and active periods in the history of Chinese Buddhism. The same was true,
of course, in India, in the culture of the great monasteries. So these early Tibetan kings began
to link themselves to the larger countries or cultures of Asia by beginning to adopt some
of their religious practices. And Buddhism was a central part of what they encountered in these
places. Now, only 100 years or so ago, we didn't know very much about what was going on in this
early phase in Tibetan history. We have a few great chronicles that were written at a later period,
that tell us all sorts of marvelous stories about these early Tibetan kings. But there was not much
firm historical evidence about their reign, other than a few inscriptions that were found
throughout central Tibet. Fortunately, about the turn of the 19th century, as the 19th century
turned to the 20th, a series of travelers and explorers discovered caves in Chinese central
Asia that were full of remarkable historical chronicles that help us begin to piece together
a picture of life in Tibetan and surrounding countries during this time. And we can now begin
to speak much more confidently about the history of Tibet in these formative years when Buddhism was
first entering Tibetan culture. According to the Tibetan chronicles, King Songchen Gampo, who reigned
roughly from 609 to 649, invited one of his two Buddhist wives to help him introduce the cult
of the Buddha to Tibet. What this meant was to introduce a statue of the Buddha in Tibet and
establish the Buddha as a focus of worship. According to the stories, the first attempts to
build a temple in the capital city of Lhasa were unsuccessful. The carts that were carrying the
Buddha's statue bogged down in the swamps, and it was impossible for them to construct the temple
that they had hoped to build. In a dream, the king was told that the land of Tibet lay on the body
of a demoness who had to be subdued before the cult of the Buddha could be successfully
established, so he ordered a series of temples to be built around the country that were understood
as pinning down her knees and her elbows and her hips and her shoulders. Finally, a temple was built
in Lhasa, in the center of the capital city, to pin down her heart. This temple is known as the
Jokang today. It's the most sacred temple in Tibet. It's the focus of Buddhist pilgrimage to the
capital of Lhasa, and it is the site of the Jolo Rinpoche, Songchen Gampo's first Buddha image,
and the holiest image in traditional Tibet. Now, the actions of Songchen Gampo, as you can imagine,
not only subdued the demoness that constituted the Tibetan landscape, and you might say in some ways
the subconscious identity of the Tibetan people themselves, but it marked Tibet with a form
of a mandala, a mandala that could be traced by pilgrims as they made their way from the fringes
of the Tibetan plateau into this holy site in the center. Now, I should say, I think, as we begin
to dig here into the history of Tibet, that a lot of the Tibetan names that I'm pronouncing to you
will seem a bit unfamiliar and certainly nothing like what we have been talking about in our
elaborate use of Pali and Sanskrit in our discussion of the Indian tradition, and I probably should
tell you something just for a moment about the Tibetan language. I'll be using a pronunciation
of these words that's something like the contemporary pronunciation, but the spelling of Tibetan was
settled quite a while ago, shortly after the introduction of Buddhism to Tibet, and it's been
standardized since that time. So the way we spell Tibetan is quite different than the way we pronounce
it. If you have the written version of this course, you'll find in the glossary both the
traditional spelling of the Tibetan names and also their modern pronunciations. If you want to imagine
what the difference between them is like, you might just simply contemplate the difference
between spelling and pronunciation of our word night, the night in shining armor who came to
rescue the fair maiden from the castle back there in the fables of our western culture. If we pronounced
what we write, it would sound like knicht, I suppose, something like that, but we pronounce it
night. A lot of Tibetan words like this, they have very complicated spellings and very simple
pronunciations. One of my favorite is the the word B-S-G-R-U-B-S. I suppose if you pronounced it
literally, it would be B-S-G-R-U-B-S. It means something like proven or established in a philosophical
sense. It's spelled B-S-G-R-U-B-S, and it's pronounced D. And therein lies one of the great
problems for a beginning student of the Tibetan tradition. In any case, what you're hearing from
me is an approximation of contemporary pronunciation. Now after the time of Song Sen Gam Po, the next
major series of events in Tibetan history occurred in the eighth century during the reign of another
Buddhist king named Trisong Datesen. Trisong Datesen sponsored the construction of a monastery at
Samye. This was the first Buddhist monastery in Tibet, and obviously it marked a major shift
in the relationship between Tibet and Buddhism. The construction of the monastery required the help
of the tantric saint Padmasambhava, also known in Tibet as Guru Rinpoche, or precious teacher.
With his magic power, this tantric saint Padmasambhava subdued the demons that opposed the monastery's
construction, and he's become the focus through Tibetan history of a tremendous amount of
storytelling and outright myth-making. And it would be wrong for us, I think, to pass him by
without giving an impression at least of the way he has been perceived in later centuries.
David Snellgrove and Hugh Richardson, two remarkable Tibetologists who have an extraordinarily deep
and sophisticated knowledge of this culture, have translated for us a passage from the legendary
biography of Padmasambhava that gives us a sense, I think, of how large he eventually loomed
in the Tibetan imagination. The passage starts with a miracle. After spending some time in
Hlasa, Padmasambhava traveled to meet King Trisong Datesen, who was camped with his army
in a barren valley. They had tried in this valley to find some water to make their afternoon tea,
and as you may know in Tibet, butter tea is one of the staple features of the staple foods, I
suppose you should say, of the culture at large. It's really hard to exist in a traditional Tibetan
culture without cultivating a taste for this mixture of butter, salt, and tea. In any case,
they were making their afternoon tea or at least trying to make it, and they couldn't find any
water to do it. And up came Padmasambhava, and a miracle that reminds you of some of the miracles
in the Bible. He struck the rock, and out of the rock began to come the water that they needed
to make their tea. So having established his miraculous presence, having made his
powerful presence known, he then sat down and pondered how best to introduce himself
to Trisong Datesen. The question that concerned him really was, how would they greet one another?
Who would bow first, and who would offer a kind of ritual submission to the other?
How he considered this is made clear in this translation by Snow Grove and Richardson. Padmasambhava
said, according to this legendary biography, I am not born from a womb, but I was magically born.
The king was born from a womb, so I am greater by birth. The name Padmasambhava means born from
a lotus. The story about Padmasambhava is that he sprang from a lotus. I am a religious king who
ruled in the land of Orgen, a land that we now associate with what's called the Swat Valley
in Pakistan and northern Pakistan. And my lineage is greater than the king of this evil land of
Tibet. As for our two aspects, he's in a confused state of ignorance while I'm skilled in all the
five branches of learning. My Buddhahood was acquired in only one lifetime, and this king
must certainly salute me first. But I wonder, shall I even bother to return his salutation?
This is the question that Padmasambhava asked himself. He decided, of course, that his dignity
required him not to salute the king, so he would receive the king's salutation and not salute him
back. The king, of course, decided that he ought to wait for Padmasambhava to salute him first,
as befit his dignity as a king. So they're standing face to face. They meet each other.
There they are, each one waiting for the other to bow down in salutation.
In the silence, Padmasambhava spoke the following words. The Buddhas of past, present, and future
emerge from wombs, accumulating stocks of merit and knowledge throughout three long, incalculable
world ages. But I, Padmasambhava, am the lotus-born, possessing the precepts of the insight that comes
from above. I discourse fully on all the Buddha ways without confusion. I am the dharma, which is
lotus-born. Outwardly, I wear the saffron robes of a monk, but inwardly, I am the highest of
tantric practitioners. After a few more verses like this, the king bowed down and asked Padmasambhava's
forgiveness. Padmasambhava then told him to atone for his sin by constructing five new stupas,
and Padmasambhava concealed a treasure in each one of them. I'm fond of this story of Padmasambhava,
not just because it tells you a little bit about the jousting about protocol that probably went on,
at least at some stage in the Tibetan tradition, but because it reminds me of one of my most amusing
encounters with the Dalai Lama. I'll say more about the Dalai Lama a couple of lectures from now,
but I remember one time when he was making one of his visits to Cambridge, and my job was to go and
pick him up at his hotel and convey him to the lecture hall where he was going to be
speaking. And we, of course, got to the door of the lecture hall. Now, who should go in first?
That's the question. Should it be this lowly junior professor from the university, or should
it be the exalted Dalai Lama? Well, you know, in our culture, I think I'm right about this,
we let the most senior person enter first. So I stepped aside and I made a gesture and hoping
that the Dalai Lama would go gently through the door, and he stepped aside and made a gesture
for me to go through. I didn't really know what to do at this point. So I laughed and I said to
him, well, you know, in America, the most important person goes through the door first, and he said,
well, you know, in Tibet, the least important person goes through first. And he laughed at me,
and he grabbed me by the arm, and he said, well, then let's walk through the door together.
It's one of my most pleasant encounters with him. And that struck me as being rather different
than this encounter between Padma Sambhava and Tresong Datesen. In any case, the relationship
between the two turned out to be fairly close. And Tresong Datesen used Padma Sambhava's help
quite extensively in the early introduction of Tibetan Manast, or of Indian monasticism to Tibet.
King Tresong Datesen also needed the help of another specialist as well. Padma Sambhava was
good at tantric magic, at tantric invoking the power of tantric meditation. But he wasn't
necessarily a scholar. And for the scholarly curriculum of his new monastery, King Tresong
Datesen had to turn to one of the representatives of the Indian monastic tradition, whose name was
Shanta Rakshita. He was actually a Madhyamaka philosopher of the Swatantrika branch of that
school. And he helped introduce to Tibet that sophisticated and complicated monastic curriculum
that we spoke about in our discussion of Buddhist philosophy. And I think you could say that these
two figures represent the two faces of Tibetan Buddhism, a reverence for the power of a tantric
practitioner that has always been important in Tibetan history, right from the very beginning.
It's still true today. Tantra is a living force in Tibetan society, and it manifests itself
in a form of practice that's not unlike the practice associated with Padma Sambhava. But
there also has been in Tibetan culture an extraordinarily deep reverence for the practice
of Buddhist scholarship, Buddhist scholasticism, as represented by Shanta Rakshita. So if you
want to study Buddhist philosophy in the form that I was discussing it a few lectures ago,
when we talked about the scholarly approaches to the doctrine of emptiness, Tibetan Buddhism
is one of the best places to do this. That scholarly tradition is still alive,
active, and flourishing in Tibetan monasteries. Now the Tibetan tradition also tells us that
Trisong Deitsen sponsored a debate at Samye. Didn't just found the monastery, but he sponsored a
debate to determine the character of Tibetan Buddhism. He brought in a Chinese religious
specialist and an Indian religious specialist, and he set them up in a mode of discourse that would
lead eventually to a conclusion about which variety of Buddhism would be best, as it were,
for Tibetan culture. Representing the Chinese side was a meditation master whose name was simply
Mahayana, who advocated a practice of sudden awakening, like the practice of sudden awakening
that we'll discuss when we talk about the Chan and Zen traditions. Representing the Indian side
was a disciple of Shanta Rakshita whose name was Kamalashila, who advocated a practice of gradual
awakening of slowly working yourself through the stages of the bodhisattva path before you come
eventually to the experience of Buddhahood. According to the Tibetan tradition, the king
decided in favor of the Indian party and permanently oriented the Tibetan tradition
toward India. So this was another watershed in Tibetan history when Tibetan king chose Indian
Buddhism as the source of the Tibetan tradition. Now you might, excuse me, after the reign of
Trisong Deitsen, another king appeared whose name was Long Dharma, who attempted to persecute Buddhism.
He attempted to stamp out the practice of Buddhism in central Tibet. Now he was not
terribly successful in this. He was eventually assassinated and the line of the Tibetan kings
was broken. But the practice of Buddhism in Tibet went into eclipse. So there was no active support
of the Tibetan monasteries and no active practice of Buddhism, at least in that organized way that
we would associate with the monastic tradition. Now you might well ask, in the case of Long Dharma
and his attempt to stamp out the practice of Buddhism in Tibet, where his opposition came from?
Why would a king appear in this line of Tibetan kings after so much effort had gone into establishing
Buddhism? Why would a king appear who would attempt to reverse that process and eliminate Buddhism
from Tibetan culture? One traditional answer to this question would be to say that it came
from the influence of an indigenous religious tradition found in traditional Tibet and known
by the name of Bern, B-O-N, the Bern tradition. Bern is sometimes called the indigenous shamanism
of Tibet. And its practices often involve a very conscious inversion of Buddhist practices.
From a Buddhist point of view, it often seems quite challenging and dangerous. For example,
when a Bern Po, a practitioner of Bern, goes to a stupa, instead of walking around it to the left
so that the right shoulder is kept always toward the holiest place in the stupa, a Bern Po goes
around a stupa to the right, so that the direction of Buddhist practices often is inverted in the
practice of Bern. Buddhists find this challenging and a little bit strange, but from the point of
view of Bern, this tradition represents the practice of Tibetan religion as it existed
in Tibet before the coming of Buddhism. Very interesting claim. The Bern tradition traces
its origin to a figure named Shenrob, who is called by Bern a Buddha using the Tibetan name
for a Buddha, Sangye. Like Shakyamuni, he has achieved this experience of awakening.
But instead of coming from India to the south of Tibet, he comes from a region known as Tazik,
to the west of Tibet. Tazik is a region that I think we can loosely associate with Persia.
Like Buddhism, the Bern tradition developed an elaborate canon of scripture, and many of the
teachings in this canon are very close to the teachings found in Tibetan Buddhist texts.
One text, for example, describes emptiness in a way that would be quite familiar to us from
the other discussions we've had of this important doctrine. The elements of existence are like a
dream or a mirage, it says. Their sole validity is their essential vacuity or their emptiness.
This truth, which never came about, was never said to have been really taught. It is taught
in the form of a metaphor, transcending sounds and terms or words. It cannot be taught for what
it really is. Classic expression of emptiness, like the kinds of descriptions of emptiness that
we would see in an Indian text. But they're also running through burned texts like a strange
undercurrent, is a sense of opposition and hostility toward the Buddhist tradition,
expressed in another text translated by Snellgroven Richardson.
Text says this, King Trisong Datsun, that king, he is a roguish fellow. His ministers are monstrous
rogues. Our blazing light is now withdrawn. Now is the time of these Buddhist monks.
The princes now have faith in gold and our haloed burn declines. May that king, that Trisong Datsun,
become a village beggar. And may his ministers become shepherds. May the land of Tibet break
into pieces and these Buddhist monks lose their law. May these nuns bear children and these Buddhist
priests lead fighting gangs. May their monasteries be filled with battle. May their temples be
set on fire. And may my curse become effective. And may these books of mine be found by someone
worthy. This is a strong and vindictive curse of the Buddhist tradition. It's found in the classic
tradition of burn. In spite of these ancient curses, the burn has now so thoroughly accommodated
itself to Buddhist practices and did so actually many centuries ago, that for many scholars,
the burn tradition is viewed as really nothing more than another variety of Buddhism. You can
certainly approach it that way, even though it makes very strong claims to represent the indigenous
tradition of Tibet and presents itself in many respects as a tradition in opposition to Buddhism.
Now you might ask one more question in talking about burn and in talking about this early
phase in the history of Buddhism in Tibet. What is it like these days to encounter a
practitioner of the burn tradition? Now I would not normally pose a question like that. I don't know
very many burn pose, and I haven't made much of an effort to seek them out. But I do have one
rather remarkable story to tell you that might give you a little bit of the flavor, not just of the
power of the tradition, but also about how it incorporates Buddhist ideas. Once when I was
sitting in my office at Boston University, I got a call from a fellow who said that he had a visiting
burn pole visiting from India. And he was traveling around and speaking in universities.
This man wondered whether I would like to have the burn pole come and visit my classes. I said,
sure, that'd be a great idea. It's not a chant, not often that you get a chance to have a visiting
black magician from Tibet come and address your class. So we set a day and I waited for the
fellow to comment on that day. Strangely enough, I'm actually not making this up. This may sound
a little odd, but it actually did happen quite this way. That was the day of what's called the
perfect storm. That great destructive storm that came in New England on Halloween spun backwards
down the New England coast and caused a tremendous amount of destruction. On that day, the wind
blowing, the rain pouring into my office swept this red-robed burn priest. We talked a bit.
We then went over to my classroom and he sat down and gave a very calm, quiet account of the burn
tradition that sounded an awful lot like Buddhism. He said, if you want to practice the burn,
have compassion on your neighbor and also at the same time study emptiness. And you will
in that way proceed to awakening. Then as the windows were rattling and the rain was beating
down outside, my students had a chance to ask him some questions and they said, well, how was it
you happened to become a burn pole? How did you choose to enter this form of religious life?
And he said, well, you know, my daddy used to be a great magician and he would leave the body
during the night and travel around to bed. And when he came home for breakfast, he would tell
us stories about all the things he saw. And I wanted to be a magician just like my daddy.
The students' jaws dropped a little bit and another person asked another question. Well,
what happened to your daddy? Whatever became of him? And this burn post said very quietly, well,
you know, one day he said to us that he needed to do an important meditation and we should
lock the door to his meditation room and not disturb him for a week. During that week, there
were meteor showers and there were strange comets and all that sort of thing. And at the end of the
week, we opened up the door and there was nothing left of my father but a pile of hair and fingernails.
And at this point, the students in the classroom, I probably was among the group actually,
their jaws dropped, the window frames rattled, the rain was pouring down outside and I felt
for a moment anyway that I had been transported into that remarkable and strange world of the
burn tradition. About the veracity of his story, I certainly cannot say much, although the claim
he was making about his father is a very traditional claim about some form of Tibetan
practitioners. But I was grateful to him for having introduced me into that world
of the burn tradition in such a powerful way.
