Lecture 17, The Schools of Tibetan Buddhism
In the last lecture we talked about the first diffusion of the Dharma in Tibet and at the
end of that lecture I gave you a long digression about an experience that I once had with a
representative of the Bern tradition, that very mysterious tradition that is sometimes talked
about as being the indigenous religion in Tibet. Actually as I mentioned in that lecture Bern is
now so thoroughly infused with Buddhism that it's hard to distinguish it from the Buddhism
that we see elsewhere in the Tibetan tradition. Now in this lecture we want to pick up the
historical narrative again and talk about the next major phase in the development of
Tibetan Buddhism. This is a phase that we call simply the later diffusion of the Dharma in Tibet
and this took place in the 11th century beginning in the 10 hundreds. Now this is associated with a
string of important teachers. One of these is a man by the name of Atisha who was an important
scholar who came from one of the monasteries in eastern India and went up into Tibet and developed
a group of Tibetan disciples taught in the monasteries and established a lineage that recreated
some of that scholarly the scholarly tradition from India that we've talked about when we discussed
Buddhist philosophy. There also were some indigenous Tibetan figures who traveled to India and
studied with Tantric saints in India and came back to Tibet to promulgate the tradition of
Tantric practice that we also have talked about in discussing Indian the Indian sources of Tibetan
Buddhism. One of these saints was the Tantric saint Marpa about whom I'll say a bit in a minute.
Now out of these very tentative beginnings just individuals floating through Tibet beginning
to reestablish some of those old lineages grew most of the schools that have dominated Tibetan
Buddhism to the present day. So our job in this lecture is to become familiar with the four major
schools of Tibetan Buddhism to understand how they got started and how they have contributed to the
shape of Tibetan Buddhism as we would encounter it today in Tibet or for that matter in the
Tibetan diaspora and all those Tibetan communities that are scattered around the rest of the world
including North America. Now the place to begin in any survey of the four schools of Tibetan
Buddhism was with a school known as the Nyingma school. This is the only one that traces its
origin back before the later diffusion of the Dharma back to the time of Padma Sambhava who was
that Tantric an important Tantric saint who helped Trisong Datesen found the monastery at Samye.
He was a Tantric magician you might say and helped quell the demons that seemed to stand in the way
of the establishment of this important monastery. The word Nyingma in the name of this school means
the old school so the name of the school refers back to this early phase in the history of Tibetan
Buddhism. Now because of the gap between the first diffusion of the Dharma and the later diffusion
but the gap between the 9th century and the 11th century the connection between Padma Sambhava
and this later Nyingma tradition has always been pretty problematic. To establish the continuity
with Padma Sambhava the members of this school of the Nyingma school claimed to have discovered
secret texts that Padma Sambhava left behind in Tibet hid sometimes in the landscape written on the
rocks on the bed of a river or hidden in some cleft of the rock in the mountain or sometimes
buried in the mines of his disciples and they have attempted to discover these texts to interpret
them and then promulgate them in the present era. These texts are known as Termas in Tibetan,
a word that means simply treasure and some of the most important and authoritative figures in
Nyingma history are people who have discovered these Termas and been able in some way to disseminate
them. Now to look into the development of the Nyingma tradition in some detail it's not a bad
thing actually to take a look at the lives of some of these so-called tertons the people who
discover treasures and then make them available to others in their community because they give a
pretty remarkable glimpse of the way authority and charisma are negotiated and passed on in this
tradition especially a tradition where the origins are so shadowy so buried in this ancient period
of Tibetan life. A good example of the practice of the discovery and the teaching and the
interpretation of Termas is a figure by the name of Jikme Lingpa who lived several centuries ago
and claimed to be a reincarnation of Triethong Deitsen who was of course Padmasambhava's cohort
in the establishment of the monastery at Samye. Like many Nyingma Lamas and like many Indian
Tantric saints, Jikme Lingpa spent many years in meditation, private seclusion in the mountains
and had the experience in his meditation of being visited by many of the important figures in the
history of the tradition including Padmasambhava and Triethong Deitsen. In fact when you read his
autobiography which is quite a wonderful text actually and gives you a very vivid
account of some of the experiences that he had in his meditation it's really wonderful to read
some of the episodes where he gets up in the morning he's been meditating all night in his dark
cave and the sun begins to rise on the eastern horizon and he goes out to greet the dawn and
you can imagine I suppose after meditating all night long that your consciousness is in some
strange way very much awake and very open to strange experiences and up the trail in front
of him comes a vision of Padmasambhava who engages him in conversation and talks about
how wonderful he is and how important he is in the in the transmission of this great teaching.
Jikme Lingpa had lots of experiences like this and felt that he really was in communication
with this this ancient tradition of charisma and authority in the in the formation of Tibetan
Buddhism. One of his most important revelations came to him in a dream and he was transported
in the dream down out of Tibet across the Himalayas and into the Kathmandu valley in Nepal
where he visited the Swayambu Nat Stupa one of the great stupas in Kathmandu. While he was there
a heavenly messenger came to him and revealed a text in a form of writing that was impossible
for him to understand so he puzzled over the text he read it with all of these mysterious little
inscriptions little characters on it and finally the heavenly messenger came to him
and gave him the key to the code that he could use to unlock and interpret that text. He did it,
became the beginning of a series of important revelations for him and eventually as he translated
these and recorded them and dictated them to his disciples and so on it became the nucleus for a
new scriptural tradition in his community. Now this story about Jikme Lingpa is not by any means
an isolated story. There are other important revealers of Teramas and the Nyingma tradition
but it is a very important one and quite distinctive and it tells us a lot about the Nyingma tradition
and also I think quite a bit about Tibetan Buddhism in general. First of all Nyingma and
Tibetan Buddhism to a large degree our traditions founded on meditative experience. It's clear that
that's the foundation of the authority of Jikme Lingpa. He was there in the mountains and he was
there for a long time and while he was there he had some strong experiences that affirmed not only
the depth of his own meditation and his own realization but his connection to this long lineage
of teaching that took him all the way back to Padmasambhava and through Padmasambhava of course
to the ancient Buddhas of the Indian tradition. In this sense Nyingma is probably the Tibetan
tradition that comes closest to the pure transmission of the tantric impulse from Tibet.
Jikme Lingpa didn't study or at least he didn't study in any important way in any sophisticated
monasteries. He wasn't a great student of philosophy. Most of what we talked about a couple of lectures
ago when we talked about the different schools of Buddhist philosophy would have been pretty
unfamiliar to him. He wasn't a scholar. His charisma and his power were established by the
vividness and the plausibility of his own personal vision came from his own meditation.
The Nyingma tradition still maintains this character today. It appeals to people precisely
because it puts its feet down on direct personal experience. But the Nyingma tradition and the
story of Jikme Lingpa also convey the ancient Buddhist respect for scriptural transmission.
We've talked about this a lot actually in the lectures that we've shared together on the history
of Buddhism. Jikme Lingpa's authority may have been founded on personal experience
but it was expressed and it was spread in a text, in a body of texts. So even in its most
esoteric and personal form Tibetan Buddhism is devoted to texts. It's a strongly textual tradition
and these are not just old texts that come from the time of the Buddha but texts that are generated
by authoritative figures who manifest themselves from time to time, just bubble up from time to
time in the history of Tibet. So you could say that Tibetan Buddhists have a canon of scripture.
They do. It's big and quite widely disseminated. It was settled in the 13th century and it contains
within it what you might call the authoritative Tibetan definition of the teaching that came to
Tibet from India but in a broader sense the Buddhist canon in Tibet you would have to say I think
still remains open because new texts can be generated or discovered to respond to all sorts of new
situations and then promulgated as the basis of authority and different sectarian movements.
So there is in Tibetan Buddhism something like a scriptural impulse, a textual impulse,
that of course reveres ancient texts, copies them and passes them on in all the ways that that
it happens in a Buddhist culture but also tries to find textual material as it were.
It can respond in a distinctive way to the issues that we face or that Tibetans faced in a new
historical situation. Now the Nyingma tradition that's represented here by Jikme Lingpa has
come to North America. You can encounter it here in various Tibetan communities and interestingly
enough I think it's quite popular among scholars who study the tradition intellectually in a very
intense way but kind of have a hunger for some personal experience. They often study with Nyingma
teachers to make that direct personal encounter with the Dharma that sometimes seems difficult to
discern in the more complicated intellectual accounts of the tradition that you see amongst
the philosophers. So those are a few comments about the Nyingma tradition, about its history and
about its shape and also about what it tells us about the tradition of Tibetan Buddhism more
generally. Another school it's interesting to encounter is a school called the Kagu school.
The word Kagu means teaching lineage and it traces its origin to the Lama Marpa
who lived between the years 1012 and 1096. He was a Tibetan by birth but he traveled to India
and studied with Tantric teachers in the Tibetan monasteries and he brought their texts back to
Tibet to serve as the foundation of a new lineage. Now as I mentioned at the end of my lecture on
Buddhist Tantra this word Lama in the Tibetan tradition is of course quite common. It's the
equivalent of the Sanskrit word Guru which means a religious teacher, somebody who teaches you
something but also in a sense passes on a lineage of power and authority to you. The Guru or the
Lama is particularly important in Tantra because the secrecy and danger of the Tantric tradition
are always present and it's important to receive a Tantric teaching if you can from a teacher who
can tailor it effectively to you and help ward off some of the difficulties that might come if you
misinterpret Tantric teachings and apply them in a dangerous way. Lamas are so important in Tibetan
Buddhism that Tibetan Buddhism itself is sometimes referred to as Lamaism. I suspect this is a name
actually that you've encountered if you run across Tibetan Buddhism especially in some old-fashioned
travelogues or literary texts. People often talk about Tibetan Lamaism. We don't use that term very
much anymore but the word expresses an important truth about Tibetan Buddhism that it really does
rely on the Lama, the teaching and personality of the Lama. In fact you might say that in Tibetan
Buddhism the Lama is really not just the first person that you encounter in the teaching but really
stands in for you as if that Lama were the Buddha. I could say as if he were the Buddha but there
also are important female Lamas in Tibet too so let's just say as if he or she were the Buddha
sitting right in front of you. The Lama in some sense in Tantric teaching at least
is an embodiment of the Buddha's presence. Now Marpa's most important disciple and the person
who carried on his teaching in the most powerful way was a man by the name of Milarepa who lived
from 1040 to 1123 and is one of Tibet's most beloved saints. The biography of Milarepa is one
of the best ways I think to come to terms, become familiar with the life, the typical life of a
Tibetan saint especially the life of a Tibetan saint who is deeply respected and loved by the
tradition in general. Milarepa I love the story I must say and I read it with my students again
as we have often commented on in the course of these lectures because Milarepa began as a reluctant
student so we can all relate to him I think especially in the early phases of his career.
He starts out as a rather weak-willed and sort of not very well organized young man. Of course
none of us know any people like that but Milarepa at least started out as a disorganized weak-willed
and somewhat malleable young person and his mother at least in the very beginning of the story is
the person who really puts fire in his belly. It turns out that Milarepa's father died when he
was a young man and relatives of Milarepa stole the family's property and Milarepa's mother was
deeply angered by this and wanted to seek revenge against the relatives so she took this malleable
young man and she sent him off to study with one of the black magicians in Tibet and learned the
black arts so that he could wreak revenge on these relatives. He learned how to use the mantras,
the chance that would help him bring call-down hailstorms on the relatives' fields and even
kill some of them through natural phenomena like hailstorms. He did this, worked, his mother was
pretty satisfied but Milarepa got a little worried by this because he realized that what he was doing
was creating enormously bad karma and unless he could find some way to remove this karma, this
stain from his personality that he would end up in one of the lowest Buddhist hells so he began
to wonder himself about where he could find a teacher that would help him achieve enlightenment
in this life and remove the weight of this guilt. He studied with a couple of different teachers
and it didn't work all that well for him and he finally was advised to go and find a man by
the name of Marpa who would give him the teaching that he needed so he went off to look for Marpa
in the place where Marpa lived. I must say that the traditional account of that first meeting
between Milarepa and Marpa is one of the most exquisite little descriptions of an initial
encounter between a teacher and a student that I'm aware of anywhere in the Tibetan tradition.
I'll read you just a piece of it. At the side of the road, Milarepa saw a tall and corpulent
monk with large eyes and an awesome look plowing a field. I had scarcely seen him,
he said, when I was filled with unutterable joy and inconceivable bliss. Stunned for a moment by
this vision, I remained motionless. Then I said, Master, I've heard that the learned Marpa the
translator, personal disciple of the glorious Naropa, dwells in this region. Where is his house?
For a long time he looked me head to foot, looked me up and down. Then he said, who are you?
Who are you? Who is asking me this question? I replied, I am a great sinner and I come from
the upper Tsang. Marpa is so renowned that I have come to beg for his teaching. Very well,
I shall arrange for you to meet Marpa, meanwhile, plow the field. He took from the ground a jar of
beer which he had hidden under his hat and he gave it to me. The beer was refreshing and very good.
Work hard, he said, and he went away. Now, we spend a little time in my classes when we talk
about the Milarepa story trying to decide which kind of beer sat under the hat in this Tibetan
field. I'm not sure we can really identify with anything that sits on the supermarket shelf today.
It obviously was Chang, that barley beer that they use in Tibet. And I imagine on a hot day on the
Tibetan Plateau plowing a barley field that some of those old barley beer would taste pretty good.
But what really strikes me most about this is not so much the image of the beer, but that sweating
monk. I just said a minute ago that the Lama, in a way, is the Buddha for a disciple in the
Tantric tradition in Tibet. So this is an image of the Buddha. You're walking down a dusty Tibetan
road. There's a fat old guy, a tall and corpulent monk sweating in the sun plowing a field. And
who is he for Milarepa? He is the embodiment of the Buddha himself. It's a really extraordinary
image. And it shows you something, I think, about the down to earth and pragmatic quality of the
Tantric tradition. It can be embodied in a figure as common, as accessible as this.
Anyway, the story goes on from this. This is just the beginning. Milarepa and Marpa have a
difficult relationship. Marpa really puts Milarepa through intense trials. He orders him to build a
tower out of stones, and he tells him to tear it down. This goes on several times, and Milarepa
becomes in a state of almost complete despair. At one point, he tries to run away, and he realizes
that running away from Marpa itself isn't going to solve the problem. And finally, he comes back
in tears and begs for Marpa's forgiveness and for his teaching. Marpa finally gives that to him
in an experience of initiation that I can read you also a piece of to indicate what a Tantric
initiation is like in Tibet, especially in this early period. When my clothes had been changed
to a monk's robe, the lama said, your name is now Mila Vajra, banner of victory. And he bound me
by the layman's vow and gave me the bodhisattva precepts. Through meditation, he consecrated the
wine of inner offering in the skull cup of liberation. We all saw the wine bubbling with the
light of the five colors. Marpa made an offering to his lama and to his own personal deity,
and then he drank, and he handed me the cup of wine, and I drained it. And then the lama said,
this is a good omen. A mere taste of my wine of inner offering is in itself superior to receiving
the complete initiation of any other lineage. And then he went on to initiate him into the mandala
of a particular Tantric deity, and then recite the text to him that gave the account of that
of the practice of that of that mandala. And then he went on to say how he had received dreams and
visions of Milarepa that foretold his passing on of this important lineage. One of the most poignant
moments in the life of Milarepa, and one of the ones that I'm most fond of talking about with my
students came after he studied with Marpa and left to carry on his meditation by himself.
He went off not to a cave to meditate, not into solitude, but he went back to his home
to visit with his mother. The relationship between Buddhist monks and their mothers often
is quite important in these traditions. Unfortunately, his mother had died and the house
had fallen into ruin, but Milarepa used it instead simply as a meditation on impermanence.
Let me read you an account of this episode. It's quite touching, I must say, it's really quite
poignant. I entered the main room, the ruins of the hearth mingling with dirt formed a heap
where the weeds grew and flourished. There were many bleached and crumbled bones. I realized that
these were the bones of my mother at the memory of her I choked with emotion. Unifying my consciousness
with that of my mother and with the enlightened mind of all of the Lamas in the Kagu lineage,
I seated myself down on my mother's bones and meditated with a pure awareness without being
distracted even for a moment in body, speech, or mind. Very powerful image of a tantric practice,
you might say. I don't remember seeing anything like this in earlier Buddhism. Simply sitting down
on the bones of his mother, uniting his consciousness with hers and using it as an occasion, not just
really to come to terms with her and to touch her presence and to feel the significance of her
life in his, but also to perceive directly in a physical way the reality of impermanence.
Milarepa went on from this experience, of course, to become a great ascetic and a great meditator
and the founder of an important lineage. But you can see from some of these stories, I think,
why the model of Milarepa's life has been so touching for Tibetans and has really typified for
them the life of a Tibetan sage. Now, there are two other schools that are worth mentioning. We
need to say something about to complete our discussion of the four schools of Tibetan Buddhism.
One of these is the Sakya school that emerged in the 11th century under the leadership of a
lama named Drogmi. Drogmi was the teacher of Kunchok Geltsen, who in 1073 founded a monastery
at Sakya in a place that gave the school its name. This school played an important role in
negotiations between the Tibetans and the Mongols who burst out of Mongolia in the 13th century and
dominated, devastated, you might say, most of Asia. Eventually, interestingly enough, the Mongols
converted to Tibetan Buddhism and became important protectors of Tibetan Buddhism, not just in
Tibet, but also in other parts of Asia. Now, the 13th century, when the Mongols first appeared,
was a crucial century in Tibet for a couple of reasons. First of all, it gave rise to this
incipient political alliance between Tibetan monks and Mongol princes. This became an important
theme and later Tibetan history. But it also was a time, the first century really, after the death
of Indian Buddhism. Indian Buddhism ended around the year 1200. So in this century, the Tibetans
really had to come of age as religious people and had to begin to fend for themselves. So you might
say that the 13th century really marks, in some respects, the beginning of a truly independent
Tibetan religious tradition. Today, the old alliance between the Tibetan Lamas and the Mongols
really is a difficult thing in Tibetan history because it's translated in the contemporary world
into this troubling relationship with the Chinese regime. China has always viewed itself
at least in recent centuries as being the heirs of the Mongols and Chinese political leaders
visualized Tibet as a part of the larger Chinese empire. Now, the fourth school that I want to
mention just briefly before we bring this lecture to an end is the Ghe Luuk or Virtuous Wei School,
also known quite commonly in the literature as the Yellow Hats. This emerged in the 14th century
under the leadership of the scholar Tsongkhapa, a great scholar and one whose works I have often
used especially to try to understand the relationship of Indian philosophical schools. Tsongkhapa followed
the example of the Indian scholar Atisha and he tried to establish a pure form of Indian monastic
practice. This involved, in his case, an intense effort to try to codify not only the Tibetan
approach to Buddhist philosophy but to the stages of tantric practice. So, Tsongkhapa is one of the
great systematizers really of the Tibetan tradition. He wrote extensive, great enormous, great corpus of
writings not just on what's known as the sutra tradition, the tradition of Mahayana philosophy,
but also the tradition of tantra. Tsongkhapa founded several major monasteries in central
Tibet, two right near Hlasa and one a short distance away from Hlasa that was his home
monastery, a monastery called Ganden, a name that means simply the pleasurable, like the name for
the heaven where the bodhisattva Maitreya resides. These have been some of the most influential
religious institutions in the history of Tibet and have been actively restored in recent years
when I was in Hlasa just a couple of years ago. I had a chance to visit some of these monasteries
and to understand, to appreciate the reverence that Tibetan people have had historically for Tsongkhapa.
In fact, at Ganden, one of the most intriguing things to do when you visit the monastery is to
do a circumambulation route around the monastery. It's not an easy place to get to. It's quite
far up a long mountain road, but pilgrims come from all over Tibet to walk in the footsteps
of Tsongkhapa around this monastery and try to discern his presence in fingerprints and
footprints in the rock. So Tsongkhapa, the founder of this lineage, is revered not just by scholars
and monks, but also by common people as a great saint. After the death of Tsongkhapa, the leadership
of the Gailuk school passed to the lineage of the Dalai Lama. The Dalai Lama will be the topic
of our next lecture.
