Lecture 20, The Classical Period of Chinese Buddhism
In the last lecture, we talked about the challenges and opportunities faced by the first few generations
of Buddhist teachers in China. As the Han dynasty declined and as Chinese people began to grope around
in that intellectual and religious world, very difficult one actually, and began to look for new ideas
that they could use to deal with the difficulties in their lives and the changed circumstances in China as a whole.
Now eventually, in a process that lasted a few centuries really, Buddhism was no longer perceived by the Chinese
It became a full part of Chinese civilization and began to influence China as deeply as the Confucian and Daoist traditions had before.
This process was really pretty complicated and it was split up in China into two separate regions.
In the northern part of China, China came under the influence of a lot of barbarian kings who really didn't know very much
about Chinese civilization and there was a great deal of turmoil in Chinese society.
Some of these kings found Buddhism an attractive and appealing religious tradition precisely because it gave them a set of values
that were not particularly located or associated with any particular Chinese social group or political entity,
but also could appeal in some way to the loyalties of their Chinese subjects.
Many of the peasants who had been oppressed for many centuries found in Buddhism an appealing way to imagine that there might be some salvation
beyond this world and Chinese intellectuals found in that interesting relationship between Buddhism and Daoism,
a way for them to explore intellectually, a model, an ideal in which they could escape from some of the suffering in this world,
but also do it in a way that responded to some of the traditional concerns and interests of Chinese life.
So eventually Buddhism was no longer treated as this odd foreign import from India,
but something that really could respond in an indigenous and natural way to the concerns of Chinese life.
In his account of Buddhism during the Tang dynasty, Arthur Wright said,
by the eighth century Buddhism was fully and triumphantly established throughout China.
Its cannons were revered, its spiritual truths unquestioned.
It marked and influenced the lives of the humble and the great,
and affected every community, large and small, in the empire of the Tang.
And this happened in a period in Chinese history known as the Tang dynasty, of course, lasted from 618 to 907,
and corresponds really to, I would say, the high point, the apogee of the development and influence of Buddhism in Chinese civilization.
This lecture will attempt to convey the richness and complexity of Tang dynasty Buddhism by focusing on three separate areas of Buddhist life.
First of all, the schools of Chinese Buddhist philosophy, picking up those Indian traditions that we've talked about before
and developing them in very different ways.
This is, as a second topic, devotion to the celestial bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara,
who is known in China as Guanyin, and also devotion to the celestial Buddha Amitabha,
figures that we've seen in India, but take on a distinctive character in Chinese Buddhism.
And finally, Buddhist influence on Chinese literature,
and it's possible for us actually to get quite an attractive and accessible understanding of the relationship between Buddhist and Taoist values in China.
So, let's start with the first category, the Chinese Buddhist schools, Buddhist philosophical schools.
The Tang dynasty saw the emergence of several indigenous Chinese styles of Buddhist philosophy.
One of the earliest and most influential of these was named Tien Tai, or Heavenly Terrace, after the mountain where the school was founded.
Zhou Yi, who lived from 531 to 597 and was the founder of this school, was concerned about the confusing diversity of Buddhist doctrines.
As you might well imagine, you know, here you're sitting in China in the 500s, and somewhere out of Central Asia comes a U-Haul full of Chinese Buddhist literature,
and it simply gets dumped in your driveway, and your job is to try to sort out some of the varieties in this incredible tradition.
One sutra is giving you an image of ultimate reality that looks like one kind of thing, and another sutra tells you something else.
And your job is to try to bring some kind of unity and consistency to this incredibly diverse tradition.
Zhou Yi grasped this challenge and really tried to do something serious with it.
To resolve the apparent contradictions, he developed a system of classification,
associating different teachings with different audiences in different periods in the Buddha's life.
So he was saying, essentially, that the Buddha taught one set of teachings to this group,
who were there with him at a certain phase in his life, and then he moved on to other teachings.
And then the question came up, of course, which was the best?
What was the final teaching that really represented the teaching of the Buddha, and could be used to interpret all of the rest?
Zhou Yi thought that he found the most definitive and inclusive doctrine in all the Buddha's teaching,
in the text that we have already looked at, that's called the Lotus Sutra.
Now, you remember that this is the sutra that gave us that classic parable of the burning house.
It showed how the Mahayana teaching was, as it were, the final teaching of the Buddha,
presented to his disciples after they had been taught in a skillful way to enter the Buddha's path by pursuing other vehicles.
The story was that a father saw a bunch of his children in a burning house,
and he tried to get the kids out, and they refused to come,
so he offered them a series of different so-called vehicles, carts, that they could play with when they came out of the house.
And when they got out of the house, he didn't actually give them a whole bunch of different vehicles.
He gave them only one vehicle, which was the vehicle of the Mahayana, the Great Vehicle.
That was understood in this text as being the definitive teaching of the Buddha,
and it was the one that Jayee used to interpret all of the other teachings that were present
in this great U-Haul load of texts that had been dumped in his backyard in China.
Now, Jayee developed a particular conceptual approach to the doctrine of emptiness
that we haven't seen before, at least in quite this way.
It's really an interesting one, and it had a tremendous impact on the rest of East Asian civilization.
He said that emptiness was to be expressed in the perfect harmony of three levels of truth.
I'll tell you what these three levels are.
The first one is really the truth of emptiness,
that all phenomena, all dharmas, are empty of any intrinsic identity.
It's a classic statement of the doctrine of emptiness in the form that we've seen before
in our discussion of Indian Buddhism.
The second truth is that all phenomena exist dependently.
This is called the temporary truth.
And then there is the third truth that's called the truth of the mean,
that's the truth that all phenomena are both empty and dependent simultaneously.
So what he's done here, we think back to the discussion we've had of Buddhist philosophy earlier,
is to take the ultimate truth and the conventional truth, discuss them separately.
In this case, he's talked about ultimate truth first and then conventional truth,
and then insist that there is a final truth, the truth of the mean or the truth of the middle way
that involves the mapping of one of these truths onto another.
So what he often does then in his own teaching is to start you out with some kind of a statement of ultimate reality,
some statement of emptiness, and then there's some discussion of conventional experience.
And then what he does is to try to map the conventional experience and the ultimate experience together
into the experience of the mean.
This is an abstract concept, and it's hard really to imagine exactly what the influence of this is going to be,
but it had tremendous effect aesthetically on the way the Chinese and the Japanese expressed Buddhist insight,
especially in their verse.
I'll say something more about that in a minute.
Jerry also developed a doctrine of 3,000 worlds imminent in an instant of thought.
This idea too, you can imagine, is coming from the Indian tradition.
It's not that far removed from some of the things that we saw in the Indian sutras,
but how Taoist it feels, you know, to say that what you've got here is all of the cosmos present right now
in a single moment of thought.
You can see the movement of Jerry's mind.
It's very down to earth.
It's very pragmatic, and it brings the abstractions of Buddhist philosophy
right down into a single moment of experience,
and that too, of course, had tremendous aesthetic impact in Chinese Buddhist literature.
I'll say more about that too when we talk about the literary expression of these ideals.
Now, there's a second Buddhist school that also is worth talking about
when we catalog for ourselves the philosophical schools of Buddhism in China.
It's called the Huayin, or the Flower Garland School.
It was founded by a figure named Fatsang, who lived from 643 to 712.
You can see his dates also correspond to the dates of the Tang dynasty.
The name of this school came from a corpus of Indian Mahayana sutras
known as the Ovatosaka, or the Flower Garland Sutras.
So it too was based on Indian texts, but not on the Lotus Sutra,
now on another body of Indian sutras.
These sutras convey a very positive image of emptiness
as the mutual interpenetration of all phenomena.
So like Jury's teaching about emptiness,
the teaching of the Huayin had to do with the interpenetration
and the positive merging of reality in conventional experience.
The doctrine of this school is sometimes called,
at least by graduate students in Buddhism,
sometimes called the Three Musketeers philosophy,
because it pictures the cosmos as all in one and one in all.
I really don't know how many people even remember that old phrase
about the Three Musketeers, but it kind of resonates from my childhood.
The old Indian example of this doctrine is the image of Indra's net,
that work of jewels in which each jewel reflects the light
from every other jewel in the net.
So if you want to perceive all of reality, all of reality,
all you've got to do is perceive just one single instant
in the flow of existence, and reflected in that will be all of reality.
It's a very powerful image, again, of the interpenetration of all of reality.
It has strong philosophical significance, strong meditative significance,
and also strong aesthetic significance in the literature.
Another school that I suspect would be more familiar to many of you
is a school known as the Chan, or meditation school,
a school that gave a very distinctive Chinese interpretation
to the practice of meditation.
Now the Chan school is the school that eventually became Zen in Japan.
Zen is, of course, a very familiar phenomenon to many of us today in America.
It permeates American culture in all sorts of ways.
You know about the Zen of flower arranging.
You probably also know about the Zen of tennis and the Zen of the stock market.
All of this comes in one way or another out of the Chan tradition in China.
Now it's sometimes said that the word Zen is a Japanese mispronunciation
of a Chinese mispronunciation of a Sanskrit word that means something like meditation.
And that's sort of true.
Chan comes from a Pali word djana that's related to the Sanskrit word djana
that we have encountered, I'm not sure you would remember this,
but we encountered it in the name of the meditation Buddhas
in a lecture on Tantric Buddhism.
A meditation Buddha was a dhyani Buddha, a meditation Buddha.
So Chan has to do with dhyana, with meditation,
and it is the great meditation school of China.
It's traced in China to the career of a legendary Indian saint
whose name is Bodhidharma who flourished, we think,
between 460 and 534, so his life came a little bit before the Tang dynasty.
He has represented a lot in Buddhist art,
and I've brought with me here to show you a very typical image of Bodhidharma
in the Japanese tradition.
You can see he's got a little bit of a scowl on his face.
He always in one way or another looks like kind of a hairy guy
because the Chinese think that westerners from India
and also other places in the West have a little bit more hair on their body
than the Chinese themselves, picture would be entirely attractive.
So he's got a scowl on his face, he's got a funny look in his eye,
and he has about two days growth of beard on his chin,
and he also, maybe a little bit more remarkably, has no arms and no feet.
That's a bit more significant.
The story of Bodhidharma is that he sat down in meditation facing a wall
for ten years until his arms and his legs fell off.
And that's why he's depicted in Japanese and Chinese art as this person
so stably located on the ground, almost like an old Joe Paluka figure
who can be knocked down but will always stand himself up.
This is Bodhidharma, the founder of the Chan tradition in China.
Now this tradition that came from Bodhidharma began to take on a Chinese character
in the hands of Hong Chen who lived from 601 to 674
and particularly in the hands of his two major disciples
known as Shenzhou who lived from about 605 to 706
and Huyneng from 638 to 713.
Now these two disciples, as it turns out,
at least according to Chan tradition, clashed with one another
and developed radically different views of the Dharma.
The story of their clash is expressed in a really important Chan text
known as the platform sutra, the sixth patriarch.
The sixth patriarch is Huyneng himself.
The story goes something like this.
Huyneng is a barbarian from an outlying region in China
and decides that he'd like to pursue the path to Nirvana.
He'd like to achieve enlightenment
and he hears about this great Chan meditation master
and decides to go study with him.
It makes the journey to Hong Chen's monastery
and presents himself for teaching
and Hong Chen says to him,
Who are you?
Why should I teach the Dharma to a barbarian like you?
And Huyneng, already a fairly assertive young man,
it seems there is no north and south in the Buddha nature.
Why shouldn't I be taught the Dharma?
So the master sends him outside
and tells him to do menial labor.
He goes out and he pounds rice with the rest of the monks
and works as a menial assistant in the monastery.
And then the time comes when the master stages a competition
to decide who's going to be his chief disciple,
who's really going to receive his transmission.
In the monastery at this time there is a man named Shen Xu
who is sort of the A student in the class.
He's the favored disciple and the one who would be the natural successor
to the old master.
The competition takes this form.
He asks everyone in the monastery to write a little verse
that expresses their understanding of enlightenment.
And Shen Xu being the favored disciple,
the A student in the class,
pins his own verse on the bulletin board
and expresses enlightenment like this.
The body is the tree of perfect wisdom.
The mind is the stand of a bright mirror.
At all times, diligently wipe it.
Do not allow it to become dusty.
Now, if you take a look at this, if you listen to it carefully,
you can hear in these words an echo of that old Yogachara vision
of the mind that we talked about in our discussion of Buddhist philosophy.
The mind here is like a mirror.
You also could say, I suppose, that it's like an ocean or a jewel.
And it's been covered with dust.
That's the experience of samsara
and the experience of all of conceptual thought
in our ordinary vision of life.
What you do in meditation, what you do in Chan,
is to try to wipe that mind clean
so that all of those conceptual distinctions and distractions
are simply eliminated.
It takes a long time.
It's a gradual process, but eventually,
the mind becomes clear and you become enlightened.
That's nice.
It's perfectly good Buddhism.
You can also slice through all of that
if you really make a radical application
of the doctrine of emptiness.
That's what Huaynong did in his response to Shenzhou's verse.
He put his own verse on the wall.
This is what it says.
Fundamentally, perfect wisdom has no tree,
nor has the bright mirror any stand.
Buddha nature is forever clear and pure.
Where is there any dust?
It's simply a strong piece of Dharma combat.
You might say it tops Shenzhou's verse
and makes a radical application of the doctrine of non-duality.
The story, of course, in the platform sutra of the Sixth Patriarch,
which is Huaynong's story,
is that the master called Huaynong into his room
and secret that night
and passed the mantle of his authority onto Huaynong
and then said that he had to leave the monastery
to establish his own tradition.
And out of this came a split in this end tradition
between two styles.
I can also say the Chan tradition.
That's probably more accurate to say here
when we're speaking about this tradition in China.
The split was between a sudden school,
a teaching of sudden enlightenment.
That was Huaynong's school
and a teaching of gradual enlightenment,
the teaching of Shenzhou.
This split continues to this day
and is an important part of the meditative tradition in China.
Now you can see from this story
that the Chan tradition's distrust of words,
its love of paradox and its emphasis
on direct person-to-person transmission of the teaching
has a lot to do with Taoism.
It reflects this Taoist influence
on the Buddhist tradition in China.
So Chan is probably the best place for us
to see the fruition of that process
that we talked about last time in the last lecture,
Taoist values insinuating themselves
into the Buddhist imagination
and really transforming it from within.
Now, I said at the beginning of this lecture
that we'd talk about Buddhist philosophy in China
but we'd also talk about some other things,
the devotional tradition
and also the influence of Buddhist values
on Chinese literature.
Let's turn to those two topics.
The devotional traditions that played
such an important part in Indian Buddhism
and also in Tibet
had great influence during the Tang dynasty in China as well.
One of these traditions is called the Qing Tu,
or Pure Land School.
It was popular not only among the common people
but also interestingly enough among the elite.
For peasants and villagers,
the promise of salvation in Amitabha's land
held out a hope for them
of some kind of salvation in a future life.
And life is always difficult for peasants in China
in even the most prosperous time.
Amitabha's vision, or the vision of Amitabha's Pure Land,
was an image of some kind of otherworldly salvation
that had tremendous amount of appeal to many people in China.
For the elite, interestingly enough,
it also offered a type of contemplation
that was very different from the austere practice of Chan
in which you really tried to empty the mind of images
and empty the mind of concepts.
You can see the difference in this meditation
in the words of a practitioner of the Pure Land School
by the name of Tao Chou, who died in the year 645.
He said,
suppose a man in an empty and distant place
encounters a bandit who, drawing his sword,
comes forcefully and directly to kill him.
This man runs straight on, looking ahead,
and tries to leap across a river to get away from the bandit.
So also is the practitioner of Pure Land
Buddhism.
When he contemplates Amitabha Buddha,
he is like the man contemplating the crossing of this river.
The thought is continuous.
No other thought mingles with it.
It's an interesting little spin on Buddhist contemplation.
We've talked before about chanting the name of Amitabha Buddha
in order to be saved in Amitabha's Pure Land,
but we haven't ever talked about the quality of the contemplation itself.
In what way do you need to think about Amitabha Buddha
in order to make this crossing of the ocean of samsara?
Here Tao Chou says that you have to, as it were, contemplate
the immediacy of Amitabha's salvation in a single, intense, perfectly focused thought.
So it becomes a kind of contemplative practice
that's very similar to the contemplative practice of Chan.
You try to focus in some way on just Amitabha,
so that Amitabha fills your imagination and you're assured in some way
of then making the transition into that other world
that's represented by the Pure Land of this Buddha.
So Pure Land Buddhism becomes a contemplative tradition in its own right
in a way that will be interesting for us to explore
when we talk about the Pure Land tradition in Japan.
And finally, for many people, the cult of bodhisattvas like Avalokiteshvara
or Guanyin, as Avalokiteshvara is known in China,
promised not just rebirth in another world,
but direct assistance with the concerns of this life.
As I think I mentioned earlier in my lectures on the Mahayana tradition,
Avalokiteshvara or Guanyin came to be pictured
as a compassionate mother in China, often holding a child in her arms.
And Guanyin is worshipped in China historically and also in China today
as really a protector of the family and a deity
who is particularly inclined to grant the gift of children.
Now we talked about that before, but when we discussed that
in our discussion of Mahayana Buddhism,
we hadn't yet seen how important family life was in China.
The family really is the center of Chinese values in many respects.
So to have a deity like this, a Mahayana deity like Avalokiteshvara
or Guanyin who can bring prosperity to the family
is a powerful, attractive feature in the Buddhist tradition.
Now I also mentioned at the beginning of this lecture
that we should take a look at the role of Buddhism in Chinese literature.
I'd like to conclude by commenting on a couple of Buddhist poems.
The first of these is written by a poet who is known simply as Cold Mountain.
Cold Mountain is his name, it's the place where he lives,
and it also is his primary symbol of enlightenment.
Let me read one of his verses, and you as you listen to it
should think a little bit about whether this is Buddhist or Taoist
or whether it's some subtle combination of those two traditions
where it's difficult any longer to get the two traditions apart.
As for me, I delight in the everyday way
amongst mist-wrapped vines and rocky caves.
Here in the wilderness I am completely free
with my friends the white clouds idling forever.
They're roads but they do not reach the world.
Since I am mindless, who can rouse my thoughts?
On a bed of stone I sit alone in the night
while the round moon climbs up Cold Mountain.
I love this poem, I must say.
This is one of the things that really makes the Buddhist tradition appealing to me
and it always takes my mind, even in the most complex and confusing situation,
right straight to the top of some rocky peak in the Adirondacks
where I'm wrapped in mist and contemplate the flow of the mountains through the valleys.
That's the image we have of Cold Mountain, he's a mountain ascetic,
he lives in the mountains and he experiences the freedom of the wilderness.
Now, really, what we're talking about here is the classic Chinese image of a Daoist sage,
Daoist ascetic who withdraws from society to achieve union with nature
out there in the wilderness in the natural world.
But you can also see that Buddhist values are very powerfully expressed in this verse as well.
When he talks about the way, it's the Buddha way.
It's the everyday way that leads you to the experience of enlightenment.
The wilderness and the experience of freedom that comes in the wilderness,
that's the old experience of Buddhist renunciation when the Buddha left the palace
and went off to wander the forest roads with a band of ascetics.
And then at the very end, when he talks about the round moon climbing up Cold Mountain,
the cold moon is a classic Indian symbol of the Buddha that cools the passions of life in this world.
And the Cold Mountain we've talked about, of course, is this mountain at the center of the cosmos
that symbolizes the experience of enlightenment in the tantric tradition.
So all of these images in here, or many of them, are powerfully resonant Buddhist images
as well as images that would work just as well in the Daoist tradition.
And then let me read one more verse that I think gives a classic example
of the way Jue Yi's philosophy of the three levels of truth expressed itself in literary form.
This is a verse by the Buddhist poet Wang Wei.
Empty hills, no one in sight.
Only the sound of someone talking.
Late sunlight enters the deep wood, shining over the green moss again.
This is a verse that again takes me to the Adirondacks, walking up an Adirondack trail
and hearing the chattering of a bunch of Boy Scouts coming along the trail behind you.
In some ways it's a very simple expression of Buddhist values,
but you can also see in it a very subtle mapping of Jue Yi's vision of the world.
Empty hills, no one in sight.
That's ultimate truth experienced in the wilderness.
Only the sound of someone talking.
That's conventional experience, chatter, jabber, the jabbering of all sorts of words.
And then finally an image at the end of the union between these two,
the ultimate reality and conventional reality in the experience of sunlight shining into the depths of the wood.
What is the wood symbolically in Buddhist literature?
It's samsara. It's the forest of samsara.
And what is the sunlight that floods through this forest?
It's really the face of a Buddha like Amitabha.
It's the sunlight of the Buddha's wisdom that illuminates us in this world.
Now, there is a lot more that can be said about the Buddhism of Tang China,
but I hope you've gotten from this just a flavor of the sophistication and complexity of Buddhism
when it became a fully apart of Chinese civilization.
