In our last lecture, we talked about Honen, Shinran, and Nichiren, and the Buddhism of
the Kamakura period, and we talked about some of the distinctive historical features
of that time, that period in Japanese history. Before we move on to the last topic in our
discussion of Japanese Buddhism, I think we ought to pause for a moment and consider
how far we have come. It's really quite a distance from the serene, solitary figure
of Siddhartha Gautama, to the fiery devotion of Shinran, and to the passionate political
statements of Nichiren. I hope you're asking yourselves. I hope you asked yourselves after
the last lecture, and you asked yourselves, right now, do you think that the Buddhism
of Honen, Shinran, and Nichiren has changed so much from the tradition that we once studied
when we contemplated the life story of that serene Indian stage, has it changed so much
that it is no longer recognizable as Buddhism? It's just Buddhism anymore that we're talking
about now, or has the tradition evolved into something that we really can't connect to
that figure, Siddhartha Gautama? Some people would say that it has. Some Buddhists would
say that it has. Others would say that beneath the differences in doctrine, and the differences
in tone, lie some of the fundamental convictions of the Buddhist tradition that are simply
working themselves out in a new idiom. I must say, I'd put myself in that category.
I see the devotion of Honen, Shinran, and Nichiren as a continuation, a continuous struggle,
you might say, with that impulse toward liberation that was set in motion initially by the figure
of the historical Buddha. But either way, these new traditions challenge us to think
again about the significance of the Buddha's teaching, and about some of its possible implications.
They also prepare us to think in new ways about the historical and religious significance
of a tradition that's familiar, I think, to most of us, the tradition of Zen in Japan.
Like these other movements from the Kamakura period, Zen was a product of very specific
historical circumstances in Kamakura during a period of great military difficulty. Now
the Zen tradition, as we know it, traces its roots to the Chan tradition in China, and
through Chan to the meditative traditions of India. As I said, when we were talking about
Chan in the lecture on Chinese Buddhism, the word Zen is sometimes said to be a Japanese
mispronunciation of a Chinese mispronunciation of an Indian word that means something like
meditation, and this is true. The Indian word actually is Jhana, a word that can be translated
as concentration, or sometimes appears in the translation of Indian texts as trance. Jhana,
or dhyana in Sanskrit, corresponds to the mental concentration or the samadhi that plays such a
crucial role in the traditional Indian path to nirvana. Now to begin thinking about Zen, or to
begin experiencing it, because Zen is an experiential tradition, you could start with the most basic
form of Indian mental concentration. You could just sit still on a cushion or in a chair,
fold your hands gently in your lap, and concentrate on your breath. Just count your breath. Count to
ten, and when you get to ten, start again with one. And as you breathe, allow your thoughts to
dissipate and let the mind become calm. That's the foundation of Zen, and it's the foundation of
Buddhist tradition or Buddhist meditation more generally. The goal of this process, of course,
is to prepare for awakening in a very specific Mahayana sense, that is to achieve an awareness of
emptiness. Zen stresses that this awareness can't be achieved conceptually, and it can't be expressed
in words. You've got to get it directly in experience. It has to be achieved with your whole
being. And you can't just sit down and get it for yourself. It has to be transmitted to you from
teacher as if it were transmitted from a teacher to a student through a process of direct experiential
encounter. Now Zen as a historical movement in Japan took shape as a separate sect in the Kamakura
period under the influence of two forceful personalities. The first of these is Asai. Like
many of the Kamakura reformers, Asai, who lived from 1141 to 1215, began his training in the
Tendai school on Mount Hiei and Kyoto. After becoming disenchanted with Tendai practice,
he traveled to China to learn the traditional discipline of meditation. In China, he studied
Chan, and he returned to Japan in 1191 as a full-fledged master of what's called in Japanese
the Rinzai school of Zen. A Rinzai is best known, especially these days, for a practice
known as koan practice. It's used to achieve an experience of sudden awakening.
A koan is a riddle that's used, especially in an encounter between a master and a student,
to stop the mind in its tracks and precipitate some kind of breakthrough into a direct experiential
awareness of emptiness. Typical koans are often talked about and are quite familiar to many of
us. One is the question, does a dog have Buddha nature? Another, what's the sound of one hand
clapping? And some old manuals, you can actually look these questions up and you can find
standard answers to them. But of course, the standard answer has to be something that you
discover for yourself. In my courses on Buddhism at BU, we often look at a little sequence of
video of an encounter between a student and a master in one of the training monasteries in Japan,
where the master asks the student, the koan, does a dog have Buddha nature? And the student
situates himself firmly on his cushion and gives some version of the standard answer,
which is the Japanese word for nothingness or emptiness. And it sounds a little bit like this.
And the master clears his throat and he says to the student, put your attention in the pit of
your stomach and speak from emptiness with your whole being. And then he rings his little bell
and the student gets up and leaves the room. Now, whether he got it right when he said
who is another question, and something I suppose that we can only understand for ourselves when we
encounter his end master face to face, you can get a sense of what that encounter feels like.
It's a way of taking a question and forcing you to understand something experientially
that breaks through your ordinary conceptual awareness of things. The use of koans
to precipitate this kind of change is distinctive to the Rinzai tradition.
Now, Asai found that Kyoto was hostile to his new teaching. It was sectarian in its own way,
like the teaching of Honen and Shinran and Nichiren. So he moved to the new center of political
power in Kamakura and began to preach Zen to the military warlords in Kamakura.
His stress on sturdy self-reliance and on fearlessness in the face of death
won him many disciples among the military classes in Japan. And it made Zen an important
component in the martial arts from that day to this. So Asai was one of the first to make that
direct connection between the practice of Zen meditation and the military discipline that was
necessary to thrive in the Kamakura period. The second important personality in the formation of
Zen in this time was a man named Dogen who lived from 1200 to 1253. He also began his career on
Mount Hiei and he followed Asai's footsteps to China. When Dogen returned from China, he established
a tradition that is known as the Soto School of Zen. Dogen thought that Kouan practice,
as Asai practiced it, put too much stress on achieving awakening as if it were different
from ordinary experience. And you can imagine how he might have felt about this if Asai had
his students going in and struggling with these Kouans to get some sudden awareness that was
completely transformative and different from their ordinary experience. That was, of course,
a significant matter, a significant discipline, but it also held up the enlightenment experience
as being something very different from ordinary experience. And that too was a kind of dualistic
thinking that you might criticize and you might want to abandon in your practice of Zen. Dogen
took this position and he insisted instead that the central practice in Zen should be Zazen or
simply sitting meditation as an end in itself, just to sit. Dogen also criticized the idea of a
degenerate age, arguing that all moments and points in space are equally reflective of emptiness.
And you can imagine why he would take this position as well. It makes sense if he's working
through the implications of that old Mahayana concept of emptiness. A classic expression
of his approach to emptiness is found in his statement called being time.
Know that in this way, he says, there are myriads of forms and hundreds of grasses
throughout the entire earth. And yet each grass and each form itself is the entire earth.
The study of this is the beginning of practice. When you are at this place,
there is just one grass and there is just one form. There is understanding of form and there
is no understanding of form, kind of thing that Nagarjuna would say. There is understanding of
grass and there is no understanding of grass. Since there is nothing but just this moment,
the being time is all the time there is. Grass being, form being are both time.
Each moment is all being the entire world. Reflect now whether any being or any world
is left out of the present moment. What a strong and traditional Mahayana critique of this
Kamakura notion of the degenerate age. Sure, we're living in tough times. Times may always be tough
for somebody, but what is it that really distinguishes this moment from any other moment
when it's viewed from the point of view of emptiness? Nothing. If you want to be awakened,
you have to perceive all of reality in this moment the same way you would perceive it at any other
time or in any other place. Now you can see here, obviously, I think that the echoes of this
teaching should be very strong in your ears. This is the Tientai teaching of Juhi,
the idea of the thousand worlds present in an instant of thought and it also is that old
Huayin doctrine of Indra's net, the image of the net made up of a multitude of jewels where
each individual jewel in the net reflects all other jewels in the net. Dogen is saying,
each blade of grass, each moment of time is the totality of reality. If you can become present
to that moment, you will see all of the cosmos and you'll become awakened. It's a strong Mahayana
teaching. One of Dogen's most powerful statements about Zen is the Genjo Koan or a text that's known
in English as actualizing the fundamental point. To study the Buddha way is to study the self.
To study the self is to forget the self. To forget the self is to be actualized by myriad things.
When actualized by myriad things, your body and mind, as well as the bodies and minds of others,
drops away. No trace of realization remains and this no trace continues endlessly.
Enlightenment is like the moon reflected on the water. The moon does not get wet nor is the water
broken. Although its light is wide and great, the moon is reflected even in a puddle and inch wide.
The whole moon and the entire sky are reflected in dew drops on the grass or even in one drop of
water. Same concept, expressed in a kind of Zen philosophical poetry. Perceive one drop of dew
and you see a reflection of the entire cosmos. Now Asai and Dogen were the founders of, of course,
quite specific lineages in the Zen tradition in Japan and they continue today. It's possible
to go and visit many monasteries in Japan that practice quite faithfully. These traditions.
Kyoto has several major Rinzai monastic centers and Dogen's monastery is still an active place
and one that is well worth visiting. But they also helped infuse Japanese culture with a spirit of
Zen. Even for a lot of people who were not involved in their movements in a sectarian sense,
I've already mentioned the martial arts of course. I have an old student friend who worked with me
when I was at Harvard Divinity School who always used to joke with me and if we wanted to try to
find Buddhism in America, one of the best places to go would be simply to make a pilgrimage through
the martial arts academies, not just to the major cities, but all of the small towns and
hamlets throughout America where teenagers and young people were practicing, practicing the
martial arts. It's really through the martial arts that many people come to know this tradition
for the first time and then find their way into the practice of Zen in a more complex and technical
sense. But Zen also is found in other aspects of Japanese culture. When I was in Japan just
recently, my wife and I spent quite a bit of time in Kyoto studying the tradition of Zen gardens.
Many of these gardens I think are known somewhat mistakenly actually in a technical sense as
being Zen gardens. They often show images not simply of a shall we say a Zen contemplative
space, but images of a pure land that might be associated with the pure land tradition of Honen
or Shinran or some other mapping of the cosmos in a Buddhist way. But where they're most powerful
is when they, where they express the empty space that's the focus of Zen meditation.
One of the most famous of these is the garden at Ryoanji, a well-known Buddhist temple in Kyoto
that's often pictured in studies of the Japanese garden tradition. It's a large rectangular space
filled with white sand, fine white gravel, and in that space are 15 rocks very carefully placed
and around the space is a wall made of stucco that has in the stucco a certain mixture of clay
and oil so that the oil has bled out of the clay and looks like the background, the gold background
of a Chinese painting. In fact the garden in Ryoanji in some ways is a three-dimensional realization
of one of the one of those wonderful Chinese paintings of a landscape that shows mountains
emerging from clouds, shows the mountain image as an image of the assertive and positive aspect of
the movement of forces in the universe and the clouds as the passive aspect of reality that we
associate with the Taoist image of the interplay of opposites and a harmonious vision of the cosmos.
Ryoanji is a little bit like that. It's got stones sticking up through the gravel as if they were
mountaintops peeking up through the mist that covers the face of the earth. When I was there
in Japan looking in this place I talked to one of the monks and asked him how they use these
gardens as contemplative devices in their practices and one would of course be curious about this.
They're not really meant to represent the world but to be tools for meditation in one way or
another and his answer surprised me. He said that the first thing that they do in a monastery and
they do this for many years actually is simply to learn how to clean the monastery, to sweep the
floor and to polish it and especially to sweep the garden and to rake it. So one of the most
fundamental things that you do with a Japanese Zen garden is simply to maintain it in a certain
kind of fastidiously prescribed way so that each gesture that you perform, each move that you make
with the rake becomes a focal point of meditation. So your first encounter with this object is really
through work, through the discipline of labor. But then he said that there also are moments
in the flow of the day in a monastery when you're not doing carefully prescribed meditation but
simply have an opportunity to do Zazen on your own in a different setting and often at night,
especially under the light of a moon, it's wonderful to sit down on the edge of one of these gardens
and absorb yourself in a state of concentration where the garden itself expresses to you some of
the sense of quiet simplicity and stillness that is really the heart of Zen. I think for many of us
this visual representation of Zen is one of the most powerful. People don't always, of course,
sit down and practice Zen but they can relate to it in this visual way and the extraordinary icon
of the Zen experience of contemplation that's created by one of these landscape spaces.
Another important example of the influence of Zen values on Japanese culture is in the tradition of
Japanese poetry. I've always found that one of the most eloquent and expressive representatives
of this tradition is the poet Matsuo Bashou who lived from 1644 to 1694, one of the most famous
and respected poets in the Japanese tradition. One of his poems, I believe, may very well be familiar
to you. It's widely quoted when people talk about Japanese culture and some people say that if you
can understand what Bashou is getting at in this poem you can really put your heart on the,
put your finger on the heart of Japanese culture. Poem is pretty simple. Let me read it. Let me
intone it. Old pond, frog jumps in, sound of water. Now you know enough about Buddhism by now to begin
to interpret this poem. The place you would go, I suspect, and I bet many of you are already there
in your associations with aspects of the earlier tradition, is to the three levels of truth in
Jie's Tientai system in China. He said that there were three ways of looking at the world. One was
from the point of view of emptiness, the other was from a conventional point of view, and the third
was from the point of view of the truth of the mean, the combination of the ultimate and the
conventional. The first line, old pond, represents the truth of emptiness. It's the still, quiet pond
of the mind, that ancient pond that we touch in the heart of our meditation. What's the next
moment in the process? Out of the grass at the side of the pond comes a frog, plop, right in the
middle of the pond. That's a conventional event, something that happens in a moment and makes a
sound. It also is a natural event. It's an animal. It's not somebody drawing something on the surface
of the pond. It's simply a frog out of his own spontaneous nature going plop into the pond.
And then what results from this? A sound of water, simply a moment of perception. It's the
combination of the ultimate and the conventional. The implication of this verse is that if you can
perceive that sound of water, if you can become present to that single moment of perception,
then you can grasp in it, in that, like the drop of dew on the blade of grass, the totality
of experience. So it's a thousand worlds in an instant of thought, a thousand worlds in an
instant of experience. Now in this poem, it's nice to read it as a mapping of Jairi. I suppose you
can see a pretty good way that Jairi's philosophy comes down to earth in a pretty effective way.
But where the poem really comes alive for me, I must say, is when I think of Bashou himself as
being like the frog. Because we're looking at reality mapped on the page, sure, mapped through
the sound of my voice, perhaps, but it's still something out there that's distant from us. But
Bashou is like his endmaster. He's not in a technical sense, but he's functionally functioning
like his endmaster for us. And what he's trying to do is to put into the still pond of our consciousness
a sound that will crystallize some experience of awakening. So think of Bashou like a frog.
We are an old pond into the stillness of that pond, plops this frog, this guy Bashou,
make some sort of a sound. And the moment of perception that's generated by this
is the moment of awakening that Bashou is trying to seek. Now you get this same kind of intensity
in other verses of Bashou. I won't comment on them as extensively as I've commented on this,
but I'd like to read you a couple more because they really express in a beautiful way Bashou's
own vision of the Zen tradition. He wrote a book called The Narrow Road to the Deep North about
his travel experiences on a long pilgrimage journey up into the northern part of Japan.
Talked a little bit about some of the experiences that he had along the way, and then he often
distilled these experiences into these short three line verses. Here's one that expresses
again in a very explicit and powerful way the three-fold vision of the Tiantai.
In the silence of an old temple, a cicada's voice splits the rock. Pretty clear. The temple,
it's quiet, it's silent, it's timeless in a sense, and then there's this bzzt sound of a cicada that
splits, that slices through the air and splits the rock. What would be the rock? Rock of the
landscape, I suppose, but also something in the heart of the poet and in the heart of the listener.
Often Bashou's poems have a certain kind of emotional tone that's important in Japanese
literature as well. A tone of sadness, a tone of melancholy. You can feel that in another
of his famous poems from The Narrow Road to the Deep North. I'm awestruck, he says,
to hear a cricket singing in the cavity of an old helmet. Here he's gone to a battlefield
where old, long dead warriors are memorialized simply by the preservation of their helmet.
In the cavity of this helmet, like the dome of emptiness, sings a cricket and he is struck
with awe. So you can see here how Bashou works with the Zen aesthetic in a poetic way.
Now it's occurred to me as we talk about Zen that all of this is in the past, it's a tradition
that we observe historically in Japan, but one always wonders what would it be like if it's
brought into the classroom? What would it be like if we brought Zen into our experience right now?
I've often thought about that when I speak historically about this tradition to students
at Boston University. How does the experience of Zen somehow touch down on a student's life?
We don't practice Zen together, that wouldn't be considered, I suppose, appropriate in an
academic setting of a classroom. But one student once gave me a story that I must say spoke as
vividly to me about Zen experience in a student's life as anything that I've ever heard in the
Zen tradition. It's not a technical story and it wouldn't necessarily pass muster amongst the
serious historians of Zen, but it gets me in the heart and I want to finish my discussion of
Zen by telling it to you. I was talking about Zen as I was just speaking now one day and a student
came up to me and he said, Professor, I think I know something about Zen. I think I know something
about this and I said, yeah, tell me more. He said, well, I was once studying at a military academy
in New Mexico and there was a sergeant who was supposed to be a Zen teacher and I went to him
and I said, Sergeant, teach me about Zen and he looked me up and down and he said, well, I'll teach
you about Zen, but I want you to answer a question for me first. Come on over to the window. So he
took me over to the window and he pointed to three trees and he said, see those trees, what does the
middle tree mean? And I looked at the trees and I said, well, you know, it's kind of like an
architectural barrier and it separates the soccer field from the river and Sergeant said, get out
of here. Don't come back until you can tell me what it means. And he came back a week later and he
said, well, Sergeant, you know, I've been thinking about this and he said, I think it's kind of like
a symbol of organic creativity, you know, it puts its roots down in the soil and it gets water and
it's got its leaves up in the air. Sergeant said, get out of here. Don't come back until you can
tell me what it means. So he thought about it for a while and he became obsessed by this tree.
One day he was sitting in chapel right next to the tree and he just became so frustrated that he
couldn't deal with it anymore and he jumped up in the middle of the chapel service and he went
running out and he looked at the tree and he said, that tree doesn't mean anything. It doesn't mean a
damn thing. And he went back to the Sergeant and he said, Sergeant, that tree doesn't mean anything.
And the Sergeant said, okay, now I can teach you about sin.
Powerful tradition, direct experience, direct experience of emptiness, a direct experience
of ultimate reality.
