One was the last time that you were frustrated or even angry.
The potential for anger pervades modern social life.
Whether it's getting cut off in traffic, maybe you're coworkers or giving you grief
about something, or maybe even in your family.
People are frustrating you or they're making you angry.
Now we all get angry, but now think back to that last time that you experienced anger
and I want to ask, did you lash out at the other person with physical aggression?
Now my guess is that you didn't do that, but why not?
What came between you experiencing this aggressive urge and this outcome of not behaving aggressively?
What got in the middle?
Well I would argue that self-control is one thing that got in the middle.
Now although we get angry on a regular basis, we often live in a time that's the most peaceful
that we've ever known in the history of the planet.
Stephen Pinker in his book, The Better Angels of Our Nature talks about this.
Now when we understand why that is, well we can think of two components of self-control
that helps make that possible.
The first of which is monitoring.
Now remember, monitoring, keeping track of your thoughts, feelings and behaviors, that's
a core feature of self-control and the more that you're doing it, the better off you are.
Now how is our ability to monitor aggression and violence changed over the past couple
hundred years?
Well it's gotten a lot easier to do it.
Think of J. Edgar Hoover.
He was famous for a lot of different reasons, but one thing that he did was he made it a
lot easier to monitor people in terms of their criminal history.
He was very much a proponent of having a fingerprint registry to identify people who had violent
and criminal backgrounds.
But J. Edgar Hoover isn't where the change stopped.
If you look at the internet, it's made it a lot easier to keep track of people who have
committed crimes.
You can even look up whether your neighbor has a criminal history.
So monitoring is one thing that's helped us keep track of people who commit violent crimes,
but another thing that's changed that can also help us explain why we live in such a
peaceful society is that standards related to violence and aggression have also changed.
Now remember, a standard is simply a reference point, a point on which most people can agree
that certain things are desirable or appropriate and other things aren't.
Think of how this relates to aggression.
How have attitudes and beliefs about the appropriateness of aggression changed over the past couple
hundred years?
They've changed dramatically.
When you're reading the newspaper and you're looking at the obituaries, how often do you
really see that someone was killed in a duel?
Very very infrequently.
Forget the first Treasury Secretary of the United States, Alexander Hamilton, that's
how he died.
Now we have a lot more effective ways of resolving conflict.
And one reason for that is that as cultures progress, we develop standards in ways that
we can change our attitudes toward the appropriateness of violence.
Because we don't have to use violence to solve our conflicts, we can use other, more effective
ways.
Another way of understanding how standards have shifted is simply looking at corporal
punishment and how that has become less and less common in the United States' public
school system.
So currently, 31 states in the United States forbid the use of corporal punishment in the
public school setting.
But what's most interesting is when did that occur?
There was a clear shift in the standard as to when it became inappropriate to use corporal
punishment in public schools.
Because of the 31 states that currently forbid corporal punishment in public schools, 30
of them began to forbid corporal punishment after 1970.
So what we've seen are a couple different reasons why aggression has become less and
less common.
And these reasons again relate to self-control.
By making it easier to monitor violence and aggression, we become a less violent culture.
And by shifting our standards, these things that we use that guidance steer our behavior.
By talking about and thinking about aggression as something that we should not engage in
to solve our problems, what we've seen are decreases in aggression over time.
So again, what this shows us is the importance of self-control in everyday life and how it
can help us explain why people, even though they get angry on a regular basis, often times
refuse to act on those aggressive impulses and instead use self-control.
Now although we live in one of the most peaceful times in the history of the world, aggression
still occurs and we have to ask ourselves why does that happen?
Although monitoring has become easier and standards related to aggression have changed,
one thing that hasn't changed is our strength, the amount of energy that it takes to override
an aggressive impulse.
Now a couple of criminologists sought to understand what are some of the best predictors of criminal
behavior.
And what they did was they combed over hundreds of studies to formulate what they called a
general theory of crime.
Now all of their efforts paid off handsomely.
And at the end of the day, they identified two of what they called the best predictors
of criminal behavior.
The first is simply opportunity.
When people have more opportunities to engage in criminal behavior, they take advantage
of those opportunities.
But the second factor is of particular interest to us, self-control.
And they looked at all sorts of signs related to lapses in self-control as helping to understand
why people engage in criminal behavior.
Now one of these examples comes from burglaries.
Now we all have a stereotype in our head of what burglaries kind of look like.
We might see a white van that's been stolen, and there are burglars in the van, and they're
all wearing black, and they might have ski masks on.
And through a careful series of plans, they burglarize a house or an institution.
Now the reality is quite different.
Most burglaries are committed within a mile of the perpetrator's home.
So instead of heisting stolen goods using a stolen van, most people walk to the places
that they rob.
So it's an act of impulsivity instead of careful planning.
Criminal crime is another example of impulsivity at work.
One way they can look at this is think of factors that make people more impulsive, that
make people unable to control their impulses, and how that might play into their propensity
to engage in violent behavior.
Think of alcohol intoxication, for example.
Now one report from the US Department of Justice argued that 40% of violent crimes are committed
when people are under the influence, when people are intoxicated.
Again, what this shows is that when people are in a state where they can't control their
impulses very well, such as when they're intoxicated, they're a lot more likely to engage in violent
behavior.
Another way to look at this is when violent crimes are committed.
So our most violent crimes committed early in the day when people are full of energy
and can regulate themselves or toward the end of the day when people are fatigued and
worn out.
Well what the data suggests is that the majority of violent crimes are committed between 10
p.m. and 2 a.m.
Again, this is a time when people are often fatigued when they're unable to control their
impulses, again showing us a link, although it's a correlation, but a reliable link between
lapses in self-control and violent crime.
But what happens when you put these two things together?
Let's think of bars.
And bars are places where people have lots of fun, but they're oftentimes where people
get alcohol to drink, where people become intoxicated.
And we know that when people are intoxicated, they're a lot more likely to engage in violent
behavior.
But we can correlate that as well with how long the bars actually stay open.
And one recent study has shown that the longer that bars stay open, the more violent crimes
are committed.
Now although this is simply a correlation, an association between two different variables,
what it suggests is that not only by becoming intoxicated are you more likely to engage
in violent crime, but by being intoxicated at a time of day when you're mentally fatigued
it can prove extremely costly.
Now the researchers in charge of this wanted to quantify the financial costs associated
with this spike in violent crime when bars stay open late at night.
And what they showed was that bars in New York that stayed open after 1 a.m., it was
associated with an increase of costs associated with violence of $194 million.
Now that's not a trivial cost, and it also doesn't take into account all of the other
negative consequences that accompany violence.
When people feel frustrated or angry, do they need self-control energy in order to override
their urge to behave aggressively?
And this help us explain why some people have problems controlling their aggressive impulses,
and why some people even succumb to those impulses and engage in actual aggressive behavior.
To explore this possibility, a group of researchers conducted a simple experiment.
What they did was they invited some college students into a laboratory and they had them
sit down at a table and they told them that this experiment investigated taste testing.
The first thing that they were going to do was compose an essay.
That was about a topic that was important to them.
The experimenter collected the essay, left, came back, and this time the experimenter
had a plate of food that the experimenter sat in front of the participant.
Now for half of the participants, they sat in front of a food that was extremely delicious.
It was a doughnut.
The experimenter said, what I'd like for you to do is eat the doughnut and tell us what
you think about it, how sweet it is, and other sorts of things that will tell us what this
doughnut tastes like.
Next, the experimenter waited for the participant to begin to eat the doughnut.
And as soon as the participant lifted the doughnut up to take a bite, the experimenter
said, wait, do not eat the doughnut.
I made a mistake, I'm sorry.
Put the doughnut down, I'm going to leave, and I'm going to fix this so that we can go
and get on with the rest of this study.
But whatever you do, don't eat the doughnut.
Now the idea is that by sitting in front of this doughnut that you're not supposed to
eat, it takes a lot of self-control not to eat it.
Now it was so difficult, in fact, that for a couple of these participants, they ate
it anyway.
Now the other half of the participants, they sat in front of a piece of food that was less
tempting.
They sat in front of a radish.
So the idea is that for some of these participants, they had to exert a lot of self-control not
to eat this food that was in front of them, whereas other participants had to exert very
little self-control not to eat the food that was in front of them.
Next what the experimenter did was the experimenter came back and gave them some feedback about
their essay that was ostensibly from another person.
Now in reality, this other person worked for the experimenter.
It was a confederate.
And the feedback was extremely negative.
The reason the feedback was negative is the experimenters wanted to evoke a sense of frustration
in participants, and it was effective.
But the next thing that the experimenters did was they gave participants an opportunity
to lash out at this person who had just frustrated them.
How do they do this?
On this study, what they did was they gave participants a plate full of chips and a bottle
of hot sauce.
And they told them that they could dump as much of this hot sauce on the chips as they
wanted to.
And this plate of food was going to go to the person who had just frustrated them.
But the key is that this partner that they had, who had just insulted them, hated spicy
foods.
So the more hot sauce that participants put onto these chips, the more aggressively they
were behaving.
What they found is that participants who had been depleted of their mental energy, who
had exerted a lot of mental effort to not eat that tempting doughnut, they behaved a
lot more aggressively when they were provoked.
Now a follow-up study replicated those results of when people are depleted of their self-control
energy that they're more likely to lash out at others.
But what this follow-up study also did was it took into account people's levels of
self-control that they brought with them into the laboratory.
Their general dispositions and abilities to control their impulses.
And what the researchers found is that by understanding the traits that people bring
with them to situations, people's general ability to control their impulses, it helped
them predict who is most likely to behave aggressively.
So it wasn't just being depleted of mental energy that increased aggression, but it
was also when people are depleted of their mental energy and they have a low ability
to control their impulses, those are the people who are most likely to lash out at others.
So what these findings again show us is the complexity of self-control and how it helps
us understand who is most likely to behave aggressively and under what circumstances.
It's important to understand that self-control is limited and when people have limited energy
to control their impulses, they're often going to behave more aggressively.
But this relationship is especially pronounced among people who naturally have an inability
to control their impulses.
So by understanding how these two factors interact with each other, we can better understand
why aggression occurs and who is most at risk for behaving aggressively.
We've been talking about how self-control can help us explain criminal behavior and
aggression between strangers, but can self-control help us understand aggression between people
who love each other, romantic partners, intimate partner violence.
Now intimate partner violence occurs at alarmingly high rates.
When college students, there are estimates that as many as 34% of college students report
at least one act of physical aggression in their relationship over the past year.
Now if we go outside of the college population among adults in the United States who are
in long-term romantic relationships, the rates aren't as high, but they're still about 20%.
So can self-control help us understand who is most at risk for behaving aggressively?
Well researchers have begun to explore this question and one way that they've been doing
this is with controlled laboratory experiments.
Now in one laboratory experiment, they brought couples into the research lab and they had
them do tasks that either depleted them of their self-control energy or did not deplete
them.
Specifically they had participants watch a video program where they either had to control
their attention or they didn't have to control their attention.
Next participants were provided with some feedback from their romantic partner.
Now in reality the feedback was prepared ahead of time by the experimenters.
The feedback was either extremely positive or extremely negative.
And the idea was that the experimenters wanted to make participants happy with their partner
or kind of frustrated with their partner.
Next the experimenters gave participants an opportunity to make their partner engage in
some physically painful activities.
Specifically they gave them a list of yoga positions that they could decide for their
partner to do and how long they had to hold each one.
Now the experimenter told participants that these yoga positions they won't cause any
permanent physical damage but they're extremely painful.
So the prediction is that when participants were depleted of their self-control energy
and they had been frustrated by their romantic partner that they would make their partner
hold the yoga positions longer than anyone else in the study.
And that's exactly what the researchers found.
When people were depleted of their self-control energy and their partner had frustrated them
they made their partner hold those yoga positions a lot longer than anyone else in the actual
experiment.
But what this study left out was an important factor.
So we know that depleted self-control energy mixed with frustration will increase aggressiveness
even in romantic relationships.
But what we don't know is whether this effect is most pronounced among people who are naturally
aggressive people.
So to explore this possibility a group of researchers brought in a couple of samples
of dating participants and what they had them do was complete a measure of self-control
and at the end of the day they reported on how much their partner had provoked them.
They also completed a measure that assessed how naturally physically aggressive they were.
Another thing that the experimenters did at the end of the day was they showed participants
a doll that represented their partner and what they told participants is that this doll represents
your partner and because we've been asking you lots of questions about your partner and
maybe some negative behaviors we want to give you an opportunity to let some of that negative
energy out and so what you can do is you can insert some pins into this doll that represents
your partner from 0 to 51 pins and this was used as a measure of aggressive inclinations.
So as predicted when people had low levels of self-control and they were highly provoked
by their partner they put the most pins into the doll but this was most pronounced among
people who were naturally aggressive.
These three factors created a perfect storm in helping us to identify who is most at risk
for behaving aggressively and this study was replicated among a sample of newlywed couples
and instead of using the doll measure of aggressive inclinations they found the same results with
actual physical aggression in the relationship.
So what these results tell us is that self-control can help us explain not only criminal behavior
and aggression between strangers it can help us explain who is most at risk for behaving
aggressively in their romantic relationships and why.
What can neuroscience tell us about the relationship between self-control and aggression?
Well there are a couple different ways of getting at this question.
One way that we can do this is we can identify people who are at highest risk for behaving aggressively
and we can look at how their brains function.
Researchers have begun to do this and they've identified the most violent people on the planet,
people who are psychopaths and what they've done is they've explored how the psychopaths
brain might differ from people who are not psychopathic.
What they've shown consistently are some differences and these differences are related to self-control.
One reliable difference in the psychopathic brain is that they have less volume in the frontal lobe.
The prefrontal cortex and this is the seat of self-control.
Now although they have reduced volume in the prefrontal cortex, psychopaths have more volume
in the reward center of the brain, also known as the striatum.
So you can think of the psychopathic brain as a brain that functions as a brain that functions
a little bit differently than the rest of our brains.
There's less activation going on in the prefrontal cortex, which is the brain region that helps us override impulses.
And when we think of what those impulses feel like, the psychopathic brain, they experience stronger reward responses.
So this is one way that you can understand the relationship between self-control and aggression using neuroscience.
Another way is to look at how healthy normal folks respond in aggressive situations using functional magnetic resonance imaging.
And so one study did this very thing.
They brought a group of participants into a laboratory and sat them down in an fMRI scanner.
Next what they did was they frustrated participants while they were having their brains scanned.
The way that they did this is the person who was talking to them through the microphone, intercom system, started insulting them a little bit, making them angry.
What they found is that when people were insulted, blood began to flow to a region of the brain called the anterior cingulate cortex.
This is a region of the brain that tells you that something is going completely wrong in your environment and you have to do something to correct it.
Next what participants were given was an opportunity to ruminate.
What they showed was that when people were ruminating, they were using a region of the brain that's involved in active regulation, the prefrontal cortex.
So now we can begin to see why people lash out at others after they've engaged in rumination.
Rumination wears people out because blood is flowing to the prefrontal cortex.
So I think we've begun to see how neuroscience can help us explain who is most at risk for behaving aggressively and why.
We've learned that there's a clear relationship between self-control and aggression.
People who have poor self-control are often extremely aggressive people
and factors that might undermine our ability to control our impulses can increase our chances of lashing out at others.
What are some activities that we can use to reduce our aggressive inclinations?
One thing that we can do is to build our self-control strength.
Now because self-control relies on a common energy resource, when we practice self-control in one domain, it helps us in other, even unrelated domains.
So for this activity, what I would like for you to do is for one week between 8am and 6pm, use your non-dominant hand for everyday activities.
Whether it's cooking your food, brushing your teeth, or using your telephone, it's going to take self-control to complete this activity.
It might even be frustrating or exhausting early on. That's why you're going to do it over an extended period of time.
By practicing self-control, what you're going to find is that when you're confronted with situations where you become angry and frustrated,
you're going to have added self-control muscle to overcome your impulses.
And scientific studies have shown that this activity actually reduces people's aggressive inclinations when they're mentally fatigued.
A second activity is far simpler.
We know that having adequate metabolic energy is helpful in helping people have good self-control.
We also know that people who struggle with metabolic energy, who feel like they have low blood sugar, they're often more likely to lash out at other people.
And so what I'd like for you to do is to strategically keep food around, but not any food.
What I want you to do is target foods that are going to give you a boost of metabolic energy.
Now, although this might be straight-up sugar, what I would argue is that a much more effective use of your energy can be gotten through proteins.
Things that are going to break down into energy a lot slower.
And by doing this, you're going to be a lot less likely to lash out at other people.
These two activities will help you gain skills and strength so that you might not engage in behaviors that you might regret later.
