I had a period of time after my divorce
where I was really ambitious when it came to women.
But then it felt like a job.
Like it felt like a job after a while
where I was like, God, it's like enough.
It's kind of enough.
You know, like it's like,
it's like when you've eaten so much
that you just go, I got that way with posse.
Like it really was like I just had enough.
Like I was fine.
I was like, this is great, but.
Well, when you're in your 20s or 30s,
maybe your libido is a strong meal.
It makes you insane.
Yeah, yeah, I was not.
I definitely was.
As we age, we mellow.
Yeah, which I think is great.
Although I have to tell you,
one of the most depressing divorces I ever did
was a guy who was, I think, 92.
Oh, geez.
And what made it depressing is that he had left his wife
of, I don't know, 50 something, 60 something years
for a younger woman, a woman in her 50s.
And I just remember what was sad about it to me
was this guy still being led around by his dick.
Like I thought, oh my God.
I'm gonna be chained to an idiot forever.
Like I'm gonna forever be led around by my dick.
And I remember thinking like, no,
I really thought that at like 90 something,
I would just like a beautiful woman would walk by
and I'd go, oh, there's a human being.
Like there would be no.
You'd appreciate it without.
Yeah, there would just be no sense of like, yeah.
You know, there would just, that would be gone from me.
And this guy's proof that 90 something years old
and you're still thinking with your dick, like I.
Redumed.
That terrified me.
It really did.
It actually upset me.
Because I thought, man, I thought at some point
I'd get to experience what it's like to just be free.
If you live in New York where there's a financial industry,
there's all kinds of industries here.
Oh yeah.
But to me, sometimes I wonder if female attractiveness
isn't the highest valued commodity in our country.
100% it is.
100%.
It is.
Yeah, yeah, of course.
Because men are becoming rich and powerful
in order to get a woman.
Of course.
The woman they want.
Of course.
What an attractive woman.
And when I say attractive, I don't just mean attractive.
I mean, even just sexually confident.
I mean, what an unbelievably lucrative career that is.
Like I do divorces for people that,
you know, a woman walks out with $200, $300 million.
He was an analyst at Goldman Sachs
who built a hedge fund and then sold it
and then used his trading algorithm
to build it up to $500 million.
She was hot and slept with him for a while
and then stopped and started sleeping with other people
and playing tennis and having Botox.
And she's going to get half.
Like that's fucking incredible.
Like, do you know what he had to do to get that?
And what she had to, I'll fuck that guy for $200 million.
Are you kidding me?
Like that's insane.
That's incredible.
Like, and God bless.
I mean, I'm not saying that this person,
this is the rules of the game, you know?
But you can't argue that that's not easier
than going to Harvard.
No, for sure.
But then the payoff, the trade off for that
is that when they hit a certain age,
the value decreases.
Right, any stock, if you hold it too long,
it's going to go down, you know?
Like, so play the stock the right way.
I mean, and that's what I think.
If we were a little more honest
about the nature of male-female coupling,
I mean, right now we can't even, you know,
we can't even establish what is gender.
You know, we can't establish any of that anymore.
So divorce has become incredibly hilarious and fraught.
But to me, what is, like, sometimes you have to stand back
and look at things to get the real perspective
on what it is.
And sometimes you look back at marriage.
So when was it invented?
Like 2000 BC, roughly.
And the life expectancy of humans back then was 18 years old.
Yeah, yeah.
Marriage was created for...
Landownership.
Landownership and things like that.
And if you're going to die in your early 20s or whatever,
then getting married at 16, 18 makes sense.
Well, I think there's a distinction
that has to be made between pair bonds and marriage, right?
Marriage is a government concept.
Marriage is a contract.
Marriage is a legal status.
Pair bonds, right?
Two people go in it together, you know,
saying, hey, there's 7.3 billion people in the world
and the two of us, we're going to lock up together
and we're going to try to hold hands
and get through this thing.
Till we're eight years old.
Well, until whatever, you know?
I mean, what's interesting is,
first of all, all marriages end.
They end and death are divorced, but they all end.
Like every marriage ends.
So it's one of the only things that you go,
wow, I really hope this ends in us dying.
You know, most things, that's not the desired outcome.
But in marriage, you hope marriage will end in death.
You hope that you will be together
until one or both of you die, you know?
But all marriages end.
But as a guy, as a provider,
if you knew it was going to end
and you were going to have to give away half your money,
you might think twice about doing it.
Well, I think that's what makes
being a divorce lawyer interesting,
is that it's a lot of what a court has to do
is disregard what happened in the marriage,
because A, the truth is at the bottom of a bottomless pit.
Like you're never going to get there.
Yeah, well, he's fucking his secretary.
Right, because you are not sleeping with me anymore.
I have a client whose wife acknowledges
she didn't sleep with him for six years.
What did you think was going on
if you didn't sleep with him for six years?
So you, okay, delegate.
You've delegated that responsibility.
If you don't want to have sex with him, that's okay.
No one should force you to have sex with this person.
Let him go have sex with someone else.
You don't want to do the laundry.
Hire someone to do the laundry.
If you don't want to mow your own lawn,
hire someone to mow the lawn.
Delegate that responsibility.
And this guy wasn't even sleeping around.
He was going to those hand job places, you know,
where you get a massage and you get a hand.
Like what the most pathetic thing in the world,
the most innocuous thing in the world.
He didn't have a girlfriend.
There was no love involved.
He was getting jacked off for $50.
Like that's sad.
Like I mean, first of all, hand jobs.
Like that's an outdated technology.
That's like a Betamax, you know,
like who even does that anymore?
But he was doing this and he just thought, okay, that's fine.
She had the indignation to say he is not a,
he shouldn't be a custodial parent.
He's a terrible person because he's doing this.
And it was like, wait, how is that that much different
than going to a strip club?
How is that much more different?
Cause we just, you know, he was like, well, should I deny it?
And I was like, is it true?
And he's like, well, yeah, I said, no, we should own it.
Let's go in and say, yeah, you know what?
Yeah, it's pathetic.
It's really pathetic.
My wife didn't sleep with me for six years and I'm human.
And I wanted to have sex still.
I didn't want to blow up my life.
I didn't want to screw up my kids
and have my kids have divorced parents.
So I thought, all right,
she's clearly not interested in me and more.
I'm not going to have a girlfriend
and get caught up in all the things
where people could get hurt and there's feelings
and fatal attraction and stuff.
I'm just going to go, it'll be transactional.
Like going to a strip club or anything else.
And I'm, yeah, is it a little pathetic
that I'm a guy who makes a million dollars a year
in finance and I'm paying someone $50 to jack me off?
Yeah, it's kind of pathetic, but you know what?
I figured it out.
But to suggest that that means I'm a bad parent,
that has nothing to do with my parenting at all, period.
You know, so, and thankfully the judge agreed
with me on that one.
But I really do think that the idea,
I don't think, I mean, if you break it down fundamentally,
56% of marriages end in divorce.
But think about that's the ones that end in divorce.
So how many people, what percentage stay together
for the kids?
Or cause they don't want to give away half their shit.
Another 10% that's conservative.
Conservative.
But let's say 20% then, okay?
That's at least right.
Now I have a technology that fails 76% of the time.
That's insane.
That's insane.
That's more likely than not.
76%, if I told you there's a 76% chance
when you walk out the door today
you're gonna get hit in the head with a bowling ball,
you would not go out or you'd wear a helmet for sure.
But people just continue to get married.
Not only do they continue to get married,
there's a presumption that you should get married.
And if you don't get married,
there's something wrong with you.
So if you've got a girlfriend and you've been with her
for five years and you say to someone,
we're getting married.
They go, oh, that's great.
They don't go, why?
You're happy.
Why would you get married?
Like everything's going fine.
Why would you put yourself through that?
Why would you run that risk?
If you say to someone, we've been together five years
and we've decided we're not gonna get married.
We're gonna move in together,
but we're not gonna get married.
Ooh, what's wrong?
You got intimacy issues?
What's your problem?
Me want to set 56% end in divorce.
It literally fits the legal definition of negligence.
It's a negligent behavior.
The way you define negligence in law school
is when what you lose by not doing something
is lower than the risk of harm.
It's what's called a BPL analysis.
So the burden of not doing a thing
is lower than the likelihood, the probability of harm.
So BPLs, the burden, probability and loss.
Marriage is an inherently negligent activity.
It's like owning a lion.
Like the likelihood of someone getting hurt
seriously by this is very, very high.
You know, whatever says it to you, because why?
Because, and I would say to me,
I've been doing this for over 20 years
and I still get misty-eyed at weddings.
Like I still really, there's something in me
that goes like, you know, maybe it'll work out
for these two.
You still believe in much.
I absolutely believe in love.
I think love is wonderful.
But love and marriage have very little to do with each other.
I don't think there's much of a correlation there.
I think that's where we got off track.
Like I believe in pair bonds.
I believe, I don't think I can learn everything
I need to know about myself from myself.
I think having someone around me who sees my blind spots
and that it doesn't have to be a romantic partner.
That could be a friend, that could be any number of things,
but there is something wonderful
about romantic connection.
We know that.
I mean, the other statistic is 56% of marriages
and in divorce, but 84% of people who get divorced
are remarried within five years of their divorce.
Really?
Let's think about that.
So now you've done it and failed
and felt the pain of the loss
and within five years, 84% are remarried.
So when you fall in love
and you're with a partner who is in love with you,
it's like hard to put the brakes on and say,
you know what, that's as far as I'm gonna go.
Well, I think we, you know,
whoever discovered water, it wasn't a fish.
And I think when we're in a thing, we don't see it.
And so, I mean, and this is true of any of us.
There must be some endorphins,
something's being released in our brains.
Listen, you wanna test that theory.
The next time you're out with a couple
who've been together for a while
and it seems like they maybe got in a fight
or they're just like kind of being impatient
with each other at the table.
You know, when you go like a group thing.
Just say to them, so tell me about how you met.
Tell me the story of how you met
and everything on them changes.
At like, they go back to that place.
And there's this like, oh yeah, and she was this,
because for that second, you go back to that place.
Like you can go, someone with a horrible divorce,
if you could get them to go to that place
and talk to you about that time.
Like I would say something, when I was a kid,
you know, like every kid, you have the fantasy of like,
if you were invisible, what would you do?
You didn't go to the girl's locker room, you know, whatever.
I have this fantasy that if I could be invisible,
I have about eight clients that I'd like to sneak into their
house and find their wedding album.
Like I know it's in the attic somewhere or something.
Cause I would love to see what it looked like
when these people loved each other.
Because they are weaponized against each other now
and we are trying to kill each other
and we're taking every secret, every intimacy, everything.
At their ugliest.
At their ugliest, at their worst.
And there's something in me that just the thought that like,
you guys at some point, like at some point,
you were like, there's 7.3 billion people in the world
and you're the one.
Like you're the one I just want to be with and smell
and touch and like that feeling, we all know that feeling
of like just the electricity of another person, you know?
And I mean, I think I'm a romantic at heart
in the sense that I really get it.
Like I really get why we do this.
I felt it, I know it, I understand it.
But tying that to the technology of marriage to me
makes almost no sense whatsoever.
And I actually think it's almost antagonistic
to that connection with another person.
Because there's so much expectation
that comes with marriage culturally.
We've created so much stuff around it.
Like when you marry someone, they're supposed to be,
at least in the modern Western model,
your best friend, best roommate, best co-parent,
best travel partner, best roommate, best everything,
best activity partner.
Like how would one person be all of those things?
That's insane.
Like if I was interviewing for a job
and said, I want you to be the best typist
and I also want you to be best on the phone
and I also want you to be great at that.
And I ran down a list of dissimilar things.
Like wherever I went to an amazing chef
and I said, I know you're a great chef, but can you farm?
Like that has to do with food,
but they're not the same thing.
Like what are you talking,
so I think why do we put on people this idea?
Like whoever came up with the word soulmate,
really we should be paying,
like divorce lawyer should be paying that person dividends.
Because we've convinced people that if this person
isn't meeting every one of your needs,
checking all of these boxes, they're not your soulmate.
Your soulmate would know exactly what to do,
exactly what to say at exactly the right time.
I can get, I go off on this stuff, tend to.
What do you think the secret is
is keeping a marriage vital, keeping it alive?
You know, I think people get unhappy in marriages
the way that people go bankrupt,
which is very slowly and then all at once.
I think it's very slow and then it just goes off a cliff.
So everybody will say, well,
we divorced because he was cheating or she was cheating
or we divorced because he had an alcohol issue
or a drug issue, which lately we're seeing more
like alcohol and drugs is a big, big thing,
especially post pandemic.
There's a tremendous amount of substance abuse stuff
that's causing a lot of issues in marriages.
And certainly like social media has increased
the accessibility of adultery and connections
to other people and reconnections
to people from your past who remind you
of a version of yourself that you felt more excited about
because you were younger.
So it's, you know, it used to be
if you like ran into the girl you banged in high school,
it was like once every 10 years at reunion, you know,
or if you lived in the same town as you grew up in,
you know, you might run into the person at the Walmart.
But now it's like on Facebook, you have all these excuses
to be able to chit chat with someone
and all these benign entry points, you know, of like,
oh, you know, I saw your pictures from vacation.
Where did you stay in Miami, you know?
And then it becomes, oh, yeah, well, you look great.
I mean, boy, you look fantastic in a bikini
and all of a sudden we're off to the races
and we're chatting with each other.
So I, you know, if we were gonna invent
like an infidelity machine,
you couldn't do better than Facebook and Instagram.
I mean, that's about as good as it gets.
But I genuinely think that the secret
to staying happy in a marriage is probably
the same secret to maintaining a healthy weight.
You know, don't wait till you get super fat
and then try to lose the weight.
Don't wait until you get really sick.
Like my sister is a dentist and she always says,
if you have a toothache, there's nothing I can do really.
Like I can pull the tooth, I can give you a root canal,
but like I can prevent you from getting a toothache.
If you just come see me regularly
and you just floss and you just brush your teeth,
you'll never get a toothache.
By the time your tooth hurts,
something is already seriously wrong.
By the time you're in a divorce lawyer's office,
you're fucked, the whole thing's fucked at that point.
Like you'd be better off just, you know,
figuring out the preventative maintenance, right?
Like change the oil in your car.
Like, so I, what I try to, if you reverse engineer divorce,
like most people, the marriage killer, you know,
the, like the cheating or the gambling or the whatever,
that's the symptom.
Like the problem is these little disconnections, you know?
One of the, one of the best stories I have is my,
I had a client, I did her divorce,
and we'd spend a lot of time together because you do.
You know, when you're a divorce lawyer,
you spend a lot of time with people
and you get to know them very well.
I mean, people will lie to their therapist,
they won't lie to their divorce lawyer
because A, there's no reason to and B,
you know, I need to know everything
and it's all attorney-client privilege.
And this woman, we were sitting outside the courtroom
waiting on a break in testimony.
And she was a young woman in her,
in her probably like late 30s, you know?
Very attractive.
And we were just chit-chatting and I said to her,
you know, was there a moment when you realized
the marriage is over?
You know, like, was there a moment?
And she said, yeah, yeah.
And I said, when was it?
And she said, there was this granola that I like.
She said it, they only sold it
at like this particular grocery store.
And I like to put it in my yogurt.
And she said, he used to always,
whenever I'd be running low on it,
I would just open the thing one day
and a new bag would be there.
She's like, and I just, she's like,
it made me feel so loved.
Like he didn't, I didn't have to ask.
He didn't want credit for it.
Like he didn't go like, oh, did you see it?
I got your granola that you wanted, you know?
Like he just would do this thing, you know?
And she said, it was just something that like,
I just, it always made me smile.
She said, every time the granola was running low
and there was a new bag of granola,
I just felt very loved, you know?
And she said, one day the granola ran out.
And I thought, oh, that's weird.
You know, maybe he didn't see it.
She's like, so I left the bag in there
because I thought, well, at some point he'll notice.
And he didn't notice.
She goes, so I took the bag out and I waited.
And he didn't get a new bag.
And I thought, okay, this thing's going down.
And I thought to myself, wow, that's like,
you know, that's such a small thing, like granola.
Like you just, but these are the things.
Like these are the little things that make us feel loved
and that are gestures of love.
And when I said to her, was there anything like that
for you with him?
And she said, yeah, blowjobs.
And I almost spit out my coffee.
And she goes, no, she goes, when we were first dating
and even first married, she's like,
I used to give blowjobs a lot.
She's like, you know, she's like, do it in the morning,
just took two minutes.
And he was like super happy the rest of the day, you know?
She's like the rest of the day.
He would like call me or text me and be like,
oh, I'm so good this morning.
You know, I had such pep in my step now.
And she's like, it was just like,
what did it really take out of my life to do that?
You know, and it made him feel good.
She's like, and then I got to a point where I was like,
well, you know what, no, I'll wait.
And then tonight we can both, we can have sex.
And we'll both enjoy that.
Like what is why I owe him a blowjob?
Like, no, you know, like I don't owe him that, you know?
And then she said, I got to a point where it was like,
I look back and I'm like, yeah, I guess I,
I didn't do that as often, hardly ever really, you know?
Which came first.
You know, I said that to her and she said,
she said, I couldn't tell you.
She said, but I think it's the same thing.
The same thing.
And I do think it's the same thing.
And I'm not saying blowjobs and granola
is all you need to know, but,
and I'm not, by the way, I'm not saying that,
that a blowjob is a small thing.
I don't think I have any right to, I've never given one.
But it seems like a phenomenal feat.
And I'm grateful for everyone I've ever received.
But I don't, I don't think it's a massive investment,
right?
Just like buying someone's granola is not a massive.
But when you love somebody,
you love doing things for them.
Right, their pleasure pleases you.
Their joy pleases you.
Like their, their, you know, their happiness makes you happy.
Exactly.
And somewhere along the line,
and it happens a lot in marriage,
it becomes, well, I'm not happy, why should you be happy?
You know?
And then that creates a spiral.
And I really believe that you can,
that spiral could go in the other direction.
Like if he did the granola,
I think the blowjobs would have come, you know?
And if the, like I,
and if the blowjobs were there,
I bet he'd have bought the granola.
Like I can't prove that.
There's no control group, you know?
I can't run that research.
But it feels to me like those little things,
like leaving a note, you know?
I've said to some of my friends, you know,
when they say to me like, you know,
as a divorce lawyer, you see all this misery,
like, what's, how do I stay out of your office?
And I'll often say, I'm like, it's dumb little things, man.
I'm like, just leave her a note.
I'm like, leave her a note in the morning.
Just leave a little note, says, hey, beautiful.
You know, so, it was so fun watching that movie
with you last night.
So glad we got to have a date.
I'll be thinking of you today.
Love you.
Like, what does that take?
That takes like a minute.
Not even, like, and look what it can do.
Like, look at how that makes this person feel.
And even if right away, it doesn't work.
On that moment, it doesn't work.
Okay, do it enough times.
Like, and then you're either gonna figure out
that this person's gone, and then just fucking bail.
You're done.
Like, because if you try for long enough,
and you give like that, but if you're not giving like that,
and then you're not getting back either,
well, I'm not surprised, you know?
That's how you end up in my office,
is this death spiral of everyone,
like, well, I'm not giving Guy and the Grinola
issues, not giving me blowjobs.
Well, I'm not giving him blowjobs, he's mean to me.
Okay, well, everybody's just gonna,
has an equal right to be fucking miserable then.
I think if you're happy with yourself,
be truly happy with who you are at that point in your life,
or whatever the situation is,
I think it's easier for you to be happy with your partner.
Yeah, but I would argue that if you're not happy
with yourself, having someone happy with you
is certainly not gonna hurt your feeling of who you are,
right?
Like, I don't need someone to tell me I'm handsome
for me to have a nice day,
but I can't think of anybody telling me I was handsome
that it ruined my day, you know?
Most of the time, you're like, oh, that's nice,
you know, I got that going for me.
So yeah, I think self-love, of course,
is the most important love,
and to be secure in who you are,
and to not allow your self-definition
to be easily swayed or pulled.
Like, if you believe the good reviews,
you gotta believe the bad ones too, I get that,
but I just don't think kindness,
like, it's just such an easy,
especially if it's easy, like if it's easy stuff,
like just telling someone that they're beautiful
or handsome or that you're cheering for them.
To me with marriage, or pair bonds,
I shouldn't even say marriage,
like the world is trying to kill you all the time,
you know, like people are criticizing you all the time,
you feel like a failure a lot of the time,
if you compare yourself to other people,
you'll constantly be, you know,
comparisons the thief of joy.
So why not have like one person
who's just cheering for you, you know,
like constructive criticism is criticism.
It's still just criticism.
So if your spouse is just sitting around criticizing you
and telling you all the things you could do
to improve yourself, instead of just being a fan
and just saying, you know what,
I know who you are and you're beautiful,
I know who you are and your heart is good,
and betting on the best parts of a person,
I think that there's no,
there's very little downside to that, you know.
I think it would put guys like me out of business
if people really leveraged that the right way.
I asked you earlier, if you believe in love,
which you said you do, do you believe in marriage?
I mean, I believe people believe in marriage.
No, but to you.
Yeah, do I believe in marriage?
I don't, I don't think it's a useful technology.
I understand culturally why people do it,
but I don't think people should need it.
I know I certainly don't need marriage.
I don't think marriage, I was married.
I was married before I really ever thought
about what does that mean, you know.
I married my college sweetheart, you know.
I hadn't, I got married because that's what you do,
you get married, you know.
But I hadn't thought about it as a technology
and why it's there.
I didn't, I didn't understand it the way I do now.
You know, there's a line from a Joseph Brodsky poem
that he wrote when his wife died where he says,
I wish I knew no astronomy when stars appear.
And I feel that way as a divorce lawyer.
Like I wish I knew no astronomy when stars appear.
I wish I, I wish I didn't know what the end
of so many marriages looks like
because I think I would have a more optimistic
and unrealistic view of it.
I would-
Yeah, but you'd be divorced and giving away half your-
I'd be foolish.
Yeah, I'd be foolish.
I'd be as foolish, but I don't know that,
I don't know that it's always good to know, right?
Sometimes there's tremendous joy to be had
and like falling feels like flying for a little while,
you know, till you hit the ground, it feels really good.
As I said earlier, you know,
now that the life expectancy of man is around the 80s
or something, then it's like,
so you're gonna do this from your 20s or 30s until the 80s?
Well, marriage is a technology that was designed
for when women died in childbirth
and when men died in their 40s if they were lucky,
you know, 50s if they were super lucky.
Like if you were in your 50s, your 60s, you were an elder,
you know, that was pretty amazing.
Women, most women died in childbirth.
Like childbirth is traumatic.
It's a traumatic thing and before modern medicine
and before we understood antibiotics.
So marriages is, I don't think anyone ever planned
that it was gonna be, okay, we're gonna do this forever.
You know, we're gonna do this till we're 100.
I mean, but I think that's part of a bigger problem.
You know, I don't remember who said it,
but I remember someone saying,
I can't remember who it was,
but we are prehistoric creatures, right?
Like we are biological creatures
living in medieval institutions
like education, work, with God-like technology.
How do you think that ends?
Like you think that ends and happily ever after?
Like that's insane.
Marriage was not designed, I mean,
think about even the early days of marriage.
Think about every Rodgers and Hammerstein musical,
you know, think about Oklahoma, you know,
where you'd have like, there's like the three people
in town that aren't married, you know,
and you sort of pick which of the three,
you know, you were gonna go be with.
And now you have access to just an endless supply
of the opposite sex, or I shouldn't even say
the opposite sex, you have an endless supply
of romantic partners in a device in your hand.
How does that possibly stand up?
How does marriage, the idea of monogamy,
forced monogamy or enforced monogamy,
how does that ever survive in that environment?
I don't think it can, I don't think it's realistic.
And the statistics prove me right.
You know, the statistics are absolutely in my favor.
Now again, get married as many times as you want
if you have a prenup.
Go get married, get married's a blast.
Being married is difficult.
You know, someone once said that it's great
to be married sometimes.
The problem is you're married all the time.
So you're a fan of prenups?
I'm a huge fan of prenups.
I mean, I shouldn't be because a prenup
for a couple of thousand dollars will save you hundreds
of thousands of dollars potentially in legal fees,
if not millions.
So there are clients I have that have spent
over a million dollars just in their legal fees,
that if they had spent $2,000 on a prenup,
none of that, they'd still have that money in their pocket.
And that's incredible to me.
Like I have two sons who are adults
that they are absolutely gonna have prenups.
Like they have to have prenups.
They'd be fools to not have prenups.
It's like jumping out of a plane with no parachute.
Why would you do that?
You know, it's just, it's stupid.
Prenups are enforceable, they make sense.
I actually think there's something very romantic
about prenups because they're forcing you
to have a conversation about this relationship.
I genuinely believe that we are the most aware of our health
just after we got sick, right?
Like when we, if you wake up and you have a toothache,
all you can think about is the fact your tooth hurts.
And then your toothache goes away and for like a week.
You're taking care of your teeth.
You go, oh my God, at least I don't have a toothache.
You know, but then a month goes by and you don't wake up
and go, well, at least I don't have a toothache.
And it's the furthest thing from your mind.
But theoretically you could wake up today and go,
I don't have a toothache.
I don't have a backache.
I don't have a head cold.
Like this is a great day.
What does a typical prenup look like?
Typical, the easiest prenup in the world.
Easiest, yours, mine, ours.
That's it, yours, mine, ours.
Then your name, it's yours.
If it's in my name, it's mine.
Like in a divorce, everything,
all the assets are split 50-50.
Well, no, what you say in a prenup-truel agreement is,
if it's an asset or a liability,
if it's in my name, it's mine.
If it's in your name, it's yours.
If it's in our joint names,
we'll divide it 50-50.
That's it, yours, mine, ours.
And then you have to have ongoing conversations
throughout the marriage about, you know,
hey, I got this bonus at work.
Do I put it in my account?
Do I put it in the joint account?
If the husband owns a house that's worth
whatever, $2 million, and he marries a woman.
The house is his still.
Well, they have to have a conversation.
Do I owe you a house?
That's an awkward conversation.
Okay.
You know what's a more awkward conversation?
I had a conversation 10 years later with a lawyer
about the fact that you have to give half of this house
away to someone.
Isn't it better to have that conversation
when you still, like, why would you learn
how to fight in a fight?
But won't that undermine the love that each person feels?
Why?
Why?
You're gonna die.
Does that undermine your life?
Or does it make you conscious of the fact
that this is finite and that you should be out there?
Like, I think having a conversation with your partner
about, look, I love you.
You love me.
We want to do this thing together.
But the numbers are against us
and the world is antagonistic to it.
And I hope we'll be together forever.
But if we split up, what do we owe each other?
What do you expect from me?
Because I have to tell you something.
I'm a fair person.
I'm a fair person.
If you say to me, you know, Jim,
I'm not gonna work as hard
because you make a good living.
So if we split up, I'm gonna need help
for a couple of years because I'm not gonna pay
attention to my career.
Okay, does that unreasonable?
That's totally reasonable.
You know, if I say, hey, listen,
I have this house and I bought it, you know,
but I'm buying it with money that I made
really before we were together.
So if we split up, I don't really think
you deserve half of it.
I think that if we bought things for it together,
that, okay, those things you can half of,
but the house itself, like that's money I had
before I met you and why can't you have that conversation?
What, why not?
Instead, I mean, you buy a house,
you do a HUD one, a lead paint disclosure,
you gotta sign all these things that,
this is how much the interest is gonna be
and you get married and you can get a fucking pamphlet.
You don't get anything.
You just did the most legally significant thing
you're ever gonna do other than die
and no one has explained any of it to you.
People come into my office and they go,
well, my retirement account, that's in my name.
And I'm like, yeah, it doesn't matter.
It's in your name?
Okay, was it acquired during the marriage?
Okay, she's got half of it.
Well, I have this bank account, but it's in my sole name.
It's money that I inherited from my mom.
I'm like, okay, it's in your name, yeah,
but you inherited that money during the marriage.
And did you put money that you earned
during the marriage in that account also?
Yeah, okay, that's commingled and transmuted.
That's now marital property.
So they don't know that.
Why?
Because no one tells them that when they're getting married.
All they did, you spend more time talking about the cake
than you do talking about the fact
that you just opted out of the title system.
That's gigantic.
You can't legally change the beneficiary
of your life insurance, even to your children,
if you're married, without your spouse
signing a consent to that.
No one tells you that when you get married.
You get married, Elvis can marry you for $20
at a drive-thru cathedral.
And it's a legal status, a massive legal,
you buy your spouse a Rolex,
you bought yourself one half of a Rolex.
You buy someone a birthday present who you're married to,
you bought yourself one half of that birthday present.
Nobody know, people don't know that.
They learn that for the first time in my office
or in a courtroom.
That's insane.
What other thing in the world?
Like anything else, any other contract,
you would say, well, wait a minute,
no one explained that to me.
No one explained that to me.
When I leased this car,
no one explained to me that there's wear and tear.
Doesn't say it anywhere in the contract, right?
Okay, marriage contract doesn't say that.
It doesn't say, oh, and by the way,
you're opting out of the title system
and your retirement assets and all these other things.
And if there's any debts
and you could have enhanced earning capacity
or celebrity goodwill that has to be valued
by forensic accountants that'll cost you $100,000,
you don't, no contract that says that.
It just says, yep, we're getting married.
It's two witnesses, we're good.
What other contract?
What other contract in the United States or anywhere
has that lack of disclosure and is that binding?
None, zero, none.
So a prenup, yes, that's an awkward conversation, I guess.
I don't know that it has to be.
And I have to tell you,
the more awkward of a conversation it is,
the more you should think twice about getting married.
Because if you can't have a conversation with this person
about the possibility that someday one or both of you
might hurt each other,
like how many people, while they're still happy and in love,
say something like, you know, babe, I love you.
But we're gonna disagree about something at some point.
And when we do, how do you like to fight?
Like, do you need a minute?
Like, do you need like to be alone for a minute
so you can kind of calm down?
Or are you the like, hey, we gotta figure this out
and we can't go to bed angry?
Like, cause let's talk about that now
while we're not in the fight.
Like, let's talk about it now while we still get along
and we're happy and we're trying to figure out
how to navigate each other.
It's hard enough to navigate yourself.
I wanna navigate another human being.
Why don't we have that conversation now?
But no, we don't.
We learn on the job.
We learn how to fight in a fight, which is insane.
You know, but again, why?
Well, cause it's awkward.
It'd be awkward to have that conversation.
More awkward than getting in a fight
where you don't know the rules of engagement,
or you don't know how your partner does better
or would feel better.
Like, and you're not gonna ask them that
in the heat of battle, you know?
So why wouldn't you have that awkward conversation
while you have this abundance of affection for each other?
I mean, when I negotiate prenups,
it's the easiest thing in the world in a sense
because these two people really like each other.
You know, they're about to get married.
So they're clearly not trying to kill each other.
At that point, they clearly like each other.
So you just say, hey, listen, go home,
talk to your fiance about X, Y, and Z,
and see what they, you know, see what they think.
And see, tell them what your concern is.
And very often, people will come back and say to me,
I mean, I have to tell you, I've been doing this now,
you know, over 20 years.
I do a lot of prenups.
I do maybe five, six prenups a month,
sometimes during like pre-wedding season,
which is the fall and before the summer,
I'll do 10, 15 a month.
The people who say to me,
oh, well, I don't want to have that conversation.
You know, I think, they get the prenup
and within three, four years, they're divorced.
Sometimes five years and then seven years,
but they're the ones who get divorced.
They have no business getting married.
Like the ones who have the discussion
and figure out the, well, I'm worried
because if you keep the place, yeah, you're right.
Okay, so what if I give you this amount of money
and it's this much for each of you?
Okay, yeah, that's cool.
Let's do it that way.
Those people, they're probably never gonna put the prenup
in a safe someplace.
You'll never look at it probably.
Good communication solves it all.
Because they're able to talk to each other
and they're able to talk about hard things.
How are you gonna be married to someone?
Have children with someone
and you can't talk about hard things, you know?
Like how?
How are you gonna navigate life
and not be able to talk about hard things?
Like that's silly.
So if you can't talk about hard things,
don't get fucking married.
It's okay.
You don't have to.
You can stay together.
But people love, I had a client.
No joke, guy was in his 70s.
He was married four times.
I did his third and fourth divorces
and he was getting married for a fifth time.
And I said to him, I was like,
because I actually thought he's older.
So I thought like, does he know
you don't have to marry them anymore?
Like maybe he doesn't know.
He's dividing his assets.
Yeah, maybe someone didn't tell him.
Like maybe someone didn't tell him,
like you can fuck them.
You don't have to marry them anymore.
You can just do that.
He's dividing his asset multiple times.
Well, I mean, it's getting smaller and smaller every time.
But I said to him, I was like,
why are you doing this again?
I was like, you don't have to get married.
Like you're clearly not great at it, you know?
Like, and he was very funny.
He said, you know, Jim, he said,
you buy a car and you drive it for 200,000 miles
and eventually the engine craps out.
So you go out and you buy a Ferrari
or you buy some flashy sports car
and you drive it for a couple of months
and you realize this is not the car for me.
So you get rid of it.
Then you get another car.
And you know, you think this one's gonna be the one for you
but you know, after you drive it for like a year,
you realize, yeah, this is not the car for me.
You can lease them instead of buying them.
You're gonna walk everywhere for the rest of your life?
Yeah, well, that was my answer.
You could lease them.
You could lease them or you could,
you could have some other alternative.
I mean, here's the thing about marriage,
is it's a technology.
So we made it up so we can change it.
You think marriage will change in the next 20 years?
No, no, I think it'll,
I actually think it's gonna have,
I mean, I think we're leaning,
I think the pendulum always swings hard
in the other direction.
We have a tendency as a culture to overcorrect.
So I think we're heading into a spiral
of like traditional stuff.
Like I think you're gonna see like people getting
like super religious again
and people are gonna get super dogmatic.
I think we're gonna see the trad wife thing.
We're gonna see the hyper masculine.
We're gonna see like a very, you know,
we've got to, we've gone so far
in the direction of postmodernism
where nothing means anything
and everything's just, you know, like there is no definite.
We've become like Sartre, you know,
like we've become so postmodern
that it's become almost the form of rugged individualism.
I think we're gonna swing in the other direction now
and traditional institutions are gonna get popular again.
It will be, I mean, you know, from a marriage place,
it's gonna be great
because I think people are gonna get married.
I mean, people were slowing down on getting married
for a while and they were getting married later
and they're having kids later.
We're declining to have kids.
And I think as we, I think as a culture,
we start re-solidifying into gender roles
or gender tropes, depending on how we wanna look at it.
I think you're gonna see marriage resurge again,
but I think that it's still gonna be
as flawed of a technology as it ever was.
And I think we have so much out there now
to compare ourselves to.
You know, you used to compare yourself
to the neighbors next door
and what car they had in the driveway
and what they were wearing
when they left for church on Sunday.
Now you're just looking at everyone's greatest hits.
While living your gag reel, you know,
and you're never looking at any of that stuff
when you're having like a peak experience.
You know, you're on the toilet or you're bored
and you're looking at everyone's hashtag blessed.
I mean, well, they're in my office.
I can't tell you how many people do a consult with me
and they're cheating
and they haven't slept with their spouse in three years
and they're miserable
and you're looking at their Instagram
and it's all like best life ever, hashtag greatest hubby ever.
And you're like, what is this?
It's performance art.
You know, it's an advertisement of how happy you are
but this is what people are comparing themselves to.
They're looking at that
and going, oh, my marriage isn't that good.
That marriage isn't that good.
Trust me, that marriage isn't that good.
That marriage is in my, look at celebrities.
You don't even need to look at the people you know.
Look at celebrities.
Before they do the, it is with great sadness
that we advise that we're going to be moving
in separate directions and consciously uncoupling
and like that right before that, it's like,
oh no, we're happy, we're great, we're phenomenal.
You know, we're constantly advertising
how wonderful our relationships are while they're on fire.
You know, and then wondering why everyone's, you know,
miserable in their relationship
because they're comparing it to something fake.
It's like comparing your body to a photoshopped body.
You know, it's-
Other than social media, do you think there's something else
in our society that made marriage more difficult
to stay together?
Now makes it worse.
And just like your parents stayed married?
Yeah, my parents stayed married until my mother passed away.
Same with me.
But they were mixed result.
I see, I think that my parents were not as caught up
in their own happiness.
I think we're very caught up in our own happiness.
We're all very self.
Yeah, we're all very sort of, I don't want to say narcissistic,
but we're very much like we are the son
around which everything revolves.
What am I not getting?
Yeah, my father was a Vietnam veteran, you know.
Well, he got out of the Naval Academy in 66
and went to Vietnam for three years.
So he was alive.
So he was like, fuck, I'm ahead.
I'm playing with the house's money.
I'm alive.
Everybody in their wedding party,
all the men in their wedding party died in Vietnam.
There's five guys in their wedding party.
They all died in Vietnam.
My parents never looked at their wedding novel
because every single man and it was dead.
They were all helicopter pilots in Vietnam
who got killed in their 20s, you know.
So they didn't really see marriages.
Like it was a partnership.
It was like, yeah, we're gonna do this thing.
We're gonna have kids.
We're gonna raise the kids.
We're gonna, you know, we're gonna have a house.
You know, we're gonna have a car.
Like we'll be successful.
The lights are on.
My father was dirt poor.
He came from like Appalachian part of Virginia,
a small town called Shawsville.
Didn't have indoor plumbing
until he left for the Naval Academy.
And he just, I think he saw marriages.
Yeah, that's what you do, you know.
He met my mom on Fleet Week.
She was a nurse in the city.
And he was, you know, on Fleet Week
and he had his uniform on and he was in a bar
and he was drunk and he went to her
and he said, you're the most beautiful woman
I've ever seen and I'm gonna marry you.
Cause he was drunk.
And she said, are you in the military?
Cause he was wearing a uniform and he said, yep.
And she said, what country?
And he said, whatever country you're from.
And he invited her to visit him at the Naval Academy
a couple of weeks later and she came.
But he'd invited three other women.
He just didn't know if any of them would come.
So he'd invited all of them.
So my mom got there and she saw these other women
and she said, either I'm leaving or they're all leaving.
And he was like, I kind of like her.
So he made them all leave.
And they were, yeah, they were married 50 plus years.
But, you know, their marriage had challenges.
You know, he was an alcoholic.
He's been in recovery for maybe seven, eight years
since she passed, but, and he's remarried.
But he remarried within a year of my mom dying.
Like he was the kind of, he's of a generation of men
that he needed someone to take care of him.
You know, my mom died.
He didn't even know how to scramble an egg.
Like it was, you know, like after she passed,
I had him come to stay with me and my sons.
And I was trying to like teach him like, okay, dad,
here's how you make like a batch of chili
and then you can eat it all week, you know.
And I was like, how's this guy gonna,
cause they had this very, you know,
but that's what I met another older woman
and her husband had died.
She needed someone to take care of.
He needed someone to take care of him.
But that generation didn't have it as easy as we know.
That's what I'm saying.
Like they, they, just meeting your basic needs, right?
They were grateful to be alive.
They were grateful to be alive
because they'd either been through a war.
We're not grateful unless we're driving a Mercedes or a,
and even then we're not grateful
because, because the truth is as well.
Okay, a Mercedes, a Mercedes, who cares?
You know, when people have a Mercedes,
my secretary has a Mercedes.
She leases it, you know, I drive a Jeep.
So is she better than me?
Is she more successful than me?
She works for me, you know.
So I don't, I don't know that any of it's enough anymore.
Like no matter what watch you have,
somebody's got another one or a better one or five of them.
And all those comparison that we see.
It's all, and so I just think that's the thing
that makes it impossible, right?
Like if, if, if you're,
our parents' generation was struggling
to just make it through, right?
To, to meet your basic needs,
to keep a roof over your head, to raise your children.
And now where it's very much, are you self-actualized?
Are you happy?
Do you have an eight pack at?
Like it would never have occurred to my father,
did he have an eight pack?
It would never have been something he thought of, you know?
It's just not, it just wasn't on his radar, you know?
And I don't think my mother would have ever been like,
oh, you know, he, he doesn't have an eight pack.
Like that wouldn't, because again,
though it's not constantly being advertised to him, you know?
I think that how many women did he interact with in a day?
You know, how many women do I interact with in a day?
Visually, or personally in some fashion,
or, or, you know, in a curated, mediated way.
And again, those are curated women, by the way.
So they're Photoshopped, they're airbrushed,
they're, they've got filters on them.
So again, you know, how does marriage survive in that setting?
It had a hard enough time surviving without all of that.
I mean, forget kids.
The divorce rate keeps increasing, right?
Yeah, it keeps going up, it keeps going up.
It's, it's been hanging around 53 to 56% for a while.
We had a bump after COVID.
What are other countries like?
Countries that have a significant religious narrative
have the lowest divorce rates.
So the lowest divorce rates are in like, you know,
Saudi Arabia.
Yeah, but they don't have a whole lot of choice.
Right, you're not allowed to divorce.
You just have your wife killed, you know?
So that's, you don't have to divorce.
So the countries where there is this very strict
religious prohibition against marriage, or against divorce.
But I mean, the United States
is probably the highest divorce rate?
We're among the highest, yeah.
I don't think we're the, we might,
we might be the highest now.
For a while, Germany had a very high divorce rate.
France had a pretty high divorce rate.
What's interesting is, is the divorce rate
and the marriage satisfaction rates, those are different.
Cause most people, the goal is not, can we stay married?
The goal is, can we stay happily married, you know?
Cause if somebody said to me like, yeah,
I've been married 25 years
and I've been fucking miserable for 15 of them.
Like, I'm not gonna envy you.
Like, great job, you're really hung in there
in that awful situation, you know?
Like, that's not impressive to me, you know?
I have a cousin who got married and I was,
I was chatting with her, she's a younger woman.
And I, her, her husband just joined the police force.
And I said to him, so I was trying to make small talk.
And I said, so do you, you know, do you like it?
And he's from a family of cops.
And he said, nah, not really.
But you know, I'm gonna do like the 20 years
and then you know, you get your pension.
And I thought, I'll just do my 20, that's 20 years.
You're 25 years old, that's 25 to 45.
Those are fucking incredible years.
You'll never get those back.
And your approach to life is, yeah, I mean, I don't like it,
but I'll just kind of do it, you know?
Like I, I want to tip toe through life
and arrive safely at death.
Like that seems, you know, but I, I, I get that that's what
we're, if that's what marriage is,
if it's an endurance event, you know,
where no, no, you've got to stay married, you know?
Why, I mean, that's why I think
religions have been very quick to, I mean,
I always tell people I'm not religious.
I was raised very Catholic.
But the reality is that, you know, I mean, there's,
if in fact, God talked to humanity with 10 commandments,
I think it's hilarious that the only thing he has to say twice
is don't fuck people you're not married to.
Thou shall not kill once, right?
Honor the Sabbath once.
Don't covet your neighbor's wife, don't commit adultery.
It's, it's the only thing.
It's the only thing that got two commandments.
So like Bayes goes, don't kill, honor the Sabbath,
don't fuck people you're not married to,
seriously, don't fuck people you're not married to.
Like they just, no, it didn't,
Dasha, not steal one, you know,
it's the only one that got double billing.
Well, religion's a big component.
It's a huge component too, but why?
Because how else are you going to control people?
How else are you going to get people
to sign on for this thing and not sleep with each other?
I mean, I'm not saying Freud was right,
but we do want to sleep with people.
We do want to kill people that don't do
what we want them to do.
Like we have these animal instincts.
We have these impulses.
And what do we do with them?
Well, we have to live in a civilized society.
So civilization, it's this content.
We have to suppress certain things.
If marriage was outlawed or just abolished,
it would just be a free-for-all.
I don't know that that's true.
I mean, I think that,
I think people would like us to believe that's true.
You know, I don't believe that.
Like I don't believe that if,
Probably a lot of heavy.
If murder wasn't illegal,
that I would just go killing people.
Like I, like, you know, like I,
I rape and murder as many people as I want to,
which is none, cause I'm not a monster.
Like I don't, I rape as many people as I want to, none,
because I don't want to.
I wouldn't want to do that to another person.
I think society would be probably happier without marriage.
Well, I think we would have a lot less
of the damage that comes, right?
I think we'd have to find new narratives
to structure, to define relationships, right?
I mean, I do think there is a part of us that wants to say,
cause you know, as a grown man who's divorced,
when you're 20 and you say, oh, that's my girlfriend,
nobody thinks anything of it.
When you're 50 and you say, oh, that's my girlfriend,
people go, there's a story there.
Like cause you're either divorced or commitment phobic,
or why do you have a girlfriend when you're 50?
Why isn't that your wife?
So they know there's a story there.
So we'd have to, and I get it, I get it,
because if someone says, oh, that's my boyfriend,
it's like, all right, well, that could be for a week.
That could have been nothing.
That could be like, yeah, that's my boyfriend.
My husband, it's like, oh, okay, wait, that's her husband.
Like she's got some authority there.
So I get that there's this idea that we want to say,
like, you know, it's like when you're a little kid,
this is my friend, but this is my best friend.
You know, this is my best friend.
But like how many adults still need to say that?
Like how many adults still need to say,
oh, my friend, Todd and I, and my best friend, Tom and I,
like, okay, like, so they extra special friend?
Like, what are they, like, do they get health insurance
with that?
Like, what is the deal with that?
So I think that's kind of what marriage has become,
is it's like, you know, well, the person I love.
No, no, but like the person I love.
Like there's a lot of people I love.
I wouldn't want to be married to any of them.
But there's a lot of people I love, you know?
And I love my ex-wife.
I wouldn't want to be married to her.
I think she loves me.
She wouldn't want to be married to me.
I don't blame her.
I'm a great ex-husband.
I'm a terrible husband.
I'm a great ex-husband.
Because the skill set for an ex-husband
is totally different than skill set for a husband.
Skill set for a father is completely different
than that of a husband.
That's the thing I have to tell people all the time.
People say, well, he's a terrible husband,
so he shouldn't have custody of the kids.
I'm like, what the fuck?
Where's the overlap between being a good husband
and being a good father?
Like being a good father is a whole different skill.
You could be a great husband and a shit father.
And you could be an amazing father, a terrible husband.
Like there's very little overlap in those skill sets.
You know, maybe good listening skills would be helpful
in both or patience would be good in both.
But that's true of almost anything.
You know, it's a doctor and a lawyer.
Both be good if you had good listening skills.
It doesn't mean that the same profession.
Is divorce harder on women or men?
That's a great question.
I think it's equally hard on both,
but I think that the world is more sympathetic
to women when they get divorced.
I think when a woman gets cheated on,
the man's a piece of shit.
And when a woman cheats on a man,
she must have been forced into the arms of this other man
or she had to explore herself
or she was being neglected in some fashion.
So if a man cheats, he's a piece of garbage.
And if a man's wife cheats,
he mustn't have been meeting her needs.
And she had every right in the world.
Like, so the world is very unsympathetic
to men when they get divorced.
But that's been throughout hers.
Yeah, that's been for, I mean,
there was a maternal presumption, a legal presumption,
what was called the tender year's doctrine,
which was that if a child was under the age of seven,
they were automatically presumed
that they would be in the custody of the mother.
And men, so men get really beat up still in court.
I mean, the law theoretically is gender blind right now,
but I don't actually see that.
Because the law is people, the law is judges,
and judges are human and they are all the same biases.
And it's just not a moment right now
where men are particularly sympathetic characters.
I think that even young men, I mean,
if at a school dance they sing Beyonce's Girls
Who Runs the World, like if there was a song called Men,
Who Runs the World Men, and it was a positive thing,
like you get pilloried for that.
So I think that men have a very hard time right now
in divorce.
They see their children less,
they get hit harder financially.
They are the bad guy no matter what.
If they cheat, they're the bad guy.
If they get cheated on, they were the bad guy
because they probably neglected her.
There's a presumption that the man
is to blame a lot of the time.
Now again, marriage equality has been a thing for a while.
So there are tons of gay couples.
So you have two men, two women divorcing each other.
And that hasn't really shook out too much yet
in terms of how that plays out.
I don't know if it's that gay and lesbian couples
are better at it than heterosexual couples
or if it's still they're in the honeymoon period
because marriage equality hasn't been around that long.
But I think men find a less sympathetic world.
But in fairness,
divorced men have it a little easier, I think.
Divorced men meet a young woman
and the woman's like, instant family, just add me.
That's great, you know.
If he's got kids, it's like, oh, he's got kids.
Look at how nurturing he is and how lovely and women,
you know, they get divorced.
They've got kids, guys are like, whoop, it's got baggage.
I'm not going near that.
So I think that men and women have different problems
post-divorce and the world could be better to both of them.
I think that I have some women who I've done their divorce
and whatever guy is with them is gonna be very lucky
because they're beautiful, they're smart, they're good moms,
but they're also vibrant, exciting women.
Now they're loaded.
And they've got money now, yeah, they've got money.
They don't have as much financial insecurity.
Although I have to tell you that,
it's the last remaining feminist taboo.
I got a lot of women paying alimony these days.
I mean, women can, women marry the like handsome musician
who's not successful or the artist, you know.
There's a lot of listen week.
It hasn't been, you know, there's been a significant effort
in our culture in the last decade
if anyone didn't notice to improve the situation of women.
If you have an equally qualified man
and an uniquely qualified woman,
the woman's the diversity higher, the man's not.
So I have a lot of women who get, when they get told,
like, oh yeah, no, you gotta give them half your shit
or oh no, you gotta pay alimony
because he makes 50 grand a year and you make 250.
And they're like, you know,
they could be the staunchest feminist in the world.
And when you tell them they gotta pay alimony,
they're like, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, he's a man.
He's got a strong back, he can get out there and work.
And then suddenly the whole like gender is a construct
and there's no such thing.
That goes right out the window
and you got told you gotta pay alimony.
That's like, nope, no, no, no, no.
I believe in strict gender roles.
Men should pay alimony.
Women, even if you earn 10 times,
you should not have to pay alimony.
I've had very, very staunchly feminist clients
who changed their mind about how feminist they were
when they got told that they were gonna have to pay alimony.
Interesting.
Yeah, but I do have a lot of men
who won't take alimony even though they're entitled to it
because there's just some feeling of like,
yeah, no, I'm not doing that.
It's emasculating.
Like if she tells people that we know
that I took alimony from her,
like people will think I'm less than a man.
So again, it's all gender stuff.
It's still out there.
It's still part of the zeitgeist.
We're still trying to figure it all out.
How many marriages are genuinely happy, you think?
How many married couples?
Gosh.
Because I see married couples that have been married.
It looks like they've been married a decade or two
and they're having dinner
and they're having the same conversation they had yesterday
or the day before or the day before that
and the weeks and months before that.
You know, here's what I'll tell you.
I have, I know a lot of people
and I think I know one couple
that has like a genuinely happy marriage.
What do you think the secret is?
Ah, they really like each other.
I don't know.
Like they're really good to each other.
I have to tell you, they make me very uncomfortable.
My ex-wife and I jokingly say
that they were the reason we got divorced
because we've known them since we were in college
and we went to Disney with them,
with their kids and our kids,
when all the kids were little.
And we were gonna go on a ride
with our kids and their kids
and they were gonna like,
oh, we'll take the kids on the ride
and you guys can go.
And my friend was like,
oh good, we're just gonna go walk and hold hands.
And they walked away and like holding hands
and we looked at them
and we didn't say anything to each other.
But like five years later when we got divorced,
I said, you know, when I saw the two of them together,
I thought, I don't feel like that about her.
Like, and she said, oh my God,
I remember that exact moment and I felt the same way.
So I think they make people uncomfortable.
Like when you see someone who's got it right,
like this guy just loves her.
He loves her.
They've been married 25 years
and dude, it's like he's talking
about a girl he met yesterday.
And she's the same way about him.
Like she's-
It's a miracle when that happens.
Yeah, I just think it,
you know, man, I tell people,
marriage is like the lottery.
You are probably not gonna win, you know?
But if you win, what you win is so good.
Like, I don't know, maybe buy a ticket, fuck it.
Like, but buy a ticket, get a prenup.
Like, do you take all your money
and buy lottery tickets?
No, but if you, and I don't buy lottery tickets.
Like, I don't play the lottery.
I'm not gonna fucking win, why?
You know, set the money on fire, it'll be more fun.
But if somebody said to me, no man, you know what?
Once a week, I buy $20 worth of lottery tickets.
All right, go for it, you know?
Somebody's gotta win, maybe it'll be you.
Like same thing with marriage.
Like maybe somebody's gotta win.
Like yeah, I've met hundreds, if not thousands of couples.
And I know one, one that is legitimately happy
and like really seem to just feed that happiness
by that marriage that they have.
And they both as individuals have become the best version
of themselves by being, you know what?
Like, that's, they won the lottery.
So buy the ticket, I guess, you know?
But I mean, don't make that your retirement plan.
Like, don't go like, well, you know, don't worry.
I'm not saving money for my kid's college
because, you know, I'm buying lottery tickets.
Like that's, you're an idiot if you're doing that.
Excellent.
Jim, thank you so much for sharing your story.
It was a pleasure.
Your thoughts on marriage and love and divorce.
Fascinating topic, isn't it?
Yeah, it is, and I suspect it will continue to be.
I don't know that we're gonna culturally
get any better at it, but the economy's good, we're busy.
Economy's bad, we're busy.
Like we're a recession-proof industry.
So, you know, it's, even COVID didn't slow us down, you know?
It probably sped you up.
Well, people said for better or for worse,
they didn't say for lunch, you know?
And when you're locked in the house together,
that was not great for most marriages.
Like there was no, it was not,
hey, we should all spend more time together.
You know, there was a lot of difficult conversations
that came out of that.
Barbers and divorce lawyers, when the pandemic ended,
we were, the lines were out the door, you know?
So whatever the next thing is, you know,
we'll still be here.
All right, thank you so much.
You got it, man.
Thank you.
