Hello, my name is Roberta Anding, I'm a clinical dietitian and I'm going to take you on this
journey to wellness, this roadmap to wellness for this course on nutrition.
Let's start out by telling you a story.
Had a girl who came into my office and she was on this wonderful cayenne, lemonade, and
maple syrup diet.
And she wanted to really know how to lose weight, she'd seen a celebrity on television
talking about this diet and how they lost weight very, very quickly and how this was
a wonderful way of detoxifying her body.
Well, she ended up losing some weight on this diet, but lo and behold, wasn't getting adequate
amounts of protein, wasn't getting vitamins and minerals.
And she lost mostly fluid on this diet and not really the body fat that she was attempting
to lose.
Well, how do I know this?
Again, my name is Roberta Anding, I'm a clinical and registered dietitian.
I work at Texas Children's Hospital in Houston as a director of sports nutrition.
I'm the director of sports nutrition at Memorial Hermann Hospital in Houston.
I teach a course in nutrition at Rice University and I'm the dietitian for the Houston Texans.
I've been a dietitian for 30 years and again, my job with this course is to take you on
this journey to wellness.
We're going to start out this journey by looking at trends and seeing what Americans
are actually interested in.
Well, trends suggest that we're interested in nutrition, we're interested in eating
right, and we're interested in increasing our physical activity.
But do we really do all of this?
Or do we think we do all of this?
Well, a recent trend study from the American Dietetic Association suggests that 43% of
Americans believe that they are already eating well.
Well, maybe their definition of eating well in mind are a little bit different.
And again, we're going to explore that as we go through this course.
38% know that they should, but they believe there are barriers to changing their behaviors.
And I think this is a really big area.
We know that we're supposed to eat better.
We know that we're supposed to eat more fruits and vegetables.
But what are your barriers?
Is your barrier time?
Is your barrier family obligations?
Is your work a barrier?
19% aren't interested at all in changing their behaviors, and that's always an amazing statistic
to me.
It's almost like saying, I'm really not interested in being well.
I'm really not interested in promoting my health.
Or maybe those are individuals who really do have an unexplored barrier.
Some place where they haven't gotten the correct answers.
Well, the United States Department of Agriculture has showed us that Americans have increased
their calories by 523 calories per day since 1970.
So I want you to think about that for a second.
If indeed we're increasing our calories, but we're believing that we're eating right,
is there a disconnect there?
I think there is.
I think there is a disconnect.
We believe we're eating well, 43% of us.
But yet we're increasing our calories by about 523 calories per day.
Want you to also think about this, that if indeed we are overeating by 500 calories or
so per day, lo and behold, we're going to gain weight every single year.
Every single year we are going to gain weight if we're eating more calories than we need
to.
So again, where do those 523 additional calories come from?
Well, some of it was an increase in fruits and vegetables, but not much actually, because
think about this.
Do fruits and vegetables have a lot of calories?
Well the answer to that is no, they don't.
So a good percentage, about 50%, are coming from added fats and sugars, okay?
Are we eating well?
43% of us believe that we are, but in reality our additional calories are coming from fats
and sugars.
Well, why is that the case?
Well, one of the other major facts since 1970s is portions are getting larger.
They're getting significantly larger than they were in the 1970s.
Remember back to the way your grandmother ate or the way your grandmother fixed food.
You might have had fried foods at a meal, you might have had dessert at a meal, but the
portions were controlled.
So I think as we look at that additional 523 calories, what's actually happening is we're
getting larger portions and those larger portions have more fat and sugar than the original
foods.
There's also a disconnect between what we believe to be true and what we actually do.
Well this course is designed to do a few things for you.
First, we're going to really work on clarifying the misconceptions around food.
Should I go on a cleansing diet?
What about the latest diet that I've read about in a magazine?
What about that product that claims I can lose weight without any work?
I don't have to change my eating habits.
I don't have to increase my exercise, but I'm going to lose weight.
So we're going to clarify some of those misconceptions around nutrition and we are going to replace
it with science.
We're going to replace it with science that you can understand and most importantly, most
importantly implement in your everyday lives.
So when you are bombarded with the next latest and greatest fad that's out there, when the
next latest and greatest diet comes out there, you're going to look at this and say, but
I know what the science says.
I know the science can't justify the claim that's being made for that product, device,
supplement, herb.
So the science is going to rule this course.
This introductory lecture explores our reasons for why we eat what we do and some of our
beliefs surrounding food.
Americans have a love affair with food.
We all love food.
So we're going to take all of this science information and continue that love affair
with food and we're going to work on undoing the confusion about nutrition.
Well, where do we get our information from?
Well, in an ideal world, we'd get it from our physician, our healthcare provider, our
registered dietitian, but that's generally not where Americans get their information.
So I bet you can think to yourself, where do I get my information?
All of this ADA Trends Study, the American Dietetic Association Trends Study, suggests
since 2002, television has actually decreased in popularity from where we get our nutrition
information from 72% to 63%.
I think what's important about this is, yes, we're not using the television as much as
we did in years past and we also don't really believe the information.
Perceived credibility of television is about 14%.
I do a lot of media work in Houston, a media spokesperson for the American Dietetic Association,
and one of the challenges, one of the challenges is that when you do an interview, when someone
wants to interview you on television, they want you to say their sound bites.
So I think the challenge is that the information oftentimes that we get on television is snippets
of nutrition, something that's quick and easy, not something that's going to be necessarily
factually true.
So television is a source of information that's going to represent another source, and they're
down in popularity from about 58% to 45%.
And the perceived credibility of magazine nutrition information is about 25%.
So it's actually greater than TV, because that includes some of the national news magazines
that really do in-depth exploration on nutrition topics.
So magazines have decreased in popularity.
Newspapers have suffered the most significant decline from 33% to 19%.
So we all know what's happening to newspaper popularity.
The newspaper that appears on your doorstep is going down in terms of just subscription.
So that's really not surprising that newspapers are a little less important in our lives.
This doesn't include, however, online newspaper subscriptions, where you can go and read your
favorite newspaper on the Internet.
So there's the answer.
The Internet has increased in popularity from 13% in 2002 to 24%.
So therein lies the challenge.
In this electronic age, we're going to the Internet to get nutrition and information.
In fact, if we're talking about adolescents, that is their number one source of nutrition
information is the Internet.
So again, I think there's a challenge there.
We're going away from traditional media outlets, and we're going to electronic media outlets,
the Internet.
Perceived credibility is approximately 22%.
So we believe the information.
It is a similar percentage to magazines, but in reality, the Internet has the widest variability
of information.
So the challenge is it goes from excellent.
information to flat out fraudulent.
And I have to tell you, every once in a while, when I go and look online, I'll think to
myself, does somebody honestly believe that?
Do they believe that?
Well, the perceived credibility of the information on the Internet is about 22%.
So my goodness, yes, there are people out there who will believe the information that
is presented because we want a quick fix.
We want to lose that 20 pounds for our reunion.
We want to get toned.
We want to get fit.
We want to prevent disease.
So anything that can pull us in oftentimes does.
It pulls us in regardless of the credibility.
So if we look at, this is where we're getting our information, we now can explore why do
we make the food choices that we do?
Well, almost every single survey study out there will say that taste rules the day.
In my household, my husband will say, is this good or good for me?
Because if it's not good, if it doesn't taste the way he wants it to taste, it really doesn't
make any difference if the nutritional value is high.
Convenience, working women.
Well, I've worked for 30 years and raised three children.
So the challenge for me always was, can I get something nutritious on the table in a
very quick fashion?
When my son played soccer, we oftentimes didn't get home from soccer practice till 9 o'clock
at night.
I have to tell you, I'm not going to be the person who's fixing dinner at 9 o'clock
at night.
So we did a lot of sandwiches at my house when my children were growing up.
Emotions.
I don't want you to necessarily raise your hands at home, but I want you to think about
times that you've been upset or times that you've been sad or times that you've been
happy.
Have you ever eaten more or less based on emotions?
And I think we do have that emotional connection with food.
Religion and culture, very, very important in terms of our food preferences and our food
choices.
I had a basketball player who during Ramadan, his holy fasting time, would actually fast
during Ramadan as dictated by his culture.
His basketball statistics got better during Ramadan because that's what made him whole.
That's what completed him as a man was his faith and his culture.
So he actually scored more, had more rebounds during Ramadan with no food and no water.
I have to tell you as a sports dietitian, that's probably not anything that I would
ever recommend, but it worked well for him because again, it completed the package, it
made him whole.
Health beliefs, if I believe something to be true, if I believe it to be true, then
lo and behold, that's going to be how I dictate my choice.
If I believe that whole grains are better for me, then lo and behold, I'm going to go
ahead and do that.
If my mother has told me something to be true, I might do it regardless of the science.
Remember being in college, probably my senior year of a nutrition curriculum, and my mother
always told me, if I had a cold, I needed to heat up orange juice and add lemonade to
it.
I have to tell you, I did that for years.
There is really no science, but this is what my mother instilled in me as a health belief
as a little girl, and so I continued that through about my senior year in college and
I finally said, wait a minute, I don't think that's necessarily based in science.
There's no science saying that you can heat up your orange juice or lemonade and somehow
it's going to be better for you.
Nutrition, do we make choices based on nutritional values of foods?
Well, some of us do.
If I believe that whole grains are better, if I believe berries have lots of phytochemicals,
I may make that switch and now improve my health that way.
Medical conditions, do you have a chronic illness, diabetes, heart disease, diverticulitis,
some illness that is going to dictate that you change the type of food that you consume?
I have to tell you, this becomes more a phenomena of growing older than it does for younger
individuals.
I've had folks with type 1 diabetes, for example, that made absolutely no changes in
their eating behaviors because they really didn't believe that something was going to
happen to them.
So I think as we all get older, we all have what I call nutritional religion.
We all decide that our medical conditions are such that we must change our eating behaviors.
And certainly socioeconomic status, economy can make a big difference in terms of what
people choose as their food sources.
So if I live below the federal poverty line, I am going to participate in school lunch
for my children.
I am going to possibly make different choices when I go to the grocery store.
The most striking one I see is individuals who, for example, won't buy fruits and vegetables
because they'll say fruits and vegetables are way too expensive.
Well a solution to that would be canned.
And yes, I did say canned.
Canned fruits and vegetables have improved so much in the last five to six years that
we can now look at them as better sources of nutrition than maybe when I was growing
up.
Well, what's the reason for this disconnect?
The reasons for the disconnect are a couple.
Nutrition is a relatively new science.
But I think more importantly, because we all eat, we are all experts.
We all have an opinion.
We all have a belief about food that is true for us.
So if it's true for us, it must be universally true.
We don't know how to dress a wound, so we would ask a nurse.
We don't know necessarily how to take a prescription medication, so we would ask our pharmacist.
But we all eat.
So by definition, we are all experts.
I also think a major challenge is the understanding of the science is lacking.
And I think over and over throughout this course, what you'll find maybe challenging
is we're going to uncover the science and maybe put to the side or challenge your thinking
about nutrition and food.
We're going to start out by looking at this whole science by going through a brief history
of nutrition.
The first known reference to nutrition was by Hippocrates about 2,500 years ago where
he said, let food be thy medicine and let medicine be thy food.
Now I think that's probably one of the more powerful supports for nutrition and look at
the age of that quote.
I think it's an absolutely brilliant assessment of the role of nutrition in the management
and prevention of chronic illnesses.
But in the United States, we're still really in our infancy.
The nutritional history of the United States first started out, and there are some other
key findings I'm just going to give you the highlights here.
Wilbur Atwater in the late 1800s actually provided the first foundational information
regarding metabolism of food and energy requirements.
Throughout his work, this brought attention to the word calorie.
calorie being a unit of measure that estimates how much energy is used in the conduction
of work or metabolism, and this was again in the late 1800s.
During the first 50 years of the 20th century, discovery of essential nutrients highlighted
the nutritional science here in the United States as well as abroad.
So I think during this first 50 years, we were thinking about vitamins, vitamin C, vitamin
D.
All being discovered and the role being elucidated in human nutrition.
Kashmir Funk in 1912 proposed what he called the vital amine theory as a cure for most
common nutritional diseases, most notably berry berry.
Amine is a part of a protein molecule, and Funk believed that a vital or essential amine
or protein was the missing compound in white rice that was lacking what he called thiamine.
Now that we know it's thiamine, a B vitamin, that was a cause of heart failure in berry
berry.
The milling of brown rice caused the removal of the bran, which was an excellent source
of this B vitamin.
So in his discovery, what he learned was that taking off that outer layer of bran really
decreased the nutritional value of food.
He thought it was a protein, wasn't a protein, it was a B vitamin.
If we fast forwarded, thiamine is now added to white rice as part of fortification.
In the early 1930s, William Cummings Rose made landmark contributions in the area of
protein metabolism and the requirements of protein.
I have to tell you, in my dealing with athletes, the big challenge oftentimes with athletes
is getting them to realize that when William Cummings Rose made landmark contributions
in how much protein we require, he never said more was better.
He never said, eat all the protein that you want.
He actually gave us boundaries of protein requirements that still in this day and age
we are attempting to step over, particularly in the athletic world or the bodybuilding
world.
One of my favorite landmark works was the work of Ansel Keys on starvation.
And he did what is now known as the Minnesota Starvation Study.
I will tell you, in this day and age, the Minnesota Starvation Study would never be
approved by any research group or institutional review board because it is sort of unethical
in this day and age.
But what Keys did is he took conscientious objectors to World War II, men for religious
reasons who did not want to fight, and he voluntarily brought them into a research facility and
dropped about 25% of their body weight.
Now think about that for a second.
You come in, you're already at a normal weight, and I get you to lose 25% of your body weight.
Well, his medical findings were really pretty outstanding.
What he found was that in individuals that significantly reduced their calories, the
body adapted.
It slowed down its metabolic machinery.
And we now had an idea that metabolism, metabolism meaning the amount of calories that you burn
at rest, could be significantly impacted by dropping 25% of your calories.
Heart rate goes down, body temperature goes down, blood pressure goes down.
All of those decrease.
And I have to tell you, and the clients that I take care of who have anorexia nervosa, we
see the exact same medical findings that Keys helped us to understand in the mid-1940s.
What Keys also found, which to me was unbelievably, unbelievably outstanding, was that when you
reduce calories significantly, when you drop those calories by 25%, you have changes in
your mental status.
You have changes in your mental status, irritability, confusion, inability to focus.
So think about times in your own life that you've been unbelievably hungry.
I will tell you personally for me, not terribly pleasant to be around.
Get a little cranky, a little irritable.
But if that goes on beyond just missing a meal, and this is chronic, people become socially
isolated.
They don't really want to go out and do anything.
Oftentimes they'll cut up their food and lots of different pieces around their plate, move
the food around, and become so focused in on the event of food that it excludes other
things.
In Keys's study, these were all young men, and they weren't interested in being with
their wives and girlfriends anymore.
They weren't interested in playing cards.
All they were interested in were recipes and cutting out pictures of food in magazines.
Very similar to what we see in anorexia nervosa today.
Young women and men who have anorexia nervosa oftentimes really focus in on the arrangement
of food in their plate.
All of those findings that Keys opened up that door and let us know about in the 1940s.
The 1950s were really signaled by the advent of fast food.
And I will tell you, I think fast food oftentimes gets a bad reputation.
It gets a bad reputation because we think fast food alone is responsible for the increase
in obesity that we see in our country.
When McDonald's was founded in 1954, you could go in and get a hamburger, french fries, and
a soft drink for around plus or minus 700 calories.
Well, now a fast food meal, if you go in and supersize it, is 2,000 calories.
So reflect back to it's the portion sizes and that increase in calories that we've seen
since the 1970s that are crystallized in that statement.
Well now, if we look at from that work of Keys and through the 1950s with the advent
of fast food, we're now looking at a shift from nutritional deficiency diseases to diseases
of nutritional excess.
And that has been the focus of nutritional science since the 1970s.
We are interested in preventing heart disease or managing heart disease and we are interested
in the prevention of diabetes.
So I think when you think just about the changes in nutritional philosophy since the 1970s
with heart disease, heart disease in the 1970s, probably the most landmark study, really
looked at the use of polyunsaturated fats, liquid oils, corn oil, safflower oil, sunflower
oil in the management of heart disease.
Well, if we fast forward to today, we're still interested in oils, but we now have comments
on trans fats which we'll explore in later lectures, saturated fat.
We've dissected that out and actually made this more of an exact science from where we
were in the 70s.
Diabetes.
I think diabetes is going to be the tsunami of disease that gets us in this century.
When you look at statistics, it has been estimated that a child born in the year 2000
has a one in three chance of being diagnosed with this disease, one in three chance.
When I first started out as a clinical dietician, I didn't see children who had type 2 diabetes.
We think of type 2 diabetes as adult diabetes.
Sometimes it's referred to as obesity onset diabetes.
I think the real tragedy is that we're now seeing children at younger and younger ages
with type 2 diabetes.
At Texas Children's, the youngest child with type 2 diabetes that we've had is four.
And again, in 30 years of practice, I never thought I would see that.
Well, I'm also now going to give you some real good news.
Talked a little gloom and doom here, but I'm going to give you some good news.
Diet and exercise can help.
Diet and exercise can really help that management of chronic illness.
So we've looked at this nutritional history and said, aha, since 1970, we are really
focusing on nutritional excess.
Well, this is where this course comes in.
Diet and exercise can be that roadmap.
It can be that those steps to wellness that we're all looking at.
The question is, how are we going to come up with good sources of nutrition information?
Where will we get that from?
Are we going to be evidence-based?
Are we going to go to the science to get the information?
Are we going to go to less reputable sources?
Well, certainly, I'm going to direct you to the science of nutrition.
We're going to talk about the building blocks.
How do we get from our first step on the road to the end?
We're going to talk about how your body digest food.
Again, I think one of the real challenges is we have a disconnect between what we believe
to be true about digestion and what actually goes on.
And so we're going to uncover that roadmap to digestion.
We're going to talk about proteins, carbohydrates, and fats.
What's good?
What's not good?
How much?
What's the balance?
We're going to talk about vitamins and minerals.
And as we explore that science, we're not going to just talk about how much you need
vitamins and minerals.
We're also going to look at, is there any harm in taking vitamins and minerals?
And some of the more recent science suggests, yes, that because a little bit is good, a
small amount is good, does not mean a lot is better.
In fact, when it comes to vitamins and minerals, a lot can actually be harmful.
We're going to explore calories.
How many do you need?
How do you know how much you need?
We're going to talk about water.
We're going to talk about fiber.
We're also going to, again, come to these nutrition-related disorders and how to combat
them through good nutritional choices.
We're going to explore the big ones, cardiovascular disease.
Certainly, no course on nutrition would be complete without talking about overweight and
obesity.
Really, the next big public health emergency in this country is going to be overweight
and obesity.
Metabolic syndrome.
What is metabolic syndrome?
Metabolic syndrome is kind of like prediabetes, digestive disorders.
We're going to talk about cancer.
We're going to talk about food safety, and along those lines, we not only have to talk
about these foods, but we have to talk about nutrition in your own life.
How do you actually read a food label?
How do you take all that information, make it personal, create your own nutrition and
exercise plan, depending on where you are on that wellness roadmap?
We're going to talk about understanding herbal therapies.
Are they good?
Should I take them?
Should they replace conventional medicines?
We're going to talk about this category of functional foods.
We're going to look at organic versus conventional foods.
Now, we're going to go back to whatever happened to that girl on that crazy lemonade, cayenne,
and maple syrup diet.
We got her off that diet.
We got her off that diet onto something sensible, because could she maintain that diet?
Could she live on lemonade and maple syrup and cayenne pepper?
What happens if she wanted to go out to eat with her friends?
What happens if she was going to sleep over?
What happens if she had a job?
She can't hang on that diet.
So we replaced the fad.
We replaced the hype and substituted in its place something she hadn't thought about.
Maybe I should get up in the morning and eat breakfast.
Maybe I should not skip meals.
Maybe I should stay away from large portions of fast food, and yes, she lost weight.
Can I tell you that she lost all the weight that she wanted to lose?
No, that wouldn't be true.
But she lost weight in a sensible way that was integrated into her lifestyle, and that's
what we're going to do in our nutrition course.
We're certainly going to talk about some frequently asked questions, things that I hear all the
time.
You know, should I do this?
What about drinking sports drinks versus water?
We're going to mention those along the way.
So as we go through this course on nutrition, we're going to replace the hype with the
science and make this a personal roadmap to wellness.
