Welcome back. In this lecture we're going to take a look at sources of nutrition information
as well as nutrition misinformation to help you to avoid being a victim of health fraud.
And we're going to start out by going over a little example that I've seen recently in my clinic.
I've had patients coming in who want to cleanse their colon.
Now, if you think about colon cleansing, you think that kind of makes sense.
Why wouldn't you want to clean your colon?
But Mother Nature has done a wonderful job in terms of giving us a recipe for colon cleansing, and it's called fiber.
There is no 20 pounds of waste product that accumulates on the inside of your intestinal wall.
There is no reason to purify and detoxify yourself, but literally over and over again I see people coming in with colon cleansing,
and essentially most of the programs out there really are forcing diarrhea as a way of helping people to lose weight.
Well, if you think about that for a second, if you have diarrhea, it's mostly water weight.
So if you're getting on the scale after your colon cleanse, you're going to lose weight.
But did you lose body fat?
And the answer is no.
So in this lecture, we're really going to try and separate the nuts from the berries,
come up with a really good way of evaluating some of the information,
talk about some good places to get information, and again continue on that roadmap to wellness.
Well, how do you separate fact from fiction?
How do you know it's fact or fiction?
I think that's a really difficult question to answer.
And in my rice class, I used to assign an assignment where I'd have them evaluate an ad,
and quite honestly, they couldn't do it.
Unless you had a degree in biochemistry, sometimes the advertisements were so sophisticated that it was very difficult.
Most of those sophisticated ads are actually coming from the internet.
So the challenge for us is how are we going to get this reputable source of information?
Well, I had a patient who came into clinic and she had been reading on the internet
that Prozac antidepressant medication has a black box warning
which suggests there's some side effects associated with it.
So she didn't want to use that evil pharmaceutical.
What she wanted to use was a homeopathic version of an antidepressant.
So we in our clinic did a little CSI nutrition, a little detective work,
and we actually looked up the herbs she was taking, and the herb contained strychnine.
So she was every single day supplementing herself with a poison.
But it sounded so great. It was homeopathic. It was natural.
It was all of that compared to the warning she was getting about the prescription antidepressant.
Trying to convince the family that this was a dangerous product for her to take was a challenge.
Now, the key here is, even though it's a challenge, that family was really trying to protect their health.
So in individuals who are trying to find alternative information, as a registered dietitian,
I always look at that as a gift because now I have people who are interested in making a change
but maybe need some guidance along that roadmap.
They need some guidance along that path to optimal wellness.
So what we're going to do is take a look at separating fact from fiction.
We're going to look at how do I get good nutrition information.
And most importantly, how can I avoid fraud?
So I think the real challenge is that avoiding fraud.
So that's going to come up over and over and over again in this series of lectures.
It's how do I as a consumer avoid fraud?
Well, first and foremost, we have some information from the Food and Drug Administration
that actually highlights, it actually highlights the red flags of health fraud.
How do you know when a product or a service or a device has, again, some reputable science
or is it making a claim?
So if you hear any of these claims being made, you need to have your antenna up and say,
now wait a minute, is this fact or fiction?
Is this helpful or is it hype?
And I also want you to ask the question, is there any harm to me if I do this?
And I think that's the new avenue that I see with a lot of the alternative products that are out there.
There is actually harm associated with them.
And that's unfortunate in this day and age that you have to be concerned about.
I can go out and spend my good money.
I can go out and invest in a product or a diagnostic test or something along those lines.
And lo and behold, I could actually harm myself.
Well, the first point is, is it a quick and effective cure all?
Well, just this morning, I was watching an advertisement on television for a new diet product.
You didn't have to diet.
You didn't have to exercise.
And you could eat all the food that you want.
Well, do you honestly think that it's going to be that kind of effective cure all?
That I don't have to do any work.
I don't have to invest any time.
But lo and behold, I'm going to get this great quick and effective cure all with no effort on my part.
Probably not reasonable.
The other example I can give you is I had a young lady who came in
and she was interested in treating her metabolic syndrome.
Metabolic syndrome, again, is this pre-diabetic state.
She had gone to a curandata health care provider within her Hispanic community
and she was taking, again, an herbal product.
It was a quick and effective cure all.
She wasn't supposed to have to do anything.
All she had to do is take this product and it was going to prevent her from developing diabetes.
There is no such product.
So that quick and effective cure all is tip number one.
To me, this is the most tragic one.
Can it treat a serious or incurable disease?
Again, in our life's cycle, many of us are going to end up with a serious illness.
And a product that you can buy from a consumer magazine, from the internet,
or that you see advertised that can treat a serious or incurable disease to me is the ultimate fraud.
Because what you're doing is separating yourself.
You're separating that patient from treatment that may be life-saving or at least life-sustaining.
And I think that's the real tragedy.
There's been lots and lots of folks in the media,
whether they're movie stars or athletes that have had cancer,
that have abandoned conventional therapy because they've read somewhere
that they can take a product that will treat a serious or incurable disease.
So I can think of an example where patients have gone to Mexico for leitrile
or they've had aggressive breast cancer and they're using mistletoe.
And initially, honestly, they'll feel better
because chemotherapy, radiation therapy for the treatment of cancer is arduous.
It's painful. It's challenging.
And you end up feeling almost sicker than the disease.
So you abandon that conventional therapy and you try something that you saw advertised
that will claim that it can cure a disease.
And lo and behold, you've abandoned your best chance at the best solution that you can get.
There are claims oftentimes of miraculous breakthroughs, secret formulas,
or my favorite, the hidden ingredient that your doctor doesn't want you to know.
So think about this one for a second.
What they're trying to do is say your doctor doesn't want you to know,
your healthcare provider doesn't want you to know.
So what they're trying to do is separate you from reliable sources of information.
Now, if you say, well, my doctor doesn't give me any good information
and I'm not really getting better or having a resolution of my symptoms,
I would encourage you to find another physician.
But having a miraculous breakthrough, a secret formula, or hidden ingredients
that, again, your physician doesn't want you to know about,
quite honestly, again, is one of those, uh-oh, ding, here it comes.
I really need to watch, is this health fraud?
Another one of my favorite ones, and you can tell I have a lot of favorites,
is useless medical terminology to sell a product,
such as thermogetic set point, lipoactive.
It all sounds impressive, but oftentimes this useless medical terminology,
you can't find it.
There is no definition because it doesn't exist.
And remember, we talked about one of the reasons why individuals struggle
with nutritional science is they don't have a good enough science background.
So if it sounds too impressive, if it sounds too good to be true, chances are it is.
Another great evidence of health fraud, another great tip for health fraud,
is all natural equals all safe.
This one I have to tell you, I scratch my head about.
Where did we ever get natural and safe in the same sentence?
So what's our alternative?
All synthetic, all fake?
We don't like those words, so all natural gives us this picture,
this illusion in our mind of waving grains of wheat.
We have this picture of nature in our mind, and we translate that to safe.
Well, I want you to think of things that might be from nature that aren't safe at all.
A couple come to mind from me, heroin, cocaine, tobacco.
All of those are natural products.
I'm waiting for cigarette manufacturers to put waving fields of tobacco on their product
to try and sell this as an all natural product.
All natural and safe are not synonymous terms.
Personal testimonies, even if these personal testimonies are from physicians,
claiming amazing results.
There was a famous athlete who was in a magazine endorsing a product.
He was endorsing this product, and he was saying this was the latest and greatest product out there,
and it got him a Super Bowl championship.
When he was interviewed afterwards of whether he actually took the product,
he said, no way, I don't take that product.
My agent got me an endorsement deal for $50,000.
Certainly in this category of personal testimonies, you've all seen pictures of before and after,
where someone will claim they got amazing results from this product.
We're all smart enough to know that with some of the computer technologies that we have
with Photoshop and other things that we can do to alter photos,
just because you see it in print doesn't necessarily mean it's an actual picture.
These personal testimonies endorsements are all claiming amazing results,
and you've got to ask yourself the question, is this practically or reasonably true?
And I think that's a challenge for all of us.
Some companies will set the urgency, limited availability, act now,
and you've all seen this on infomercials.
For the next 30 minutes only, you can get this product, but it's limited availability,
so act now, these products are in short supply.
We're all individuals who don't want to miss out on a good deal.
We want to maximize the amount of value that we get for our money.
So if a product is in short supply, why wouldn't I want that?
Why wouldn't I want to jump on that bandwagon?
And again, we create a sense of urgency that if I don't get this now, I might not get it.
Well, I tend to try and track these commercials,
and this limited availability comes back over and over and over again for the same product.
So obviously they must be making more product because the supply is running out
and they're making more and the supply is running out.
So you see this all the time.
No risk, money back guarantee.
Where do we get that in the real world?
If you go in and have a medical procedure, is it no risk, money back guarantee?
I think the challenge is that when you actually track those that say money back guarantee,
I'm going to encourage you to look at the flyers and the magazines that come in the newspaper.
And oftentimes there's a PO box if you want to get your money back,
and if you actually request your money back, it comes back to you saying that PO box is no longer active.
So when something claims to be no risk or a money back guarantee,
got a real challenge there because there are no guarantees in health care.
We don't see no risk on the bag of potato chips.
We don't see a money back guarantee on a bag of potato chips that if you have an adverse health outcome,
that somehow you can go back to the potato chip manufacturer.
Promises of an easy fix for some things like weight loss or impotency.
You see all these natural products being marketed for sexual dysfunction.
And oftentimes within those products, they include nutrients that have as a side effect vasodilation.
One of my favorite examples of that is niacin.
Niacin is a B vitamin that causes vasodilation.
So now I can take this all natural product that's going to be my easy fix for impotency
and lo and behold, I can feel it working, my hands tingle, my face gets flushed,
and the assumption is that somehow it's going to cure sexual dysfunction.
And it doesn't work that way.
If your sexual dysfunction is because of a nerve condition, it's a complex condition.
Dilating blood vessels isn't going to be the fix.
With weight loss, again, if all I have to do is take a pill and I can eat whatever I want,
I won't ever feel hungry.
It sounds so great and it sounds so easy.
We really want to make sure that we've got that quick and easy fix.
I can remember a family who had a daughter with a really pretty significant eating disorder,
and she went to a naturalist in my hometown of Houston.
And this naturalist said, well, we're going to do a bunch of skin testing,
and we're going to do hair testing, and we're going to find the nutritional deficiencies.
All I had to do was get some blood work done, and it had to be she was losing weight
because she had some kind of toxin in her body.
So they did a hair analysis, and it came back that she was taking an excessive amount of zinc.
Well, what they didn't ask her was, what do you use to wash your hair?
Well, she was using an anti-dandruff shampoo that had a lot of zinc in it,
and so she didn't have a zinc toxicity.
She just washed her hair with a zinc-containing shampoo.
The other thing that came back and said she was allergic to soy
and she was allergic to all these different foods.
And in this one example, it gave her a really great excuse to continue with her eating disorder
because somehow she was intolerant.
Somehow some of the issues that she had were related to the fact that she had an intolerance to a food.
So you can imagine what she did.
She now said, I can't eat this, I can't eat that, and I can't eat that
because it all came back as part of my diagnostic testing.
So that poor young woman had her eating disorder made worse
because she had a promise of an easy fix.
All I have to do is take this hair test.
All I do is have to take a blood test and someone is going to diagnose me
with what I'm intolerant to, and that's going to explain my weight loss.
It gave her that open door to say, you know what?
I don't really have to make any changes in my eating habits because I've got this easy fix.
So as consumers, we have this really difficult roadmap of how do I avoid some of these products.
Well, it's going to go back to the adage, if it's too good to be true, it is.
All of the conditions that we're describing, whether it's cancer or cardiovascular disease, whatever it is,
all require some work and effort on our part.
If I set out to lose 100 pounds, I am going to be hungry, I am going to have to exercise,
and I am going to have to make behavioral choices every single day
in order to make my goal of losing weight come true.
So exercise and diet do work, and so that's why they don't end up on this list of health fraud
from the Food and Drug Administration.
So credible websites and sources of nutrition education do exist,
and credible sources for fitness information do exist.
One great resource is my parent organization, the American Dietetic Association,
and that website is www.eatright.org, and all of these websites are going to be in your guidebook.
It is the premier food and nutrition website.
So you can go log on to that website and they'll give you the nutrition tip of the day.
There is handouts and information on functional foods, dieting tips.
One of my favorite things on the American Dietetic Association website is actually diet book reviews.
So if you see a really great diet book and you think this sounds great,
but wait a minute, it sounds like it might be a little fraudulent.
Every year, spokespeople from the American Dietetic Association review these diet books
and give you their view on the books that are out there.
And I think some of them might surprise you.
When it comes to exercise, it is the American College of Sports Medicine,
which is www.acsm.org.
It is the premier fitness organization, premier.
So if you want to find out this latest trend that a trainer is telling you,
is it valid, is it not valid, you can go log on to the American College of Sports Medicine
and oftentimes find reviews.
You can find information if you take multiple medications for a chronic condition.
Is it even safe for you to exercise?
And please keep in mind really credible sources of nutrition and fitness information
for you directly as a consumer is, again, are you getting recommendations from your physician.
The federal government also has a host of nutrition and activity websites
with outstanding consumer information.
Certainly the Centers for Disease Control, www.cdc.gov,
have conditions, if you have diabetes, if you have arthritis,
they have information on obesity management, solid, reliable information.
So if you remember that internet sites can have really outstanding information down to fraudulent,
here's a really great example of outstanding information is the CDC.
They also have on there what is called a BMI calculator.
And we're going to explore BMI throughout this series of lectures.
But BMI is a way of looking at your height and relationship to weight
and determining are you overweight, are you normal weight, or are you obese.
And so the CDC would be a logical place for you to go and get some information.
Certainly you can also go to, again, that FDA website, food and drug administration at www.fda.gov.
And what I like about this website is it gives you information on recall information.
So certainly when something gets recalled, say for example the peanut butter scare with salmonella,
you could go on the FDA website and find all the products that were made with that recalled peanut butter.
There are consumer warnings. Is a product out there safe? Is it not safe?
Is there some warning about a diet supplement that's out there?
And certainly we've all looked at the contaminated food outbreaks, the peanut butter pistachios, spinach,
all the food contaminations, the FDA website is going to be a great place to go.
Certainly the Food and Nutrition Information Center of the U.S. Department of Agriculture
provides the dietary guidelines for Americans.
And so this is general information on what is the current state of the science related to food and nutrition.
So if you want to find out what our roadmap is, the general information, here's another way,
here's another consumer bulletin for you on how to get those dietary guidelines.
Certainly lots of other credible nutrition and health related websites are listed in your guidebook.
And again, your family doctor is going to be a great example of how do you get good and accurate nutrition information
as well as counseling.
Well what kind of policies and public health guidelines have been promoted for Americans?
Well certainly we can take a look at some of the things that have happened in the 20th century
that have significantly improved our health.
And I'm only going to highlight a couple of them for you because I think they're great public health examples.
In 1924, salt was fortified with iodine for the prevention of goiter.
And that really significantly reduced the number of Americans who developed goiter.
I remember my mother describing the goiter belt around the Great Lakes,
where relatives of hers actually had goiter because there was no natural iodine in the soil.
In 1933, milk was first fortified for vitamin D to prevent rickets.
I would argue and kind of give you a little heads up on what's coming.
That certainly I believe that the vitamin D level that's in milk now probably isn't enough.
But in 1933, it was really forward thinking to link vitamin D and rickets.
In the 1940s, we also had policies that were enacted to establish a standard of identity for foods claiming to be enriched.
If the product was enriched, it must contain thiamine, niacin, riboflavin, and iron.
And so things that you might see on your shelves now is when you go and look at, say for example, a loaf of bread or white rice,
you're going to see that it is enriched with these missing nutrients.
Keep in mind that when that product was milled and we took off that outer brand layer,
a lot of these nutrients that were naturally occurring in that food were lost,
and now we enrich them or add them back.
Certainly in the response to the science linking folic acid deficiency in pregnant women to neural tube defects in that developing fetus,
a standard of identity was updated to include this nutrient as part of this enrichment program in 1998.
This is a major public health initiative.
It took a long time to get this enacted because in 1998, we were looking at,
is this going to cause any harm if we add more folic acid?
Is it going to cause any harm?
But what are the benefits?
And the benefits have been really pretty significant in terms of reducing the number of neural tube defects,
spina bifida and encephaly that are certainly major public health concerns for pregnant women.
Certainly on nutrition labeling laws, school lunch mandates and dietary guidelines for Americans
are all examples of public health policies intended to improve the health of Americans.
But not all policies have the intended outcome,
and the most notable is the Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act of 1994.
In my opinion, I think this piece of legislation had an intention,
but no one really thought about the consequence,
and some of the problems that we have with dietary supplements in this country now
are related to the Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act.
This piece of legislation allows manufacturers the ability to make what is called a structure function claim,
such as calcium can contribute to bone health.
This product cannot say calcium prevents osteoporosis.
That is a disease claim, but they can link structure and function.
So you could think of another example for someone with HIV, promotes immune health.
They can't say use for the treatment of HIV disease.
Can't say that, but when you go to the health food store,
oftentimes you find, unfortunately, the disease connection,
not the structure function claim, but the disease connection.
This has also shifted the burden of purity, safety, and efficacy from the manufacturer
to the federal government, to the FDA.
That is not the way pharmaceuticals are regulated in this country.
Pharmaceuticals must show purity, safety, and efficacy before it can reach the market.
That is not true with dietary supplements.
In fact, it's reverse.
So what that means is the FDA has to prove a supplement is dangerous,
versus the manufacturer proving it is safe.
And think of the Pandora's box that that opens.
What that means is a supplement manufacturer,
and there are lots and lots of really good supplement companies in the United States.
But let's use the example of an unscrupulous company coming in.
They put a product on the market.
There are adverse events associated with it, and it gets removed.
They've come in and made a significant amount of money, and then they pull it out.
Well, I think that's honestly a tragedy for the American consumer,
because now you have to second guess the safety and the purity of a supplement,
and you've got to ask yourself the question, is it safe or pure for me?
And the answer is maybe yes, maybe no.
And I think, again, that is a real challenge for the American consumer.
Some recent examples is that 49 out of 61 weight loss pills have been inaccurately labeled.
Why don't you think about that?
If you go and buy a weight loss supplement over the counter,
you're standing the chance that that product is inaccurately labeled.
So for example, there have been weight loss products that have been laced or adulterated with prescription medications.
Well, maybe you don't want to take a prescription weight loss aid that raises your blood pressure
because your blood pressure is already high.
You might not want to do that, but in taking product X, this all natural, all safe and pure product,
you've inadvertently taken a prescription medication.
Similarly to that family that didn't want to take a prescription antidepressant,
I'm sure they didn't want to take Stricknein.
An example is there's a product that has been all over the news called StarCaps.
As a weight loss aid, had an undeclared diuretic, which was linked with electrolyte abnormalities.
So say, for example, you're a patient who has congestive heart failure
and you are not wanting to take any more diuretic than what has been prescribed,
but you decided to go buy this product and on the label,
there was no warning for you as a consumer.
Absolutely no warning that, lo and behold, you're taking something as a weight loss aid
that has an undeclared diuretic and you're also taking a diuretic that was prescribed by your physician.
And both of you, your physician and you would not know by taking that product
that you've doubled up on diuretic and now have caused significant health risk to you.
Certainly in my world of professional sports, we've had six NFL players that will be suspended
because they were taking this product because it's banned by the NFL.
They are not allowed to take a diuretic in order to make weight.
And so now these men will lose 25% of their salary, 25% of their salary
for something that they didn't know had an undeclared diuretic.
So again, to me as a consumer and as a registered dietician,
I scratch my head and say, how did we get there?
Well, we got there because of the unintended consequence of the Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act.
Well, some other questions that I usually get about websites and good sources of nutrition information
are what about those that are linked with medical schools?
Those are great websites.
If it's linked with another reputable organization, you're pretty much guaranteed
that you're going to get really good information.
So a couple of examples that I can give you is that some of the premier cancer information
actually comes from the Sloan Kettering website, M.D. Anderson website,
two premier institutions involved in the management of cancer.
So for example, on their websites, they will have information about herbal supplements
and dietary supplements that are really targeted in for the cancer patient.
So I will tell you, stay tuned.
We're going to have some really exciting information coming up in future lectures
that are also going to help you to separate the nuts from the berries.
Thank you.
