Welcome back.
In this lecture, we're going to discuss the process of digestion, but I want to start
out by giving you an example that maybe you've experienced yourself.
Have you ever been on pain medication, narcotics after surgery, and had the untoward consequence
of constipation?
Well this process of digestion simply stated takes the food that we eat and makes it available
to our bodies for the energy and the nutrients that we need.
It goes unnoticed and often underappreciated unless there's a digestive disorder.
So that pain medication causing constipation is just one example of what happens when there's
an alteration in the process of digestion.
Most Americans have had a digestive disorder sometime during their lives, and according
to the National Institutes of Health, between 60 and 70 million Americans are affected
by digestive diseases.
Probably the two most common are constipation and diarrhea.
So this lecture is going to focus on the basic functions of the gastrointestinal tract, taking
us from beginning to end, some of the common ailments, and some of the dietary management
strategies for the diseases of the gastrointestinal tract.
And to start out, we're going to start out in the mouth with something that's very simple,
something that we don't think about most days, and that's the chewing of our food.
In our mouth chewing food breaks it up into smaller pieces and it moistened the food and
it introduces a compound called salivary amylase, and salivary amylase digest carbohydrate.
So that means that amylase is a digestive enzyme.
Anywhere you see that last three letters of ASE, that's going to tell you it's an enzyme,
and an enzyme facilitates something to happen.
So in this case, it facilitates the breaking down of carbohydrate.
So you can do a little experiment.
You can take a piece of bread and hold it in your mouth.
Don't chew it, don't swallow it, hold it in your mouth, and the longer it stays in your
mouth, the sweeter it gets.
It's taking a complex carbohydrate, bread, and breaking it into its smaller component
pieces, and the smaller those pieces get, the sweeter they get.
Another example where you can see something going awry is in head and neck cancer.
In someone who's had head and neck cancer and they've had radiation to the head and
neck, what ends up happening is you end up not being able to produce saliva.
So what happens is you have to have foods that are moistened.
So instead of having an apple, you might want to have apple sauce.
Instead of having a potato with no gravy or margarine on it, you actually may want to
put some gravy or margarine on it to moisten that food, or you can also put in artificial
saliva to help to moisten that.
So again, most of us don't appreciate what can go wrong until it goes wrong, and then
you have to modify what you're going to eat.
Well, after you chew your food, we're going to have this series of one-way valves that
takes food from the beginning to the end, and the esophagus is where we encounter that
first one-way valve.
And that first one-way valve is called a cardiac, meaning heart because it's close to the heart,
or lower esophageal sphincter.
And certainly when this goes wrong, we end up with gastro-esophageal reflux disease.
And we're going to discuss GERD more in a future lecture.
But when you get to the stomach, that is a very complex, and I'm going to say under
appreciated organ, where the process of digestion, how do you digest your food, satiety, that
feeling of fullness, continue.
So in the stomach, the food is churned and mixed up with digestive juices.
Have you ever had the experience of being really hungry, and your stomach is grumbling?
Well, that's what's happening is that the stomach is actually churning in the anticipation
that hopefully food is on the way.
The stomach is also highly acidic, and most of the time we think of that acid in the stomach
as a bad thing where there's real physiological function.
But the stomach is so unique, it is protected from its own very acidic contents by what's
called a mucin layer, not mucus, but a mucin layer that lines the stomach.
So it's like its own protective insulation in that stomach to prevent it from being auto-digested
or digested by itself.
So what is the function of this acid?
Well, first it aids in the process of digestion.
It helps to take bigger molecules and turn them into smaller pieces.
It also kills bacteria.
Most of the time we don't think of bacteria in our GI tract, but literally some estimates
suggest that we eat enough bacteria to make over a thousand people sick every day, but
why don't we get sick?
Well, part of the reason is bacteria can't live in a really acidic environment.
So the next time you decide to live on antacids, what does an antacid do?
It goes against acid.
It raises the pH of the stomach from something very acidic to something that's basic.
That's not always a good thing.
That acid in the stomach also helps to activate or make both iron, a mineral, thiamine, a
B-vitamin more available to be absorbed.
So there are really key functions of that mucin lining protecting the stomach and real
functions for that acid in your stomach.
Now that mucin lining can be eroded by most notably non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications.
So we all take ibuprofen or we've taken aspirin.
Those are examples of non-steroidal anti-inflammatories.
So my world where I take care of athletes, when I have an athlete, a male athlete who
has anemia, iron deficiency anemia, it's almost always because he's been taking too many anti-inflammatories.
It's worn down that mucin lining, broken it down, and when it's broken down, the acid
can now attack that very vulnerable muscular lining in the stomach and causes it to bleed.
There may be no pain associated with it.
You certainly don't see red blood when you go and have a bowel movement, but nonetheless
it is there and you can end up having some real significant problems with anemia.
So what else does the stomach do?
The stomach makes a compound called intrinsic factor.
An intrinsic factor is secreted by the parietal cells, a very specialized set of cells in
the stomach, secreted by the parietal cells and what it does is it acts as a key to unlock
vitamin B12 from food.
So without intrinsic factor, you cannot unlock B12 from food and it causes a type of anemia,
oftentimes referred to as pernicious anemia.
So having that intrinsic factor, having those parietal cells make intrinsic factor is really
pretty key.
Now I want you to think for a second, in our world of gastric bypass, when an individual
has gastric bypass surgery and I've now made that stomach reservoir much smaller, what does
that do?
Well it makes less acid available for the digestion of food.
What else does it do?
It makes less intrinsic factor increases the likelihood of a B12 deficiency and truly people
who have had gastric bypass surgery really have to take vitamin B injections for the
rest of their life because they don't have as much intrinsic factor.
Certainly the aging process also diminishes the amount of intrinsic factor that is produced
and so there's a type of anemia, pernicious anemia, that can be significant in individuals
over the age of 50.
So the older we get, part of the normal aging process, if you want to think about it that
way, the normal aging process is less intrinsic factor.
Less intrinsic factor means less vitamin B12 gets absorbed and again data is not conclusive
on the percentage of people but we can say it's a significant number of adults over the
age of 50.
I also really love the function of the stomach and its role in satiety and fullness.
In our stomach we don't have a calorie sensor.
We can't go tick, tick, tick and say okay that was a 500 calorie meal.
We get no instant feedback but what we do have in the stomach is what is known as a
volume sensor.
So we can sense volume and volume of food makes us feel full.
Well in this day and age of energy bars and foods that have a lot of calories in a small
space, there is some thought that what contributes to the obesity epidemic is we eat a lot of
foods that don't have much volume.
We never trigger these volume receptors in our stomach to say I'm done, I don't need
any more food.
And so the challenge for us is can we create more volume in our meals and the answer is
sure we can.
We have high water volume foods, fruits, vegetables, soup, yogurt, milk, 80 to 90% water on average.
And so these high water volume foods stretch our stomach, these stretch receptors are activated,
send chemicals to your brain saying I'm done.
So again think back to your grandma.
You always had what was called a well balanced meal, lots of fruits and vegetables on the
plate.
Little did we know at that time that the water in that food helped to trigger that sense
of fullness.
So here's an example for you.
If I gave you five large apples, a fruit bowl of apples and I said this is your snack
this afternoon, you probably would tell me oh I can't eat five large apples, that's way
too much food.
Your eye is telling you the volume is too great, you can't possibly eat that volume
of food.
But if I said to you I want you to eat a king size individual bag of M&Ms.
King size individual bag of M&Ms.
You'd probably say I could eat that if you're being honest, I can eat that amount of M&Ms.
But you could eat five large apples.
The calories are the same, the calories are the same, the volume is different.
So this concept of volume is going to come back over and over when we start talking about
weight management, the management of metabolic syndrome and cardiovascular disease.
This is going to come back over and over again.
Finally at the end of the stomach you have what is called a gastric sphincter.
It controls the rate of emptying from your stomach to your small intestine and that's
going to be a significant factor when we talk about the small intestine.
Now I do want to give you a heads up that true stomach disorders like gastric ulcers
and gastric bypass are going to be covered in more detail in following lectures.
But the workhorse of the digestive process, the true workhorse occurs in the small intestine.
In the small intestine we have a series of digestive enzymes that help to aid in the
breakdown of carbohydrate, protein and fat.
So we have this workhorse.
So if you were to ask yourself the question, where does most of the digestive process occur?
It occurs in the small intestine.
Now certainly certain other organs of the body make their contribution to this process.
Well for example, made by your liver, stored in the gallbladder, is needed for the emulsification
of fat.
And to emulsify means that I'm going to take that watery content of the stomach and now
what I need to do is get the fat and the water to mix together.
Well think about this as an example, you've all had Italian salad dressing and right before
you pour it on your salad what are you doing?
You're shaking it up.
And when you shake it up you are making a temporary emulsion, temporarily you're mixing
that oil and water together.
Well bile's role is to get the watery contents of your stomach and the fat in your meal to
mix together so it can be attacked in greater force by these digestive enzymes.
So here's a tip for you, bile is 70% cholesterol.
Bile is 70% cholesterol.
So what that means is in response to a fatty meal you make bile.
Bile is normally recycled, so we might want to think of our intestinal tract as a green
organ.
Our gut naturally recycles bile and we don't excrete it.
Well what oatmeal does is the fiber in oatmeal binds to that bile.
Instead of the recycling process going on what ends up happening is that bile is now
eliminated when you have a bowel movement.
So your body has to make more bile.
Where does it get the substrate?
Where does it get the building blocks to make bile?
If it's 70% cholesterol what it's doing is removing cholesterol from your blood to make
bile which is needed to emulsify the fat.
So when you hear claims for oatmeal lowering your cholesterol the way it lowers cholesterol
is it binds to that bile and causes it to be excreted or your body now has to make more.
So these gummy fibers that you find in oatmeal are certainly going to be a valuable adjunct
to the prevention of cardiovascular disease.
Now certainly there are many fiber supplements out there that can be used for the treatment
of constipation and if they're that gumming kind of gelling fiber can really be used as
an adjunct to help to control your cholesterol.
So we've got our liver and gallbladder helping us out here in the production and the storage
of bile.
And now we've got another real workhorse here and that's the pancreas.
The pancreas contributes valuable enzymes as well as hormones.
So when we look at it this way it's got two functions.
It's making all these enzymes lipase, amylase, protease and that is called its exocrine function.
It also has an endocrine function which means it produces hormones.
So this small little pancreas laying kind of close to that small intestine really has
a significant role.
The most notable hormone release by the pancreas is insulin.
And insulin is so important in physiological processing.
It's so important in disease management this hormone is going to come up over and over
and over again as we go through our series of lectures.
So what is insulin?
It's secreted by some specialist cells in the pancreas called beta cells.
It transports nutrients from the blood into the cells.
It is an anabolic hormone.
It is anabolic.
What does anabolic mean?
It builds.
So it transports nutrients.
It transports them from the blood into the cells where they can be used.
So it's anabolic.
This is really pretty significant because anabolic means building.
Sometimes it's good to build and sometimes it's not.
Well in human physiology if we have an anabolic or building hormone we're going to have a
counterpart and the counterpart here is glucagon.
Glucagon's job is to break things down.
So I want you to think about this for a second.
If you're on a weight loss diet you want to break down your stored nutrients.
You want to release them from the cells where they're being stored and you want them to
be transported to other parts of the body to be used as energy.
So I describe this as kind of the yin and yang, the pulley system of human physiology.
Insulin gets things in.
It's an anabolic hormone.
Glucagon releases food.
It is a catabolic hormone.
Well the disease is associated with insulin and glucagon.
Oftentimes are lumped under this big umbrella term called diabetes.
It's a major endocrine disorder that have two different types and we'll spend some time
in subsequent lectures exploring those.
Type one diabetes is autoimmune which means that you actually destroy the beta cells of
your of your pancreas.
They are destroyed.
Type two diabetes is you have enough insulin.
You make enough insulin.
In fact oftentimes you make too much insulin but you just don't use it in an effective
way so the body makes more and more insulin.
So again think with me for a second.
If I'm making more insulin than I need and I can't use it for all of its transporting
functions I've now got a whole bunch of a hormone that says store, store, store and
oftentimes people with type 2 diabetes will complain of significant hunger.
Part of that is the overproduction of insulin linked with type 2 diabetes.
Well that small intestine, that workhorse of digestion is about 23 feet long and the
surface area of that small bowel or small intestine is increased by villi and villi if
you think about it this way are small finger-like projections that stick out of that small intestine
lining like fingers that will significantly increase the surface area, it creates fold
upon fold and if I were to spread the whole thing out these folds are about the size
of a football field.
So in that 23 feet long tube you now have the surface area of a football field to take
care of that workhorse load of the digestion and absorption of nutrients really pretty
significant so any disorder of the small intestine can oftentimes have malabsorption, poor absorption
because I lost some of that absorptive surface area so that's a pretty significant finding.
Also within those villi on those again think about them as fingers on those villi on the
very tips are enzymes, it could be the enzymes that digest sugar, sucrose would have sucrose,
digest malt sugar, maltose would have maltase all of those are going to sit on the very
tip and probably the most significant enzyme that sits on the tip is lactase and lactase
digest milk sugar lactose into its most basic form so it can be absorbed.
So think about this for a second, you've had diarrhea, you've had a digestive disorder
and with diarrhea you shave off the tips of those villi, well temporarily you may not
be able to digest milk at all, you may end up with worsening diarrhea that it'll go away
over time but in the meantime you're going to have some issues in digesting milk sugar.
So a question I get all the time is after I've had diarrhea or after I've had anything
that's going to wipe out those tips of the villi how long does it take for them to regenerate?
Only in the range of three to five days depending on your overall health and conditions only
three to five days so temporarily you may have to stay away from milk sugar but for most
of us it's not going to be permanent.
Within the crypts of those villi within the very deepest recesses of the villi are what
are called pyrus patches and pyrus patches are immune secreting lymphoid tissue so when
people say I have a healthy immune system if I were to ask you where does your immune
system reside most of us have no clue but a good percentage of your immune system lays
in your gut.
Now why would it be there?
Well think about it if I'm eating all this bacteria I've consumed all this bacteria as
part of my normal food supply whatever escapes that hydrochloric acid in the stomach can
now be taken care of by immune secreting lymphoid tissue within that small intestine.
So diseases of the small intestine again anything that's going to impact the overall health
and well-being of the small intestine can actually increase the likelihood that you end
up with some other form of infection because you have really no way of secreting all the
immune secretions you could normally secrete.
Crohn's disease is an example and certainly we'll cover that in a later lecture.
The large intestine finishes the work of digestion in about 12 hours so that transit time from
when I eat my food until when it's actually excreted can be up to 12 hours.
Now there's lots and lots of reasons that can alter that but in essence we're looking
at about 12 hours.
It is connected to the small intestine by again that series of one-way valves the valves
are designed to go in one way so you might consider it north to south but it's designed
to go one way.
The large intestine really controls fluid balance so if you're dehydrated your large
intestine is going to pull water out of the waste products that are in your large intestine
pull them out to increase the amount of water that you have in your blood so that's the
primary role.
You remember food is absorbed in the small intestine so for individuals who are abusing
laxatives and think it's a way of losing weight you really aren't absorbing food in
your large intestine and that's where laxatives work.
So you're absorbing food in your small intestine fluid in your large intestine so kind of keep
that in mind.
You may lose weight, scale weight by taking laxatives but you're not going to impact
calorie balance and so that's an important distinction.
Normally within that large intestine is often times where people end up with one of the
more common GI diseases, diarrhea.
And diarrhea can be caused by GI irritants and there's a significant number of GI irritants
that we'll explore but the losses of fluid can be excessive and often times if the diarrhea
is caused by for example food poisoning the losses of fluid can be more than you can make
up voluntarily and that's why often times people with significant diarrhea really have
to go to the emergency room or to the physician and get what I call rescue fluids.
So what are other causes other than food poisoning?
Well certainly any concentrated solution that is dumped into that small intestine faster
than it can be processed can cause what is known as dumping syndrome.
Usually the food is dumped from the stomach to the small intestine in a super concentrated
form and when it's in a super concentrated form the body's job is to pull water to dilute
it.
So all along the GI tract and particularly in that large intestine fluid is being dumped
in an attempt to keep that concentration solution in a manageable form for the gut.
So I think the challenge is in individuals for example who have had that gastric bypass
often times what happens if they eat more food than they should that concentrated solution
in the stomach is dumped into the small intestine water is pulled in and you can have significant
diarrhea.
Certainly inflammatory bowel disease can cause diarrhea as well and if you've ever had food
poisoning food poisoning can cause diarrhea that often times needs those rescue fluids.
Now keep in mind the villi of that small intestine if an antibiotic comes in as a gastric irritant
and irritates those villi the villi flatten and you can malabsorb food.
So I think antibiotic use can cause diarrhea for two reasons.
One it flattens the villi and two within that large intestine you're supposed to have healthy
bacteria that live there and antibiotics will kill the bad guys the things you want to get
rid of but they also kill the good guys and in killing the good guys what ends up happening
is now I don't have the really good guys that help to process food and digest fiber and
all the other wonderful things that those bacteria do.
So in essence antibiotic use can be a major source of diarrhea for individuals that are
on and off antibiotics.
So a tip might be that if indeed that is you and for whatever reason you are on and off
antibiotic therapy keep in mind that you want to kill the bad guys but in this case
you can replace them with good guys and where do I get good guys where do I get healthy bacteria.
Well certainly healthy bacteria for example can be found in yogurt.
Yogurt is a great source of what are called probiotics and these probiotics are actually
the type of bacteria that your gut needs to function.
So if you have significant diarrhea what are your what's your first line of defense?
Fluid, fluid and fluid first.
Then if it's from malabsorption some really light carbohydrates so say for example you've
had horrible food poisoning your first goal would be can I get adequate amounts of fluid.
Now certainly I will tell you adequate amounts of fluid should have some electrolytes.
So it might be an oral electrolyte replacement fluid like you'd give babies or it could be
a sports drink because what you're really trying to do is get fluid and electrolytes
back in.
The carbohydrates should be easily digested so it might be things like white rice, a potato,
something along those lines, plain pasta in order to get some nutrition back in that might
have been lost.
You also may want to eliminate substances in foods that are not absorbed well.
So for example in the recovery from chronic diarrhea you may want to stay away from some
fibrous foods if they're irritating you and then there are some fibrous foods like oatmeal
that may actually help to slow the trance of time.
So this becomes a little confusing for consumers and so as we cover the lecture on fiber this
will be made a little bit more clear.
So in essence fiber may help control the diarrhea or fiber may hurt the diarrhea it really depends
on the type.
There's an individual basis for the tolerance of fat, fiber and lactose and so I think there's
some challenges here.
So if indeed as part of my GI disorder I'm malabsorbing fat, I'm losing fat in my stool.
That's where the specialized product called medium chain triglycerides comes in.
Medium chain triglycerides are absorbed and utilized in your body a little bit different
than regular fats are and so they can be a valuable adjunct in just keeping your calories
high enough if indeed you've got a chronic gut disorder that's causing that diarrhea.
Again, one of the most common intestinal problems in western societies and studies vary and
some studies will suggest it's as little as 5% of the population have problems with constipation
up to 25%.
So a lot of it just depends on the research that you read.
Now what are the causes of constipation?
They're multifactorial just like they are for diarrhea but the cause can be long term
use of iron compounds.
So for anybody who's ever had children and took supplemental iron during their pregnancy
often times have a real issue with becoming constipated with iron.
Ironically large amounts of laxatives actually loosen some of the tone in your large intestine
and can actually lead to a laxative dependence and so if you find that you've been consuming
laxatives this is something that you really need to see your physician about for alternative
ways.
Certainly stress.
Stress can alter the way your nervous system performs.
It can shut down that last sphincter, that last one way valve and cause some difficulty
having a bowel movement.
And certainly things such as low fiber intake which honestly is a cause for most Americans.
Low fluid intake, remember that large intestine is going to pull fluid out if you're dehydrated.
So if I'm dehydrated and I'm pulling the fluid out what does that mean?
I'm going to end up with harder waste products in my large intestine and lack of exercise.
I describe exercise as an internal massage.
Exercise massages and moves around your gut increasing the motility or the movement of
that and sometimes there can be an actual obstruction of the GI tract and it's often
times with food.
The treatment of constipation, that treatment is adequate intake of fiber.
Those details are going to be in an upcoming lecture.
Certainly men under the age of 50 should eat somewhere in the range of 38 grams per day
but a lot of that really depends on how many calories.
Women under the age of 50, somewhere in the range of 25 grams per day.
The challenge is do you know high fiber foods and so I love it when numbers like this are
published but if they're published and you don't know where to get that fiber I'm going
to suggest that again the upcoming lecture on dietary fiber may help to clear that up
a little bit for you.
And certainly increase exercise.
In the management of most of the diseases that we're going to cover in this course,
increase exercise is going to come up over and over and over again and I'm going to suggest
that increasing exercise is a great way to stimulate a bowel movement.
Now certainly there will be people who can't go out and exercise, say for example if you're
wheelchair bound but this is where a physical therapist may be able to give you some exercises
that would help.
Certainly diverticular diseases and other diseases of the lower GI are going to be covered
in much more detail in a later lecture.
So what we're trying to do with this is give you this tour from beginning to end on how
do we at least have a framework for understanding the GI tract.
Now a question that I usually get is somebody in my family has got horrible gas, do you
got any help for that?
Is there anything that you can give as a solution?
Well gas can be swallowed or ingested so like carbonated drinks, whipping cream, anywhere
where air is incorporated in.
I will tell you people who drink from a straw for example actually get in more air than
maybe they know.
So I will tell people to slow down when they eat.
You don't want to have really foods that have a lot of incorporated air like carbonated
beverages and those would be some easy tips early on to again reduce the amount of air
that you're actually swallowing.
Another example of where people can swallow air is when you chew gum.
If you chew a lot of gum often times you're actually chewing in some additional air if
you want to think about it that way, chewing in some additional air and what ends up happening
is that the air goes in the gut, it's going to have to go out the gut.
Certainly some acidic foods can promote gas formation, spaghetti sauce, citrus fruits,
vinegar and pickles.
Certainly if you have a sugar alcohol and a sugar alcohol is often found in sugar free
foods and again it ends in that suffix of OL.
So if you're chewing a lot of sugar free gum you're getting a two for there.
One you're swallowing some additional air and two those sugar alcohols are actually
fermented in your gut and when they're fermented by the bacteria they're going to cause gas.
So certainly those are going to be a couple things that you want to think about when you
think about that undesirable side effect of gut digestion called flatulence or gas.
Thank you very much.
