Welcome back. In this lecture, we're going to explore water, or sometimes known as the
sea within us. How much water do you need? Well, if you remember back in school, what
we all memorized was we need eight eight ounce glasses of water per day. I want you to think
about that for just a second. Are we all identical twins? Do we all have the same amount of muscle?
Do we have the same amount of fat? And the answer is absolutely not. So although that
might be a general public health recommendation, we are so unique when it comes to our fluid
needs that that's not always going to be factually true. In some of us, eight eight
ounce glasses of water a day isn't going to touch our fluid needs. And for others, it's
going to overestimate our fluid needs. So I'm going to give you an example. I was working
with a professional football player and through our series of discussions, he was really struggling
with some performance issues on the field. And it wasn't his talent and it wasn't his
coaching. I live in Houston, Texas. It was the heat and humidity. His actual calculated
fluid needs after a game or after a practice to get him rehydrated were up to 240 ounces
of fluid. So if he just drank that eight eight ounce glasses of water per day, he is significantly
dehydrated. Not in fact, I would argue he would be the one person who would end up in
the emergency room for heat related illness. So I think the challenge when we look at hydration
is again, because water is around us. Water is everywhere. We drink, we eat water in our
foods. Sometimes we underestimate the value of this in clinical nutrition. We'll start
out by thinking our bodies are 65 to 70% water plus or minus. It is less if you have more
body fat. Now body fat is what is known as an hydrous. It really has very little stored
water, maybe less than 10% of a pound of body fat is going to be water. Not so with muscle.
Muscle can be 70% water. That's the general recommendation, the general estimation is
70% water. And think about this, the typical American as we age, what do we do? We gain
body fat and lose muscle throughout adulthood. And that changes the amount of body water.
You think, well, that's not a significant issue. Well, it can be if you become a hospitalized
patient. It can be if someone is trying to calculate intravenous fluid requirements for
you. If you needed an IV for fluid restoration. So this changing body composition really does
have some implications. Now this is not part of normal aging. Keep in mind, it is not part
of normal aging to have that shift in body composition. And I will remind you, it can
be prevented by resistance or strength training. But what's the function of water? What does
water do for us clinically? And this is beyond our thirst. Certainly if you're thirsty,
it's going to refresh you, but we're really talking about internal functions. Well, it
serves as a transport vehicle for digestion and the transport of nutrients to the cells
within the blood. Now certainly maintaining this adequate blood volume enhances nutrient
delivery. Maintaining adequate blood volume really makes us feel healthy and well. So
I'll give you an example here. Have you ever gone from a sitting to a standing position
quickly? You stand up, you get, you know, jump out of your chair and all of a sudden
you get a light little lightheaded and dizzy. You kind of feel like you're going to fade
to gray. You don't have enough blood volume. You don't have enough blood volume. You're
not delivering enough carbohydrate to your central nervous system and your brain kind
of goes into a holding mold. So we've all had that experience, but this is a great example
of water serving as a transport vehicle. Mechanical functions. It lubricates joints. It
lubricates joints. So the synovial fluid that I have in my knees, plus or minus, the synovial
fluid that I have in my knees can help to lubricate my joints. It can also, for example, give me
the mechanical function in tears. If I have tears in my eyes, the function of tears is
to clear out, to remove for me, remove for me any debris or dirt that I might have in
my eyes. For most of us, however, a major function is to dissipate, get rid of and regulate
heat loss. Again, keep in mind that water becomes a really good medium for holding and getting
rid of heat. Well, how does our body store water? Where do we store water? Well, certainly
the majority of this is going to be around the cells and in the bloodstream. Certainly
nutritional factors and the state of your health can influence where your body water
is located. So for example, if indeed I have low protein in my blood, some of the fluid,
some of that water seeps out of my blood vessels and actually goes into the tissues. Sometimes
this is an example would be a DEMA that you might have with congestive heart failure,
that you're unable to move that body water and it leaks into the tissues. Keep in mind,
and I'm going to remind you this more than once, this is going to change your scale weight.
Hydration, either over hydration in the example of a DEMA, over hydration and dehydration
are going to change what happens to you when you step on the scale. And in this case of
a DEMA, the water gets stuck in the tissues. It's stuck there and it cannot be urinated
out. So the challenge is to not end up having that water in a place that it doesn't belong.
And keep in mind, if we're 60 to 75% water, any changes in our water balance is going to
make a difference on the scale. As we reflect back, keep in mind that any dietary supplement
that causes a change in your body water, IED hydration, causes you to eliminate some of
that water from your blood supply, can actually affect your scale weight. Now, the average
adult will eliminate somewhere in the range of two and a half liters or about 84 ounces
of water a day. About one and a half of those liters comes through urine and the rest is
sweating, breathing, bowel movements. However, depending on your level of physical activity,
the amount that you eliminate through sweat could be significant. If you run, if you do
anything aerobic, you breathe in and out more times per minute and the amount of fluid that
you lose is greater. Now, we don't think of our breath as being a source of fluid loss,
but actually our breath is 100% humidified. It's got a lot of water in it and any time
I breathe in and out more often, I'm going to increase my body water loss. If you've
had a fever, your heart rate goes up, your body temperature goes up and your respiration
rate goes up and so the amount of fluid that you would lose is going to increase based
on your state of wellness. Certainly, if you've ever had diarrhea, you can lose a significant
amount of fluid by an increase in bowel movements as well as an increase in the amount of water
in the bowel movements. Insensible losses are considered fluid losses through the skin
and again, sweat is going to be an example of that. Now, most of us don't think about
our food consumption as a source of fluid, but the food that we consume, again plus or
minus depending on your food choices, is about equivalent to 17 ounces or a half a liter
per day. So, each in each day, drinking 2 liters of fluid or about 8 cups would keep
most people hydrated and then that's where that comes from. But food as fluid. Now, what
are high water volume foods? Well, fruits and vegetables, 80 to 90 percent water, milk
and yogurt, 80 to 90 percent water and so all of those can make a difference. In my individuals
who really struggle with hydration, they just can't drink any more voluntary fluid because
their losses are so significant. Oftentimes, food becomes the magic bullet. So, I describe
high water volume foods, fruits, vegetables, milk, yogurt and even soup as fluid that you
can chew, fluid that you can chew, particularly in the cases of fruits and vegetables. So,
it oftentimes is that tipping point between optimal hydration for some individuals and
dehydration. Certainly, many factors influence fluid balance, heat. Now, again, I live in
Houston, Texas, where in the summertime it's 95 degrees and 95 percent humidity. So, in
this case, my body is going to produce more sweat to cool me off. But the really bad news
is when the humidity is that high, when the humidity is that high, the sweat doesn't evaporate.
In an order to cool you, sweat has to dry off of your skin. So, depending on the part
of the country that you live in, if you live in an area that has a relative humidity that
is low, this may not be an issue for you. In fact, you might actually see on your skin
when you sweat. You might actually see salt crystals on your skin. You may actually be
able to feel it on your skin as something that's a little bit gritty. That's not the
case in an area with high relative humidity. So, again, in Houston, I sweat more. I'm not
really cooling myself off because what's happening, I'm not able to evaporate that sweat loss,
and so my body has only one response, and that is to produce more sweat. It's not sensing
that the sweat that's being produced is an effective cooling agent or another way of
thinking about it. It's not effective in dissipating that heat, so it's going to produce more and
more sweat. Now, certainly in a cold environment, if you live in a cold environment, oftentimes
the humidity in your home is relatively low. You can sense it by your skin gets very dry,
your lips get very dry, your mouth dries out pretty quickly, and you might not think, oh,
I need to drink as much because you don't have that sensation of dehydration. So I think
the challenge is that you don't look at the cold as a dehydrating event, and it actually
can be. You just don't have the environmental trigger. You can't feel sweat on your skin,
so it doesn't mean that you're not losing moisture through your skin in a different
way. One of my favorite examples is what happens when you travel on a plane. Airplane travel
can really contribute to excess fluid loss as I rehydrate myself. Your breath is humidified,
as I said, at 100%, and so you get on a plane and it's essentially 0% humidity in a pressurized
cabin. You're not sweating or exercising, but just that active breathing can really increase
the amount of fluid losses that you have. So if you do international travel, that's
one of the reasons why the flight attendants will always tell you, do yourself a favor.
Make sure that you drink more, they'll offer you water more often. You're not exercising,
you don't feel any sweat on your skin, but that fluid loss that's coming in your breath
is really pretty significant. Some reports will suggest when the plane actually lands
that the relative humidity in the cabin is about 40%, and that's all being put into that
air by your breath. So how do we test our hydration level? If we want to be better educated consumers
and we realize 8-8 ounce glasses of water a day may not cover everyone's needs, how can
you as an individual know whether or not you're hydrated? Well, we already established that
a significant amount of fluid comes out in your urine and so your urine color can give
you an idea of whether you're hydrated or not. Now, I really like looking at first morning
urine, not necessarily urine throughout the rest of the day, which I'll explain in a
minute. When I get up first thing in the morning, my urine should look like pale lemonade.
If it looks like pale lemonade, I did a good enough job the day before of hydrating myself
because there should be some waste products from metabolism overnight, so it shouldn't
be water in, water out in the morning. It shouldn't look like water, but it should look like pale
lemonade. However, if I get up in the morning and it looks like apple juice or I produce
a small volume of urine, then in reality, I didn't do a great enough job drinking the
night before. Now, a question that I always get when we're assessing that first morning
urine is what happens if I get up in the middle of the night two or three times to go to the
bathroom? Well, this may not be as a sensitive of a measure for you, but keep in mind throughout
the night, if you see anything that is dark and concentrated, the color of apple juice,
then reality, you didn't do a good enough job drinking the day before. Now, certainly
in the professional athletes that I work with, with their fluid losses being so high, they've
joked with me in the past, is there something more concentrated than apple juice? Do we
have motor oil, for example, as a color of urine? And the answer is no, if that's the
case, we probably need to get you to the emergency room. But what about thirst as a measure of
hydration? I have to tell you there's a lag between the time you get dehydrated and the
time you actually experience thirst. So the old adage of if you're thirsty, you're already
dry, you're already dehydrated is probably true. It probably has some validity to it.
The other challenge is the older we get, the less sensitive this thirst mechanism is. So
say for example, you're going to visit a relative in a nursing home, and you may be visiting
and they'll describe that the only thing they had to drink all day long was a cup of tea.
It doesn't mean that that's all they needed was a cup of tea. It's just that they never
felt that mechanism. Certainly other things can complicate the thirst mechanism as well.
If I'm on pain medication, say for example, I've had dental work done, or I had my hip
replaced, if I'm on pain medication, that oftentimes is going to blunt my sensation
of thirst, and I may not experience that. Again, if you have someone in a hospital who's
on intravenous nutrition or on an IV, it doesn't mean that they still don't need some voluntary
water if they're allowed to drink, but their thirst mechanism can be complicated by their
treatment or their medication. The other thing that can complicate thirst is this intentional
dehydration that comes along with some medication. If you're on a diuretic, for example, you
may experience thirst because your physician is trying to clear excess body water out,
and thirst may be a consequence. It may be an intended consequence of the medication that
you're on. But what about hydration and exercise? What about how much fluid you need when you
exercise? How can you measure your own hydration level during physical activity? Well, what
you've got to do, and we all don't like doing it, is you've got to get on the scale. You
have to get on the scale, because remember, a scale can only tell you how much you weigh.
It cannot tell you your percent body fat. It can't tell you how much lean you have,
and it can't tell you anything other than, are you hydrated? So if I go out and run a
mile in Houston, Texas, and I come in and I've lost four pounds, there is no way the
energy equation won't allow it. There is no way I lost four pounds of body fat. That's
the bad news. More bad news is what I've done is I've measured my body water loss. So a
one to two percent decrease in your body weight is going to affect your performance. So let's
say, for example, you're a marathoner. You love to run, and you lose as little as one
to two percent of your body weight during physical activity. That is enough to decrease
your performance. And to me, this is an impressive statistic. Decrease your performance by fifteen
to twenty percent. So when athletes and people who compete in any way, shape, or form, want
to have a performance booster, I will describe water hydration as a legal, ergogenic, or
sports-enhancing aid. We oftentimes overlook the simple, and we go to the complex. We look
for other things that are going to improve our performance, and certainly we've all seen
in the media athletes who will use things that are illegal to try and get a performance
edge, and oftentimes what they've done is skipped over the value of hydration. So keep
in mind, in the case of activity, the scale is actually your best friend, because you
can weigh yourself and calculate a one to two percent body weight loss. Now the American
College of Sports Medicine gives us guidelines on what to drink. What should we drink when
we're exercising? Well, if your exercise is less than an hour, moderate intensity, when
you're exercising, water is just fine. Nothing wrong with water. In fact, water probably would
be your preferred beverage. But the rules change if your activity is intense or you're
exercising in the heat for an hour or more. And I will tell you I've modified the ACSM
guidelines from my environmental conditions in Houston, and I'll say if you're outside
exercising in the heat for more than thirty minutes, you probably need to switch to a
sports drink. Sports drinks are intended to be used during physical activity. Sports
drinks are not a lunchtime beverage. You know, it's not something you should have at lunch.
It is a sports drink, i.e. you drink it during sport. What does it do? One, it provides fluid.
And the science is pretty clear. When a beverage is flavored, we tend to drink more of it than
when it's unflavored. The other value here is that what it's doing is providing the
electrolytes. In this case, particularly the sodium that is lost in sweat. So think about
this for a second. If you're outside exercising and you're sweating, what does your sweat taste
like? We've all had that experience. Sweat tastes salty. So the major electrolyte that's
being lost in sweat is sodium. But if you ask the average consumer of what do I need
to eat more of or drink more of when I'm outside exercising, everybody talks about potassium.
The potassium losses in your sweat are really insignificant. So I remember a couple years
ago, and I won't mention the teams, a Super Bowl champion had bananas all over their bench.
The bananas were out there to provide hopefully some fluid, but predominantly some potassium.
That's not going to alter the amount of sodium that you lost in your sweat. So I want you
to keep in mind that when someone's outside sweating intensely in the heat and develops
cramps and they start to cramp, your hand sees up, you can sometimes feel it in the arches
of your feet. The challenge is you're not losing potassium in the sweat. What's causing
the cramping is the loss of sodium in your sweat. So my solution to that Super Bowl champion
was sure provide the bananas, great source of nutrition, but give them a salt shaker
as well. They need to be able to replace the salt that's lost in the sweat. So the reason
the sports drink is advantageous. It provides a source of calories, it provides fluid, and
it provides the sodium that is being lost. Now how else can I know my fluid needs? We
now established what I need to drink. The other thing that you can do, again, is calculate
your own sweat rate. What is a sweat rate? The sweat rate is how many pounds do I lose
in that physical activity? So we've already talked about percentages, and now I'm going
to switch you to pounds because that's actually an easier way when you actually get on the
scale and weigh yourself. So if I get on the scale for each pound I lose after physical
activity, I've lost an additional 16 ounces of sweat. So think about your water bottle.
For every pound you lose in physical activity, you lose 16 ounces of sweat. I'm going to
tell you that's significant. To rehydrate, the science is also pretty clear. You need
anywhere between 16 and 24 ounces of extra fluid. Now why do I need that additional
extra fluid? Why can't I just replace 16 ounces of sweat with 16 ounces of water? Because
some of that water is going to be lost in urine, and what we're trying to do is rehydrate
the muscle. We are trying to rehydrate that muscle. And so the challenges, say for example
I have a football player who loses 10 pounds in a morning practice. Well let's do the
math here. He loses 10 pounds. How much sweat did he lose? 10 times 16 is 160 ounces of fluid.
More than a gallon of sweat. So if I reflect back and think our general recommendations
are 8, 8 ounce glasses of water, this is going to be an example of an athlete that if I only
gave him that, he's going to become significantly dehydrated. So what are our signs and symptoms
of hydration and balances? How do we start out by looking at this? Well we can either
be dehydrated or we can be over hydrated. Dehydration is characterized by weight loss,
which we've established, confusion, a dry skin that's hot to the touch, and possibly
an elevated core body temperature. I tell you what, most of us are not going to measure
core body temperature because it's a rectal thermometer that's being used. But the challenge
is, in many athletes who have died of heat related illnesses, you'll hear things in the
media that say their core body temperature at the time of their death was 106. There
was a woman who died hiking in the mountains out in California and her core body temperature
at the time of her death was 110 degrees, incompatible with life. So core body temperature
would be more of a medical evaluation. In a hot climate, dehydration can be dangerous
and result in thermal injury, a heat related injury, because the core body temperature is
not properly regulated. Why? If I become dehydrated, one of the functions of water is to dissipate
heat. It's to get rid of that heat. If I dry myself out, I have no more water to dissipate
the heat. And so things such as heat exhaustion or heat stroke are really pretty significant.
This oftentimes comes, for example, in maybe 20 years ago, we would have coaches who would
try and toughen up their athletes by not allowing them to take water breaks. Well, they're not
toughening up that athlete. They're actually increasing the likelihood of a heat related
injury. So there are recommendations that athletes should get breaks, particularly adolescents,
should get breaks maybe every 10 to 15 minutes for a fluid break. Not always practical during
a game, but certainly during practice. Individuals who are acclimating to a different environment
are more prone to dehydration when exercising outside. So if I come from the Baltimore Ravens
to the Houston Texans, I'm going to struggle that first a week or so being outside because
I'm not acclimated. And the science will say it takes anywhere between 10 and 14 days to
be acclimated to a new environment. But you've got to acclimate outside. It doesn't mean
that you just go to somebody else's house and sit inside. You actually have to be outside
doing the activity. Other causes of dehydration can certainly be excess diarrhea, vomiting
due to GI dysfunction, kidney disease, diuretic medications. And the best way to treat dehydration
if it's not significant is obviously, can we give it to you by mouth or orally? If it
is significant dehydration, you can see an IV fluid replacement. And certainly many professional
athletes sweat so much that during halftime they actually come in and are hooked up to
IVs because there's no way the gut can handle all that extra fluid. How much fluid could
you handle? How much water could your gut handle at a time? And I'm going to suggest
to you it's about a liter to two liters. And so if I've lost maybe one to two quarts in
my sweat, there's no way I'm going to be able to replace all that with just oral rehydration.
Now what about over hydrating? Is over hydrating an issue? And I'm going to tell you it is.
Over hydrating means that you drink more water than you could possibly need. Okay? There
have been examples on college campuses, for example, where fraternities cannot haze with
alcohol. They pretty much lose their charter. So what they've done is they've hazed with
water and they make their new inductees drink and drink and drink and drink. What ends up
happening here is you drink so much fluid, you drink so much fluid that you're actually
diluting the amount of sodium in your blood. Now keep in mind sodium and potassium are
essential electrolytes. Your body works really hard to try and keep those two things in balance.
Well, when I drink water, and water really has very low sodium, when I drink water and
I drink water, I dilute the sodium level in my blood to a point where I can actually have
cerebral edema, swelling of the brain, and it leads to death. So there have been some
fraternities in the news that have gotten actually in significant trouble by promoting
this hazing with water. But it also happens to people who are physically active. Where
it usually happens is in people who are new runners, they're new marathoners, they've
heard from people like me, don't get dehydrated, it impacts your performance, calculate your
sweat rate, check your urine color. But what happens when I don't do any of those things?
And I decide I'm just going to go out and run and drink. I don't want to get on the
scale, I'm not checking my urine color. Say for example, I go and run the Houston Marathon.
I start out at 120 pounds, and I come in from the marathon course and I've gained two pounds.
What that means is I drank more fluid than I lost in sweat, and I'm more likely to become
hyponatremic. And that's the medical term for inadequate amounts of sodium in the blood.
Inadequate amounts of sodium in the blood is defined as hyponatremia. So the runner comes
off the course, they're a little confused, they're a little lightheaded. And initially
the medical folks are going to look at that and say, OK, you're dehydrated. But what we
do in the Houston Marathon is we weigh people at the beginning of the marathon, and we weigh
them at the end. And actually we have their weight recorded in their little timing chip
that goes in their shoe. So if you're not familiar, that's one of the ways that they
paste in a marathon is they have a timing chip that they can tie into their shoe. We
record their starting weight. So if somebody comes in off the course and they've gained
weight, they're confused, so they might not be able to tell us what their normal weight
is, they're confused. And so we want to make sure that we're actually not treating them
inappropriately. So in someone who runs a marathon, they should lose a little bit of
weight. They just ran 26.2 miles, they burned calories, they burned energy. And remember
from a previous lecture, for every mile you run, you burn 100 calories. So within a marathon,
you burn about 2600 calories. So we do do a really good job of monitoring levels of dehydration
and overhydration. It is a medical emergency when someone is hyponatremic or has gained
or overdrunk. Because again, the brain is going to swell, and of the individuals who
oftentimes die from marathoning, it's more likely to die from dehydration, but overhydration
can be an issue as well. So the best way to prevent hyponatremia is to know your sweat
rate to weigh yourself before and after. Now what about some of the other common things
that affect hydration status? What about things such as caffeine and alcohol? Well certainly
caffeine, if you're used to drinking coffee, if you're used to drinking tea, you have acclimated
to that level of caffeine and you really don't lose a significant amount of fluid. I will
tell you however with energy drinks that have maybe three to four times the amount of caffeine
that's found in coffee and tea, there really can be a dehydrating effect of caffeine from
energy drinks. What about alcohol? Alcohol stimulates your body to produce more urine
so drinking excessive amounts of alcohol can also cause dehydration. Medications and disease
states can be cause intentional or accidental dehydration. Certainly diuretics can promote
that body water loss, laxatives can promote body water loss, congestive heart failure.
It is intentional that the physician is giving you a diuretic to reduce body water. So in
individuals who have congestive heart failure, weighing yourself every single day really
is an important strategy. If you lose a significant amount of weight, you might be dehydrated,
that might be the intent of the medication, or if you're gaining weight on diuretic therapy,
your physician may actually have to change your medication or adjust your dose.
So again, some frequently asked questions, what are these energy drinks? I've already
established there are a significant amount of caffeine in energy drinks. There are also
B vitamins and there's also amino acids. We don't really know the long term consequences
of energy drinks. Now when we talk about coffee and tea, coffee and tea actually have nutrition
in them. There are great phytochemicals or great antioxidants in coffee and tea. So because
those are whole food and the caffeine is wrapped in whole food, it behaves differently than
the caffeine in an energy drink. So in summary, those energy drinks are going to behave differently
than coffee and tea. Always look for a whole food source of caffeine versus a man-made
source of a caffeinated beverage. Thank you very much.
