Well welcome back. In this lecture we're going to explore the good and the bad and the ugly
of carbohydrates. I'm going to start out by telling you a story. I was working with a
young man who came into my office and said, I don't understand why I'm gaining weight.
I don't eat anything. Well you can imagine how many times I hear that in my clinical
practice. I don't eat anything. I don't understand why my weight is going up. Well actually in
this case he wasn't eating anything. He was drinking 20, 20 ounce sodas a day. Well that
was over 3,000 calories of soft drink and so that was the reason why his weight was
going up. He had other issues associated with that level of carbohydrate. Now I have to
tell you, although I was not terribly successful with this man, I was able to get him to drink
half of his sodas diet and his weight actually did come down. But this example is important
because unfortunately in our culture today, carbohydrate is a maligned nutrient. It gets
a bad reputation from stories just like that. Although it's maligned it really is a nutritional
powerhouse and your body has so many defenses against having inadequate amounts of carbohydrate
that you know it is central to our human physiology. First and foremost, carbohydrate is the exclusive
fuel of the central nervous system, of your brain and a fuel for exercising muscle. So
since both of these things are important, one you have to think and two you have to move,
it is a nutritional powerhouse. The trouble with carbohydrate isn't the food itself.
It's not the structure itself. It lies within our food selection and unfortunately oftentimes
our changing food supply. Well in order to put this in perspective today, I think a little
background or a little history on what's happened to our food supply and relationship to carbohydrate
is an important one. Back in the early 1900s, we ate a lot of carbohydrates. We ate about
500 grams per day. Now I want you to think about grams for a second. A slice of bread
is 15 grams of carbohydrate. A piece of fruit is 15 grams of carbohydrate. So you can see
500 grams of carbohydrate is a lot. You can imagine back in the 1900s we were a little
bit more physically active. But on the carbohydrate landscape, whole grains dominated what we
consumed. It was whole wheat bread. It was brown rice. It was these whole grain foods.
It was whole oats that dominated our landscape in the early 1900s. Steady decline until the
early 1960s. Steady decline of whole grains until the 1960s essentially means that these
whole grains were disappearing from the American dinner plate. Now why was that the case? We
began refining carbohydrates and that process of refining means we take away that outer
brand layer. We started refining carbohydrates about in the 1940s. But in the 1960s, this
carbohydrate again started to climb. And why was that the case? Now keep in mind we had
a lot of carbohydrates in the early 1900s. We had a steady decline in these whole grains
in the 1960s. But in the mid 1960s, we started to see total carbohydrate climb again. But
in place of whole grains came highly processed sweetened foods. Now certainly since the
early 1900s, the consumption of sweeteners has increased substantially and in recent
years been dominated by the creation of high fructose corn syrup. This shift in the American
food landscape has been associated with the development of some chronic diseases, most
notably type 2 diabetes. But is it the carbohydrate or is it the form? And as we go through this
lecture, we're going to explore these dilemmas. But first we're going to get to some carbohydrate
basics. Carbohydrates are made up of three elements, carbon, hydrogen and oxygen. Carbohydrates
in foods exist in multiple forms from the most simple to the more complex. Now how a
food gets categorized however depends on how many glucose or individual sugar units that
are contained within this carbohydrate. So again these categories of carbohydrates range
from the simple to the complex. Now what are the simple carbohydrates? These are termed
simple sugars. They're called mono, meaning one, dye, meaning two, saccharides, meaning
sugar. One or two sugar units and on your food label they are going to exist as sugars
on that food label. The most important mono saccharides in human nutrition are going to
be glucose, galactose and fructose. And many of these words you might not be familiar with
because most mono saccharides don't exist in a simple form in food. However it's the
dye saccharides, those two sugar units that are stuck together are sucrose, table sugar,
maltose, malt sugar and lactose which is milk sugar. Now I'm going to refresh your memory
here these dye saccharides. These dye saccharides are going to be listed on a food label as
sugar. So you look at a carton of milk and it will tell you that each serving of milk
has 12 grams of sugar. That is not sugar added by the manufacturer, not at all. It's the
sugar that mother nature put in milk and the sugar in milk is lactose. It is a dye saccharide.
Now these dye saccharides are obviously two mono saccharides stuck together. Sucrose is
made up of glucose and fructose, maltose is actually just two glucose units stuck together
and lactose is glucose and galactose. And keep in mind for every dye saccharide there
is there is an enzyme that's going to split those into the more mono saccharide form.
So for sucrose there is sucrace, maltose is maltase, lactose is lactase. There is a corresponding
enzyme. Table sugar, high fructose corn syrup and the sugar in milk again are all these
wonderful examples of dye saccharides. Now high fructose corn syrup is a relative newcomer
in the American food supply. It was actually a creation of science in the 1960s. Enzymatic
changes in corn syrup increased the fructose content from 15% in the original mother nature
version to 42% during its first modification. Well, better advances through chemistry, further
advances if you want to call them that, increased the fructose concentration to 55% and this
is the form that is found in high fructose corn syrup in most soft drinks. Ironically
when a product is labeled as light, a reduced calorie version, you actually get high fructose
corn syrup 90. So again in the creation of light foods or diet foods, many of the substitutions
when they reduce the fat content, they are actually changing the type of high fructose
corn syrup that is found in many light foods. So we have got this mono and dye saccharide
version. Now we are going to talk a little bit about complex carbohydrates. Complex carbohydrates
are groups of carbohydrates known as polysaccharides and in this case poly means many, but this
means 20 or more sugar units stuck together in different forms. It can be in a chain,
it can be branched in different forms. Given the length of the compound, it takes longer
physiologically to break those molecules down into their component part. Let me state here
that most of the absorption of carbohydrate to get it from your gut into the blood, it
has to be predominantly in a mono saccharide form. So the goal of your gut in breaking
down these molecules is to chop them down to at least a dye saccharide, but preferably
a mono saccharide in order to be absorbed. So the digestion of that long complex carbohydrate
takes a little bit longer time. Starches or complex carbohydrates are categorized by
the organization of these sugar units in space. So for example, the amylose configuration
just means those glucose units or those carbohydrate units are put together in a long chain. Keep
in mind that in this chain molecule the enzymes can only attack from the ends of that molecule.
So in the case of a chain, it can attack at one end of the chain or the other, two places
on that molecule. Amylopectin, however, is a branched chain configuration of a complex
carbohydrate and what this means is it looks like the branches of a tree. So there are
actually more spots on that molecule for the digestive enzymes to attack. So amylopectin
is going to be one of these configurations that is branched chain. The other interesting
thing about this configuration is water can be held. Water can be held in between those
branched chains and oftentimes you get a little bit different property to that food. Now when
we think about complex carbohydrates, breads, cereals and fruits are mostly complex carbohydrates.
But mother nature and her infinite wisdom usually combines mono, disaccharides and complex
carbohydrates in these foods as well. But the true benefits of these whole foods, the
true benefits of breads and cereals and fruit is that particularly in grains they are 100%
whole grains versus white bread. The carbohydrate content between a slice of white bread and
a slice of whole grain are actually the same. They are the same but the carbohydrate contents
the same but they behave differently. They don't act the same physiologically. Keep in
mind also that not all the nutrients that are lost in the refining of that grain are
replaced. Most notably the two that stand out is fiber is not part of the enrichment
process nor is magnesium. So we can look at big public health surveys that are done that
suggest the more magnesium in your diet the less type 2 diabetes you have for example.
Well keep in mind if I'm not eating whole grains I've lost a major source of magnesium
because again as that grain is refined the magnesium is not going to be replaced. Fiber
is found in complex carbohydrates particularly whole grains and given its importance in human
nutrition it's going to be the focus of our next lecture. But what are the functions of
carbohydrate? What do they actually do? It has a function central to the optimum function
of the human body. Now think about times that you know someone who's been on that low carbohydrate
diet. They're irritable, they're fatigued, they're lethargic and the reason is I've eliminated
that. So as a function primary function of carbohydrate is to serve as an energy source.
That is the high octane fuel that your body prefers for your central nervous system. It
has four calories a gram. Now that's going to be contrasted with fat that we're going
to talk about later that actually has nine calories a gram. So think about the role of
carbohydrate in terms of weight management. It's lower calories per gram than fat. It
prevents ketosis. Now fat can provide a valuable supply of energy but carbohydrate is needed
to burn that fat completely. So in the absence of carbohydrate the fat breakdown is incomplete
and something called ketone bodies are formed. I will describe ketone bodies as again as
gasoline. So let me go through the example with you. If I have gasoline in my car that's
burning appropriately that's a combination of fat and carbohydrate. I'm going to get
the energy to go but in the absence of the right kind of fuel I end up getting a waste
product and the waste product of fat metabolism is ketones. Think about that like the carbon
monoxide that's coming out of the tailpipe. It's the incomplete burning of that fuel that
leads to the accumulation of ketones that are not great for your overall health. They
can cause nausea, they can make you feel sick to your stomach. There's lots of downsides
to the formation of ketones. But I'm going to tell you an often forgotten role of carbohydrates.
It's its valuable role in protein sparing. Carbohydrates spares protein so it can do
its own unique function. So there really is no interchange. Carbohydrate protects or body
guards protein. It protects it so it can build and repair tissue. When there's inadequate
energy in the form of carbohydrate some protein will be broken down to provide the energy
needed for basal metabolic rate. So think about it this way inadequate amounts of carbohydrate
I've now got to go to my plan B to provide energy and my plan B is going to be protein.
Why is protein broken down and not fat however? Because protein can serve as a source of carbohydrate.
Protein can actually be sent to the liver and turned into carbohydrate if your carbohydrate
intake is too low. So when I say that your body really must have carbohydrate for optimum
functioning for exercising muscle and for your central nervous system I'm going to tell
you in the absence of that when there's not adequate amounts of carbohydrate your body
has a default plan. And the default plan is to send that very valuable lean mass or that
very valuable dietary protein it sends it to the liver to turn it into carbohydrate.
So for most of us carbohydrate should account for about 50% of the American diet. That's
for most of us. There's always going to be cases where that's not quite true. But you
want to make sure that you choose your carbohydrate. Think about choosing your carbohydrate by the
company it keeps. If it's associated with a whole grain that's going to be an advantageous
form of carbohydrate. Currently however that's not the major source of our carbohydrate.
Non-diet soft drinks are the biggest source of simple sugars in the American diet. Of
the 30 to 34 plus or minus teaspoons of sugar consumed every day by adolescent males up
to 40% can come from soft drinks. So keep in mind we're not getting a balance of mono
and disaccharides. We're actually getting predominantly table sugar, predominantly sucrose or predominantly
high fructose corn syrup. Added sugars for adults vary but most estimates are about 16%
of total intake. So if you look at population based recommendations, population based recommendations
are less than 10% of total calories coming from sugar. So we're a little high on that
sugar quotient and again depending on who you are or your age that amount of simple
sugar that you might be taking in your diet could be deemed as excessive. Certainly among
low income preschool children the consumption of sweet drinks are associated with overweight.
So is it the sweet drink itself or is it the volume of sweet drink? And most of the science
is going to say it's the volume of sweet drink. Keep in mind these simple sugars are
going to come from a variety of different sources. So we malign soft drinks but sweet
drinks could be fruit punch, sweet drinks could be lemonade, sweet drinks could be a
variety of different options. Is there a way to evaluate and make wiser carbohydrate choices?
Well certainly the reduction of the consumption of all sweet drinks are important. As an adult
think about the sugar or the flavoring that you put in your coffee when you go out and
get a gourmet coffee. Think about the honey. It's all natural isn't it? The honey that
you put in your tea that is going to be a source of simple sugars. And again for adults
just like there is for children it can be soft drinks, it can be fruit punch, it can
be lemonade. It can also be the sweet mixtures with your alcoholic beverages. Give you an
example. I actually assigned this to my rice students. They went out to an area close to
Rice University and I gave them money to actually buy a standard margarita from a variety of
different bars. Now the amount of calories that were taken up from the tequila were about
150 but the margarita, the average margarita contained 600 calories. All of that coming
from the mixer. So often times when we talk about sugars we think about soft drinks and
we don't think about some of the other things that might be significant in the adult American
diet. Now there's been a lot of controversy over juice. If someone is going to have juice
is that a sweet drink? Yes. Does it contain mono and disaccharides? The answer is yes.
If you're making a juice choice however it should have 100% juice. Not a fruit drink.
Not a fruit punch. 100% juice. And drink no more in the range of 4 to 6 ounces per day.
Well I'm going to challenge you to go to your cabinet and actually take the glass that you
normally drink juice from and measure it. Pour in 4 to 6 ounces of juice into that glass
and see whether or not you overdo. When I'm trying to put this in a visual I also suggest
think of your grandmother's juice glass. That tiny little juice glass that she had on her
table on Sunday morning. That's in the range of 4 to 6 ounces. I don't have a glass in my
home because I've measured. I don't have a glass in my home that's less than 10 ounces.
So again are we maligning the juice as a poor food? The answer is absolutely no. It's the
volume of that sweet drink that contributes to sugar consumption for most of us. Beyond
that reduction in simple sugars think about adding more complex carbohydrates to your
diet. More foods with natural fiber. Things like vegetables, legumes, dried beans and
peas. And in doing so you're going to have the best chance of increasing the fiber content
of your diet. But you're also going to increase the wonderful nutrients that are in those
foods that are often times not even on our radar screen in terms of good nutritional
value. Now in addition to choosing less mono and disaccharides, trying to eliminate the
sugars and increasing the whole grains, a new carbohydrate evaluation tool has emerged
over the past few years. It provides insight into the body's use of carbohydrate. But more
specifically how quickly your blood sugar rises after the ingestion of a particular
food. I want to review for you. Most carbohydrates are absorbed in a mono and disaccharide form.
So when it reaches the blood that is what impacts blood sugar. It's these mono and
disaccharides. As we digest these foods and we break them down into their component parts,
they reach the bloodstream at variable rates. Now this tool is called the glycemic index.
It actually measures how quickly does your blood sugar rise after the ingestion of a
particular carbohydrate food. Each food is compared to, its reference standard is either
compared to white bread or pure glucose. So when you look in your guidebook, you need
to pay attention to what is going to be the reference food for which this is compared.
So one of the problems we have in implementing glycemic index is we're not universally using
the same reference food. Although somewhat controversial and complex, major studies indicate
that those who eat a diet of high glycemic index carbohydrates have the greatest risk
of many chronic diseases. Highest glycemic index have the greatest risk of many chronic
diseases. So what does that mean? It means that the carbohydrate in that food was dumped
into the blood supply at a rapid rate and your body produces insulin to metabolize or
to utilize that particular amount of carbohydrate. So the thought is, is it the carbohydrate or
is it the insulin response? And I'm going to suggest to you most of the science is saying
that if you eat a high glycemic index food, you're going to have a significant increase
in the amount of insulin that is going to be produced. Now remind you that insulin is
an anabolic hormone and the development of heart disease and high blood pressure and
cancer are all thought to have this anabolic or insulin, insulogenic response. However,
as scientists we must know that many factors influence glycemic index and these are foods
for example that have mixed content of carbohydrate protein and fat. So for example, the glycemic
index of white bread might be high but when I mix it on a hamburger bun with protein or
fat it's going to leave the stomach slowly and therefore exhibit a lower glycemic index
response. The organization of the carbohydrate is that amylose or amylopectin. Remember if
in that long straight chain it's going to take a longer period of time to chop that up.
If the carbohydrate is arranged in an amylopectin form, if that's the form it actually can raise
the blood sugar more quickly. So for example, you can go to many of the glycemic index tools
online and they'll talk about the difference between a white potato and a red potato. Well
you think isn't a potato a potato? No, the organization of that carbohydrate can be different
in the red potato. The red potato actually has more amylose and the white potato has
more amylopectin so it changes the glycemic index. Foods such as oatmeal, most whole grains,
non-tropical fruits like apples and pears, legumes, dried beans and peas, minimally processed
foods in general have a lower glycemic index. The way I describe it to my adolescent population
is think of the food, the more hands that touch it, the more steps in the processing,
in general the higher the glycemic index. Chances are they've added more simple sugars
in the processing of that food. Where if I get an apple from my mom's refrigerator, the
only people that have touched it, I got it from the tree, I got it to the box in the
grocery store, I haven't processed that in any way other than maybe washed it, which
does not contribute to the glycemic index. So the challenge here is where can we get
good information? Well the international table of glycemic index and glycemic load are values
from the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition and provide the glycemic index of some processed
foods versus non-processed foods. Keep in mind these are all single foods, they are plain,
they are not, it's not a bagel with cream cheese, it's not loxin bagels, if they're
evaluating a bagel it is a plain bagel. Under grains for example, the glycemic index of
oatmeal is 58, the glycemic index of cornflakes is 81 and so oatmeal having a lower glycemic
index is going to have possibly better health benefits in eating cornflakes. The carbohydrate
could be identical, we're just looking at the way the body metabolizes or processes
that carbohydrate. Under fruits and vegetables for example, apples are 38, baked potatoes
is 85, significant difference. Other examples, lentils have a glycemic index of 29, angel
food cake 67. In jelly beans, we all know what jelly beans are made of, they're pure sugar,
have a glycemic index of 78. Certainly the dietary guidelines for Americans encourage
consumers to eat minimally processed foods and limit sweeteners in their diet. However,
most public health organizations within the United States have stopped short, put the
brakes on, of endorsing glycemic index as a way of evaluating food and part of it is
because of the complexity of that guide. However, I'm going to remind you that many, many studies
are looking at the relationship between glycemic index, high glycemic index foods and hypertension,
high glycemic index foods and things such as cataracts, high glycemic index foods and
diabetes. So there's enough evidence out there, the challenge is for those in public health
is how do I translate those guidelines where consumers can use them. Certainly simple
suggestions are increasing fresh fruits and vegetables, whole grains and low glycemic
index carbohydrates that are going to help you to maximize the benefits of the right
type. Now I'm going to also give you the flip side, is there a time where a high glycemic
index food is desirable? Well absolutely, there are times for example in the athletic
world where I want that carbohydrate to get back in that muscle as fast as I can get it
there. Why? Because maybe I have to run another race in two hours and I need to make sure
I've got adequate carbohydrate for exercising muscle. Remember that's a primary function.
So there may be times and I've actually done this where in between races with my rice athletes
I'll give them jelly beans. Sports drinks also have a relatively high glycemic index.
I'll give them that and the reason is I'm not really interested at that point in time
in their overall dietary quality. I'm actually interested in their athletic performance.
So there may be times that a higher glycemic index food is actually desirable. But when
we think about excess glycemic index or high glycemic index foods, major studies indicate
that those who eat a diet with a high glycemic index as a chronic diet, meaning that you're
not using it for athletic performance but this is just the food choices that you make.
You're going to have more issues with chronic illnesses. And again these are illnesses that
are in that public health epidemic range. They include obesity, heart disease, type 2 diabetes
and even cataracts. And as we get to the lectures on all of those chronic illnesses, this concept
of glycemic index is going to come up over and over and over again as not only a management
tool which is going to be pretty key. It's a management tool. It can actually help to
prevent some of the comorbidities or some of the other illnesses that tag along with
heart disease and type 2 diabetes. So we will talk about different ways of controlling
cholesterol and other blood fats and we're going to come back to this concept of glycemic
index. I always feel, pardon the pun, it's the icing on the cake. It's the way that
I can take nutritional management and make it even better for individuals who have those
three chronic conditions, obesity, heart disease and type 2 diabetes. On the other hand
inadequate carbohydrates such as low carbohydrate diets can establish for individuals a condition
of fatigue, low energy and irritability. Advocates of low carbohydrate diets will oftentimes
promote eating so few carbohydrates that you produce large amounts of ketones. So this
deficiency of carbohydrate is really a clinical problem in terms of human nutrition. As we
know the production of ketones can cause nausea, headaches, increased fluid and electrolyte
losses from the body. So if you've ever known anybody on a low carbohydrate diet they lose
a whole lot of weight the first week or so and part of that is because the ketones make
them dump a significant amount of body fluid and as we know scale weight can change based
on your level of hydration. Most experts agree that a carbohydrate level less in your
diet of 130 grams per day can promote ketosis. That's probably more true in people who are
actually out moving and exercising because they're burning up so much carbohydrate as
fuel. So again think again of that slice of bread, 15 grams of carbohydrate. A half to
three fourths of a cup of cereal, 15 grams of carbohydrate. A piece of fruit, 15 grams
of carbohydrate. And what about milk? Milk has 12 grams of carbohydrate. Now considering
we eat mixed diets think of that plate of spaghetti that you had. That plate of spaghetti
actually has 60, 60, 60 grams of carbohydrate. Now some frequently asked questions that I
get well of if carbohydrates and high glycemic carbohydrates are so bad for you, what about
sugar substitutes? What about things such as Splenda, sucralose, Equal, which is Nutrisweet,
aspartame, or sweet and low, which is saccharin? I will tell you that these compounds, these
artificial sweeteners have been studied more in our food supply than other foods that we
routinely consume. So you may have a personal allergic response. You might get headaches
with any one of these sugar substitutes. But in general they are deemed safe. There might
be some caveats. What I want, a two year old having a lot of artificially sweetened beverages,
any answers no. What I want a pregnant woman having a lot of artificial sweetened beverages,
the answers are no. And so that we get into this whole debate about should I drink diet
soda? I probably would encourage you to be optimally hydrated to stick with plain water.
But knowing that's not realistic for most of us, I think diet sodas in moderation, in
moderation can be a nice substitute. But considering Americans really struggle with moderation,
moderation is no more than two diet soft drinks per day. So that's where I will draw
the line on moderation. So if you're someone who's drinking six or seven, you cross the
line in moderation, I would encourage you to get a little bit more central. Now what
about individuals that are told to drink juice or four ounces of grape juice that's an equivalent
to, for example, red wine in the prevention of heart disease? Or if you're encouraged
to drink four ounces of grapefruit juice to control blood pressure, should you go above
and beyond? And my recommendation would be no. And the reason it would be no is I can
get the same wonderful phytochemicals, the phytonutrients, these wonderful colors and
pigments and fruits and vegetables from the whole fruit. And I don't necessarily need
to drink the juice. So if you've been recommended to drink four ounces of grape juice for its
heart health benefits, why not have a nice bowl of grapes, red grapes, green grapes,
your preference? Why not have a great bowl of grapes associated with that? Or why not
peel a grapefruit instead of grapefruit juice in the afternoon to help to control your blood
pressure? So I'm going to encourage you to think of all plants, whether it's in the solid
or liquid form, as being nutritional heroes. But I can get those hero capabilities, those
hero attributes, by using the fresh fruit and again, probably a lower glycemic index
food by choosing whole fruit versus juice. Thank you very much.
