Welcome back.
In this lecture we're going to explore all the intricacies of fiber.
I'm going to start out by asking you a question.
What is a Bezor?
Do you know what that is?
Well, when we look at examples of fiber gone wrong,
I'm going to tell you a Bezor is fiber gone wrong.
I had a patient one time who had pretty advanced diabetes,
but he read something in the newspaper that said,
you know what, if you have diabetes,
a great way to control your blood sugar is additional fiber.
So in his wisdom, he decided he would start taking fiber supplements.
Well, what complicates this story a little bit is that with long-standing diabetes,
your stomach gets a little bit fussy and doesn't empty very effectively.
So what ended up happening to this gentleman was,
as he increased his fiber, and it was through a supplement, not through natural foods,
as he increased his fiber, the fiber couldn't leave the stomach,
and coalesced or stuck together in a ball,
causing the obstruction of his stomach,
the connection of his stomach to his small intestine,
and that is a Bezor.
If you have a cat, you might relate to this.
It's like a hairball on a cat, but it's a fiber ball on a human.
So again, a really good example of fiber gone wrong,
and a really good example as to why taking a supplement oftentimes
is not going to be as great as a natural food.
But as we talk about this, we really have to stop and define what is fiber.
Lots and lots of different definitions exist depending on who you look at.
But the Food and Nutrition Board will suggest that total fiber is the sum of the fiber,
both dietary fiber and functional fiber.
Well, what are those two components?
Well, dietary fiber is the non-digestible carbohydrate,
because it is a carbohydrate, and lignins,
which are the woody portion of the plant that are intrinsic to plant-based foods.
So think about it this way.
What causes celery to stand erect is oftentimes the non-digestible carbohydrate
or the lignin, the woody portion of that plant.
If you've eaten broccoli in the past,
you know that the stem of broccoli can be unbelievably woody,
the stem of asparagus unbelievably woody,
and that is truly dietary fiber.
Now, functional fiber is also non-digestible carbohydrate,
but it has some really unique health benefits in human beings.
So for example, functional fiber could be the gummy or viscous fiber,
the thicker fibers that are found in oatmeal,
and this specific type of fiber is called beta-glucan.
Beta-glucan lowers your cholesterol.
It supports the immune function.
So there are lots of studies out there taking a look at the role of oatmeal,
and more particularly beta-glucan in terms of the support in the immune function.
So what we know is that, for example, in athletes,
or anyone who trains very vigorously,
that in athletes, that intense physical activity
actually suppresses your immune system,
and one of the fixes to that immunosuppression
can be found in your morning breakfast cereal.
It can be found in oatmeal in the form of beta-glucan.
So that's an example of a functional fiber.
It not only lowers cholesterol, but supports the immune function.
So certainly lots and lots of definitions exist.
And another definition, sometimes a little bit more consumer-friendly,
looks actually at the physical properties alone.
Now these are going to be properties that you as a consumer,
when you eat your plant-based foods,
you as the consumer can actually look at that food,
that high-fiber food, and say,
aha, I can tell the difference between the two.
And we categorize this based on the solubility
or whether that fiber actually dissolves in water.
So water in soluble fiber are things such as the celluloses
and the lignins, again, would provide that structural dietary fiber,
that woody portion of food.
So you can see that, you can pull the strings off of that celery
and you're pulling off some of that water-soluble fiber.
Now it doesn't mean that that fibrous food doesn't absorb the water,
maybe become a little bit more firm,
but that's different than becoming soluble in water.
And these are fibers that absorb and hold the water.
So the example of oatmeal is going to hold true.
But let's think of some others.
So for example, in holding the water,
red beans, white beans, garbanzo beans,
when you cook them in water, they break apart,
they absorb and hold the water,
and become a little gummy or a little gel-like.
These water-soluble fibers are going to hold and absorb water.
Again, we can look at it in a variety of different ways.
We can look at the technical definition,
dietary fiber versus functional fiber,
or we can look at the properties of that fiber.
Is it soluble in water or is it insoluble?
Well, to further that definition,
fiber is going to be found in complex carbohydrates.
Now it is a carbohydrate, but it doesn't have four calories per gram.
So in previous lectures, we've defined carbohydrates as four calories a gram.
Fiber's foods are going to be found in complex carbohydrates.
So they're classified in that carbohydrate family.
But as opposed to mono- and disaccharides,
they do not have four calories per gram.
Now certainly what can be confusing are other things in our diet that are fibrous.
So you might have had a piece of meat that's a little difficult to chew,
something might have gristle, something might have connective tissue,
but that's not fiber.
There might be fibers in those foods,
but that's not going to fit our definition of fiber.
So again, what are going to be the health benefits of fiber?
Well, I'm going to tell you,
it depends on the type of fiber that's predominant.
If it's an insoluble fiber,
this insoluble fiber's primary role is to regulate bowel function,
especially the movement of food through the intestines.
So as we look at all the products on the market now
that are supposed to be natural colon cleansers, for example,
I would always argue that insoluble fiber is nature's way of regulating bowel function
and you don't necessarily need to step over into the supplement world.
It certainly increases the size of the stool,
thus helping to eliminate constipation as part of our American landscape.
Sources are going to include, again, those whole wheat products,
whole grain breads and cereals, nuts, vegetables, green beans, celery.
However, I want to caution you here
that if you have an individual who in your family suffers from constipation
and you really do need to go to a fiber supplement,
keep in mind it is the insoluble fiber.
It's the insoluble fiber that promotes the optimal bowel functioning.
So if you're going to provide a fiber supplement,
why not try something like unprocessed wheat bran?
You can buy unprocessed wheat bran in most health food stores
and it's maybe 50 cents a pound.
It mixes in lots and lots of different foods.
So for example, you can take this wheat bran and mix it in mashed potatoes.
You can take wheat bran and mix it in yogurt or applesauce.
It is a very, very effective treatment for constipation.
And we're going to come back to that
because most of the fiber supplements that are on the market,
commercial fiber supplements are not water insoluble fiber.
They're not water insoluble fiber.
So keep in mind that water insoluble fiber
is going to be the best regulator of optimal bowel health.
Now soluble fiber, on the other hand,
forms a gel when it's dissolved in water.
And it can help to lower cholesterol
and also to help to control blood sugar levels or blood glucose levels.
Now again, these sources are things that are going to be gummy,
that are going to gel,
but sometimes you can't tell
because mother nature has put oftentimes
around these predominantly water-soluble fibers
an insoluble coating.
So this is where it gets a little bit tricky.
Oatmeal classic example.
Peas, again, the inside of the pea
is predominantly a gummy or jelly fiber,
but it's protected from its gummy or jelly function
by that wonderful outer coating.
Beans, red beans, pink beans,
in the state of Texas it's always pinto beans,
again have that wonderful fibrous coating,
but when they break open in the water,
you're releasing that water-soluble fiber.
So what the key point here is
that not one food is exclusively soluble or insoluble fiber.
Barley that you might have in soup
is going to be a great example of water-soluble fiber.
And now we can also enter the world of dietary supplements,
and psyllium.
Psyllium fiber is what is going to be found
in many of the high-fiber breakfast cereals.
If you look at that nutrition fax panel on the backside,
you can look for the word psyllium fiber added.
It's also the fiber that's found in metamucil.
Now again, I want you to think about this for a second.
We've already defined that the other type of fiber,
the water-insoluble fiber,
is best for the treatment of constipation.
Yet in many commercial products
designed for the treatment of constipation
are based from psyllium.
So if I'm going to go out and buy a commercial product
that is psyllium-based,
it's not going to be as effective as a water-insoluble fiber.
Certain other examples of foods
that contain predominantly water-soluble fiber are pears.
Again, the inside is that gumming fiber.
Apples, many citrus fruits, berries, and carrots.
Again, this is a gummy, gelling kind of fiber.
So since different plants have different amounts and types of fiber,
what's the best way to get an adequate amount of fiber in your diet?
Eat a variety of high-fiber foods to receive the greatest health benefit.
Now I'm going to caution you here
because you didn't hear me say take a supplement.
The American Dietetic Association is stressing to all consumers
that the best benefit of a high-fiber diet
is going to come from the food that we eat
and not necessarily the supplement that we take.
So what are the benefits of a high-fiber diet?
Let's take a little bit more detailed look.
Now we talked about this bulkier stool.
A softer bulkier stool is easy to eliminate.
So think about this for a minute here.
That if indeed I'm babysitting my grandson or daughter,
or if I have issues with this myself,
that I'm going to have to work hard to add some additional high-fiber foods.
Now given the list that we just went over,
there are going to be many children, for example, who don't like those foods,
or will eat those foods in a more processed form.
So for example, as we talk about the benefits of applesauce,
there is still going to be fiber in whole apple or in applesauce,
but when we get to the apple filling that is found in many of the energy bars,
cereal bars, that really is more like a jelly
that is not going to be a good source of fiber.
So as we process that food,
when we get down to the most highly processed,
we're really not looking at a source of fiber anymore.
So an apple is going to be a great example.
Either the whole apple or applesauce are great sources of fiber.
So your grandson or daughter may really enjoy applesauce,
doesn't really like the whole apple, always wants it peeled.
But again, don't transition that to what happens
if I get an apple filling in my toaster strudel in the morning.
Now it can also solidify loose and watery stools
depending on the type of fiber that you take in.
So if I take a gumming or gelling fiber,
it adds bulk to the stool, but it also holds water.
You have to have adequate fluid for that to happen.
So again, these water soluble fibers must have as part of their matrix.
They must have adequate amounts of fluid.
If you remember back from previous lectures,
we talked about the primary role of the large intestine
is to regulate fluid balance.
So if I don't have adequate amounts of fluid
and I'm taking in a water soluble fiber,
I can actually end up with an impaction,
a worst case scenario of too much fiber in the absence of fluid.
Okay, let's give you an example.
I worked for years in the HIV population, individuals who have AIDS,
and one of the hallmarks of AIDS is chronic diarrhea.
How do we blunt that diarrhea?
How do we get that water to hold?
What we would do is we would use pectin,
which if you're familiar with making jelly,
it's a water soluble fiber that helps that fluid to gel.
We would take pectin, this unbelievably great water soluble product,
add it to water, and when it got to the large intestine,
it would help to hold some of that water in place.
So what is diarrhea?
Diarrhea is the excessive loss of body fluid,
and this was a great way of manipulating that gut physiology,
manipulating the type of fiber that you could use
to make sure that you had optimal functioning.
So I could blunt some of the fluid losses in my clients who had HIV disease
by getting that water held in the large intestine.
Another example, as you might be familiar with,
is that maybe 20 years ago,
we talked about what was called the brat diet, B-R-A-T,
the brat diet that was used for the treatment of diarrhea.
Well, it contained bananas, it contained rice, it contained apples,
and depending on whose research you read,
some people would advocate tea and others would say that that tea stood for toast,
but if you looked at that,
you were predominantly providing water soluble fibers
for the management of any kind of GI disorder,
and in this case, diarrhea.
It can also help to promote digestive health in other ways.
It can lower the risk of hemorrhoids.
If you're not straining to have a bowel movement,
you're much less likely to have hemorrhoids.
Certainly in our country, the prevalence of irritable bowel
is at least in some thoughts, in some schools of thought.
The irritable bowel, that alternating constipation and diarrhea,
can be based on the fact that your gut is not moving as seamlessly as it needs to be.
So I think the challenge is in irritable bowel
to make sure that you have adequate amounts of mixed fiber.
Diverticular disease is formed when the gut has little outpouchings
or in the wall of the large intestine.
Little pockets form from the straining to have a bowel movement,
and certainly there are going to be multiple, multiple recommendations on
you can prevent diverticular disease,
you can prevent the outpouching of that large intestine
by increasing the amount of fiber that you have in your diet.
Now also, in countries where people consume large amounts of fiber lifelong,
there is little digestive disease.
So keep in mind in the United States what we are always trying to do
is a quick fix to a problem.
But I'll remind you over and over again that your bodies remember
what you do most of the time.
So if most of the time you're trying to promote adequate amounts of fiber,
you can help to prevent things from happening.
I wouldn't want you to think,
well, I have diverticular disease or I have irritable bowel,
so the only solution to that,
my strategy to solve that problem is I'm going to go out today
and significantly increase my fiber content.
In fact, I'll tell you exactly not to do that.
Okay, what else can fiber do for us?
Well, fiber can also help to lower blood cholesterol
and in that case help to prevent cardiovascular disease, heart disease.
That soluble fiber, those gumming, gelling fibers in beans and oats,
flaxseed, oat bran can actually help to lower LDL.
LDL stands for low density lipoprotein
and oftentimes gets the tag as the bad guy.
It is the bad cholesterol.
It's the kind of cholesterol that adheres to arterial walls narrowing blood flow.
So if I'm able to add more soluble fiber, I can actually lower that.
Well, how does that work?
Water soluble fiber binds with bile,
which again is about 70 to 75% cholesterol.
It binds with bile and it prevents the bile from being normally reabsorbed.
So again, in previous lectures we talked about kind of bile physiology.
Normally when bile is released from your gallbladder in response to a fatty meal,
it helps to emulsify the fat, keeps the oil and water mixed together,
and it gets recycled in the large intestine.
And normally that's what happens.
In the presence of water soluble fiber, the bile sticks to the fiber
and the fiber causes it to be released or eliminated when you have a bowel movement.
So what does the body do?
It has to make more bile.
Where does it get the raw materials?
It gets the raw materials from your blood cholesterol.
So this water soluble fiber works as a real aid in terms of keeping your cholesterol lower.
We could also put in here that when you have a lot of water soluble fiber,
those water soluble fibers make you feel full a little bit longer
and can be valuable in the management of weight.
Water soluble fibers and particularly water soluble fibers also can help to control blood sugar levels.
For people with metabolic syndrome, and metabolic syndrome is thought of as prediabetes,
and we're going to talk about prediabetes, metabolic syndrome, and overt diabetes in future lectures.
It can help to improve blood sugar by slowly controlling the absorption of sugar.
So if you refer back to the lecture on carbohydrates,
these water soluble fibers help to lower the glycemic index of the carbohydrate that you just consumed.
It delays the entry of that food into your blood supply, delays it, and that's what we're looking for.
So certainly we may be able to reduce the risk of developing type 2 diabetes by controlling blood sugar levels.
And it's due to the fiber and because whole grain foods, these wonderful whole grain foods,
are a source of magnesium, which is lost in the processing of whole grains,
and it's not going to be added by fortification.
Additionally, these water soluble foods help us to feel full, satisfied, and controlling our weight.
So you can see a lot of commercials out there, a lot of advertisements for
eat oatmeal in the morning, it really helps to promote weight control.
And there is some science to suggest that these water soluble fibers
actually stay in your stomach a little bit longer, they stay in your stomach a little bit longer,
and therefore help in that natural feeling of fullness.
Keep in mind, however, just like my first example, my man who had that poor gastric emptying time and developed a bizor,
he was taking a water soluble fiber supplement and what did that do?
It delayed the gastric emptying time, it delayed his stomach emptying time,
and lo and behold, it stuck around in the stomach too long and coalesced or gelled into a fiber ball called a bizor.
Additionally, by consuming these types of fibrous foods, it requires that you chew your food.
It requires that it takes a little bit more effort to get the calories to where they need to be.
The more I chew my food and the longer it stays in my gut, in my stomach, the more likely I am to feel full.
It allows your body again to signal when you are full so overall food intake is lower.
So as part of any weight reduction strategy, having more fiber in your diet of both forms, soluble and insoluble,
more fiber in your diet can promote overall fullness and ultimately because you have a volume sensor in your stomach, not a calorie sensor.
You have this volume sensor, the longer my stomach is dilated from these high fiber foods,
it sends chemicals to your brain. So in essence, it makes a meal seem larger and it makes that meal last longer.
So you're satisfied for longer periods of time and feelings of hunger are delayed.
Now keep in mind what's happening here again is the increasing volume triggers those stretch receptors that say,
I'm done, I'm full, I don't need any more food.
So high fiber diets can oftentimes be termed as less energy dense.
So what does that mean? It means fewer calories for the same amount of food.
High fiber foods are also nutrient dense, a lot of nutrition, a lot of nutrition packed into that powerhouse high fiber food.
Now, the jury is still out regarding the effect of a high fiber diet in the management of colorectal cancer.
The results of studies vary. Some show benefits, some show no benefits and some even show greater risk.
So a lot of this depends on where in that process of cancer development that you are.
So the best prevention of colorectal cancer is a healthy diet along with regular screenings.
So if you're tempted to look at the latest, greatest, whatever is in the newspaper regarding fiber and colorectal cancer,
keep in mind a healthy diet is always going to be advantageous but is never going to prevent you from staying away from your doctor
and getting that regular screening for colon cancer.
Now the challenge is how much fiber do you need?
And according to the Institutes of Medicine and that Food and Nutrition Board, recommendations for fiber are based on age and calorie intake.
So for men and women under the age of 50, we're looking at 38 grams for men and about 25 grams for women.
If you get older, survive past 50. We're looking at 30 grams of fiber for men and 21 for women.
Well why is that the case? The case is for most of us as we age, we can tolerate less calories.
So it's calorie driven here. It's calorie driven. Less calories mean that you have less natural exposure to fiber.
Certainly we're looking at a combination of fiber types.
We're going to specifically say only soluble and insoluble because as we've learned, there are benefits to both.
We don't want to eliminate one at the expense of another.
So I wouldn't want you to think, you know what, for an overall healthy diet, I've got a strong family history of heart disease.
I'm only going to eat water soluble fibers. That's not the best strategy.
The overall strategy is when I'm looking at how many grams of fiber, I really want to concentrate on total fiber and the types of fiber are going to work out in the wash.
Well what are high fiber foods?
A cup of raspberries, 8 grams of fiber.
Well if I need between 21 and 25, this is a really great option to add to my oatmeal.
My oatmeal is going to be 4 grams of fiber.
So if I have a cup of berries and a cup of oatmeal, I've got approximately plus or minus half the fiber content that I need for the day.
A pear is going to have 5 grams per fruit.
Now keep in mind that pear has that outer fibrous coating.
So that's a water insoluble fiber.
The inside of the pear, the softer portion is actually where the water insoluble fiber resides.
Broccoli, a cup of broccoli is going to have about 2 to 3 grams of fiber.
So again we've got these wonderful powerhouses.
Now be careful when you look online for the fiber content of food.
So you can go to the internet today and find numbers that are different than the ones that I just gave you.
A lot of it depends on the database that was used.
That's why I was careful to let you know this is the Institute of Medicine Food Nutrition Board.
Sometimes it's the database.
The database may not be comprehensive enough to have the fiber content of all foods.
So when you type in your little diet history into the computer, it shows that you have a lot of missing values for fiber and food.
It just means that the company that provided that database didn't put the fiber content in.
It doesn't mean that you're not consuming it.
So I find that's a real challenge for people who use online nutrition programs to evaluate your diet.
And in the evaluation of your diet you may erroneously think that you need to take a fiber supplement when actually it's a flaw of the database.
Okay.
So what are our simple tips?
How are we going to increase the fiber content of your diet?
Well, eat fruits and vegetables with the peel if possible.
Okay.
Eat them with the peel.
Add lentils, black beans to casseroles and salads and mixed dishes.
One of my favorite strategies when I go to a salad bar is they're always going to have some kind of bean dish.
And maybe it's a three-bean salad.
Maybe it's black beans off to the side.
Maybe it's garbanzo beans.
That would be a great way of just amping up the fiber content of that salad,
adding a little bit more fiber to the wonderful greens and the other things that you're adding.
Salad bars are actually great places to go to enhance the fiber content
because you could also put in nuts and seeds.
And that would be another great as well as delicious way to add some crunch and some fiber to your salad.
Now use brown rice instead of white rice.
The biggest barrier that I see to people using brown rice is the time it takes to fix it.
So here's a couple tips.
You can actually use instant brown rice.
And instant brown rice has a great fiber content.
There are now little individual packs of brown rice,
prepared brown rice that you can pop in your microwave for 90 seconds.
So if you live alone or you don't want to do a lot of cooking
or you don't want the huge volume of brown rice that is made,
if you cook it like in a slow cooker,
you can actually just have a little bit of brown rice by using one of those microwave packages.
Choose high-fiber breakfast cereals.
Now I will tell you for a lot of folks, particularly women who are managing calories,
high-fiber breakfast cereals become the salvation to the fiber dilemma.
Keep in mind that these are whole grain cereals that oftentimes have additional bran
or in the case of some cereals have additional psyllium added.
So again, the total fiber on the label may say 13 grams.
And depending on what it was added to that cereal,
bran versus psyllium, you would have predominantly water insoluble
with the bran and water soluble with the ones that have added psyllium.
Now, what about sugary breakfast cereals?
Well, one of the things that's happened in the last couple of years
is that many food manufacturers are trying to use more whole grain
to their traditional, what I call children's breakfast cereals.
And so there may be a little bit more fiber in those cereals
than maybe in the last four or five years.
Now the challenge is, if you're relying on the vending machine for your good nutrition,
the chances are you might have to bring your own higher fiber snacks.
And so you can find higher fiber cereal bars and other things along those lines.
Now, frequently asked questions.
Fill in the blank, somebody in my family hates vegetables.
How do I prepare meals to add more fiber but to avoid the complaints?
Well, I'm not a real big fan of hiding vegetables in food,
but actually there's a wonderful strategy where you can take potatoes
and cook an equal amount of cauliflower, puree or put in the cauliflower in your food processor
and mix it with the potatoes.
I know it sounds odd but the potatoes kind of mask that cauliflower taste
and I've done that for years in my family
and they didn't know they were eating cauliflower
because I mixed them with another white food, potatoes.
What about fiber rich choices when I eat out?
Well, always think fruits and vegetables and whole grain cereals.
Again, the salad bar is a great place to add it.
If you have the option when you go to a restaurant
to doubling up your vegetable side that you get with your entree,
always think is there a way that I can get more fruits and vegetables.
Now another strategy is think about your dinner plate as a circle
and think three-fourths of that dinner plate should be predominated by whole grains
and fruits and vegetables.
Only one-fourth of that plate should be the protein rich food.
So when you think plant, by definition you are thinking fiber.
When you think on process plants, more fresh fruits and vegetables,
you're thinking even more fiber.
Well, again, is there an example of eating too much fiber?
The answer is absolutely yes and we've defined that with our man with the Bezor.
But if you go and increase the fiber content of your diet too rapidly,
you're not going to be a happy camper.
And the reason why is that because that fiber is poorly digested
and because it's not a source of calories to us as human beings,
we can't get any energy out of fiber.
What ends up happening is the bacteria that happily live in our large intestine
can digest that fiber.
They can ferment that fiber into methane gas and all the other issues with flatulence.
But the bacteria that live there very happily digest this high fiber food.
So what ends up happening is you dump too much fiber into the system too quickly.
Your gut cannot adapt that quickly.
And so what ends up happening is you end up with diarrhea
or really pretty significant abdominal pains.
So this is one of these examples of go slow.
Don't add significantly more fiber too quickly.
So a tip might be take your regular breakfast cereal,
your regular oatmeal breakfast cereal
and maybe mix it with a higher fiber breakfast cereal.
Gradually reduce the regular cereal,
gradually increase the higher fiber breakfast cereal
and your gut will adapt and you are going to be on your way to optimal wellness.
Thank you.
