Welcome back. In this lecture we're going to take a look at two important fat soluble
vitamins, vitamin A and vitamin K. But I'm going to start out by telling you an example
of something that happened to me early in my clinical practice. I had a lady who came
into Tulane Medical Center in New Orleans complaining of long bone tenderness. Wasn't
so much her joints were achy but her bones were hurting. And she wanted to know if there
was any kind of dietary reason for that. Well as we explored it and the medical team got
involved they actually thought she had what was called hyperparathyroidism. And they scheduled
her for surgery. But as we explored her diet a little bit more we discovered that she was
taking a lot of preformed vitamin A. And she actually had vitamin A poisoning. And vitamin
A poisoning was responsible for her long bone tenderness, not hyperparathyroidism. So she
was able to avoid the surgeon's knife but didn't realize it was vitamin A that got her there
and we stopped the supplement and the pain went away. Well vitamin A and vitamin K are
two very important fat soluble vitamins and as such fat soluble vitamins are much more
likely to be toxic. Vitamin A in its role however is particularly important for normal
and healthy vision. Deficiencies of vitamin A in the United States are not common. However
up to a half a million children each year in developing countries, particularly in Africa
and Southeast Asia, become blind as a consequence of vitamin A deficiency. Its partner vitamin
K was first discovered in 1929. A Danish scientist by the name of Hunrik Dam was researching the
role and nature of cholesterol by feeding chickens a cholesterol free diet. After a few weeks
the chickens on this diet started developing hemorrhages and they were bleeding. Well he
couldn't repair these deficiencies by supplementing their diets with purified cholesterol. So it
appeared that a second compound together with cholesterol had also been extracted from the
diet and this was thought to be responsible for the coagulation of blood. Because the study
was published in a German magazine and coagulation in German is spelled with a K, the mysterious
compound was named vitamin K. Although both vitamin A and K have traditional roles the
term multitasker applies to both as they have many roles in human nutrition. So you might
be familiar with vitamin K and coagulation and vitamin A and vision. However they are
multitaskers. Vitamin A is indeed a great multitasker and plays a wide variety of activities in
the body including vision. It is a necessary constituent to the visual pigment rhodopsin
which is found in the rods. These are necessary to see black and white as well as for you
to see during the night. It's also important in gene transcription. It's important in
making DNA and RNA and these are necessary steps for ultimately synthesizing proteins
that we need. Vitamin A also is a conductor. It teaches cells what they should become.
This is known as cell differentiation. This is really important in clinical nutrition
because cells need to know which direction they need to go in. And epithelial cells,
skin cells normally produce mucus that lubricates and prevents the thickening of skin. Thickening
of skin is called keratinization. It's also needed for T lymphocytes which are central
to the immune system. So when we look at immune function, vitamin A protects immune, the immune
system via its role in epithelial cell development. As these skin cells line the intestinal tract,
if they become keratinized and thick and crack, it allows bacteria to do what's called
translocate. What this means is that we normally eat a lot of bacteria in our food. It could
be on our hands. And if the intestinal cell is doing what it should, if those cells are
differentiated, they don't become keratinized. They don't become thick and they protect you
from bacterial invasion. So without vitamin A, as it becomes thick and keratinized, the
skin cells crack and it allows the bacteria to translocate. Translocate from the gut into
the blood where they can make you ill. Vitamin A is also needed in normal embryonic development
and reproduction. Now both vitamin A deficiency and toxicity can affect field development
and that is very important because again, remember vitamin A is a fat soluble vitamin
and too much of a good thing is not a good thing. Well as early as 1937, research suggested
that vitamin A deficiency and early pregnancy increase the risk of fetal deaths. This is
linked with cell differentiation and the inability of these cells to become what they are genetically
predetermined to be. Vitamin A is also important in bone metabolism, growth and development
of bones. It's also needed for hematopoiesis, which is the formation of blood components.
Well certainly in that skin health, we've already explored that a little bit. It is necessary
for the maintenance of normal epithelial cells. In dermatology, a form of retinol is oftentimes
the most effective treatment for certain types of acne. What's going on here is you apply
it to the skin and it helps the new developing cells to become healthy, to do the normal role
of epithelial cells. There's also some emerging role for vitamin A in reducing the risk of
heart disease, but that's in its infancy. Vitamin A also has antioxidant activity. Now
remember antioxidant means it protects cell membranes from oxidative damage. Well as in
all forms of human nutrition, we have to take a look at the bioavailability of a compound.
And with vitamin A, there are three different forms of vitamin A. Retinol is an active type
of vitamin A and it's found in predominantly animal foods, things like liver, great source
of vitamin A, whole milk, it's in the fatty portion, butter, eggs, cheese and some fortified
foods have retinol added to them. Keep in mind though, because it is a preformed vitamin
A, it is much more likely to be toxic. Retinol and its two other cousins, retinol and retinoic
acid are what are considered the preformed or the most active form, the most biologically
available form of vitamin A. Protein is required to transport this fatty compound in blood.
Keep in mind oil and water don't mix and retinol and its cousins need what is called retinol
binding protein to take that fatty compound and store it in the liver. And about 90% of
vitamin A is actually stored in the liver. Think about that, makes sense. If animal liver
is a good source of vitamin A, we store it as human beings in our liver as well. Carotenoids
such as beta carotene, probably the most popular, are considered inactive forms of vitamin A.
Now that doesn't mean that they can't become vitamin A, but in their infancy they are considered
pro-vitamins or precursors for this vitamin. Now they can be converted to vitamin A in
the body, but there is an important distinction here. They actually have to be converted from
beta carotene on to the biologically active forms. And in our body we have breaks, we
have rate limiting steps to prevent beta carotene from becoming retinol if the body doesn't
require it. Well we have about 600 carotenoids in food, but about 50 to 60 are found in the
human diet and fewer than this have vitamin A activity. Carotenoids because they are precursors
to vitamin A are relatively non-toxic. The breaks can be put on if the body has enough
retinol. Now this is important. The absorption of pro-vitamins like beta carotene depend
greatly on the amount of lipid or fat that's ingested with the pro-vitamin. Fat in the
diet actually increases the absorption. So you might have remembered a few years ago
when low fat or fat free diets were the craze and everybody was counting their grams of
fat. Think about that for a second. What that actually did was reduce the absorption of
beta carotene or carotenoids from the diet. Carotenoids are found in plant sources such
as green leafy vegetables and probably the most popular is carrots. So you remember when
your mother told you to eat your carrots because that's going to help your vision? Actually
what your mom didn't know is carrots don't have any preformed vitamin A, but they have
carotenoids which can be converted to vitamin A. Lutein and lycopene are carotenoids that
have no vitamin A activity. They're not going to convert to vitamin A, but they are still
beneficial. Lutein is kind of in the yellow-green pigment and lycopene is in the red pigment,
tomatoes, watermelon, things such as that. Additional roles for these carotenoids might
be in the prevention of macular degeneration, an eye disease that we get with advancing
age, and the prevention of prostate cancer. So now you can actually find supplements on
the market that will say that they have lutein or lycopene added for the prevention of those
two chronic diseases. But keep in mind, anything that causes fat malabsorption can cause a
reduction of absorbed carotenoids. Now that would include laxatives, so anyone who's chronically
using laxatives. Or there's a new product on the market for weight loss called Ally.
And actually what Ally does is cause, as part of its design, it causes fat malabsorption.
So as such, this medication will increase the likelihood of malabsorbing or not absorbing
carotenoids. Well the big question remains, are carotenoids essential? Well yes, as they're
needed for the precursors of vitamin A, but they're not considered essential nutrients
on their own, independent of their vitamin A activity, according to the National Academy
of Sciences, as recently as the year 2000. But as a group, these carotenoids function
as antioxidants. Now that could be good and bad, and we're going to explore that in a
little bit more detail. Multiple intervention studies have tested this role. Now keep in
mind in the research studies, they're looking at beta-carotene as a supplement, not as a
food. And the ATBC cancer prevention study, which stands for alpha-tocopherol, vitamin
E, beta-carotene precursor to vitamin A. They looked at 30,000 people between the ages of
50 and 69. And the unfortunate thing is those in the beta-carotene supplemented group died
with an increased frequency from lung cancer, heart disease, and stroke. The carrot study
saw an increase in mortality in heavy smokers and those exposed to asbestos in those that
were getting beta-carotene. Current research indicates that beta-carotene supplements can
cause oxidative DNA damage in lung epithelial cells, and this might be the etiology of the
increased mortality. So keep in mind there's a difference between the amount that you could
actually get in a normal diet and what you would take as a supplement. Additionally, beta-carotene
as a supplement is associated with increased heart disease risk and a possible increase
in gastrointestinal cancer. What foods contain beta-carotene? Well, a half a cup of carrots,
cooked from fresh, has about 671 micrograms. Three-fourths of a cup of carrot juice, over
1600 micrograms. A medium sweet potato baked with a peel, over 1,000 micrograms. And a fourth
of a medium cantaloupe, which would be raw, 230 micrograms. Okay, now I want you to think
about this for a second. These are going to be in amounts smaller than in those studies.
So again, when it's put in the food naturally, the amount is going to be within a therapeutic
range if you want to think about it that way. When you take it as a supplement, you're going
to take oftentimes above and beyond that. Well, how much vitamin A do you actually need? Well,
these are RDA values in grams per day or micrograms per day. Males, 19 to 70, require about
900 micrograms. Females, 19 to 70, 700 micrograms. Easily met, very easily met with a normal
diet. Well, deficiencies of preformed vitamin A. A vitamin A deficiency can occur from inadequate
dietary intake or secondary from the malabsorption of lipids, which we've already explored in
some degree. But states of illness, states of illness that might cause malabsorption
of fat, very, very low fat diets, certain lipid-lowering medications, some of the statin
resins can have an impact on vitamin A status. Problems with bile, and remember what bile
does, bile keeps oil and water mixed together. Eating mostifies those, so the fat can be
better absorbed. So problems with bile production, malabsorption of fat can lead to malabsorption
of vitamin A. Or from chronic exposure to oxidants like cigarette smoke. Well, the following
health problems, especially with vision, may result from a deficiency. Reduced night vision,
the inability to correct your vision when you go from a light room to a dark room or
most probably importantly, from your lighted home onto the road when you're driving
at night. If it goes on, it can cause night blindness. It's also a cause of dry eyes or
eye inflammation. There's a condition also known as Bito's spots, which are superficial
white or gray patches occurring on the eye membrane due to deficiency in vitamin A. So
oftentimes in developing countries when individuals go in and do public relief in developing countries
where children are more likely to have a vitamin A deficiency, Bito's spots are one of the
first things that they can assess to see whether or not that child is developing a vitamin
A deficiency. A deficiency of vitamin A contributes to the high prevalence of measles seen in
developing countries. Now why would that be? Keep in mind that if you have a vitamin A
deficiency, you get a keratinization of the GI tract and when it becomes keratinized bacteria
viruses can translocate. According to the World Health Organization, 100 to 140 million
children suffer from a vitamin A deficiency. This deficiency makes vitamin A blindness
one of the leading causes of blindness in children worldwide. Now I'll tell you in my
clinical practice the only time I've ever seen a vitamin A deficiency is going to be
in someone who's recently immigrated from a foreign country and I have seen that. I had
a nursing student when I taught at the University of Texas whose whole family went blind from
a vitamin A deficiency and when she saw pictures in my class and slides in my class she knew
exactly what it was. She was living in Africa during the time of a massive famine when fruits
and vegetables as well as animal sources of vitamin A were in short supply. Now the excess
of preformed vitamin A. This is a challenge because there's a narrow range of essential
and toxicity which is generally about 10 times the RDA. The tolerable upper limit is
about 3,000 micrograms per day or about 10,000 international units and usually what you'll
see is on a supplement bottle it will tell you how many international units are available
in that product. We haven't quite in the United States made the transition between micrograms
and IUs. 20,000 international units during pregnancy can cause birth defects and spontaneous
abortion. The most notable birth defects in pregnancy are going to be cardiac birth defects
and so that is one of the reasons why the formulations of prenatal vitamins have changed
in the years past. In the years past there used to be only retinol, the active vitamin
A in prenatal vitamins and now they've removed some of that and they've replaced it with
beta carotene. Certainly you can have blurred vision and just like my woman at Tulane painful
swelling of the long bones like the femur of the leg. There can be swelling of breast
tissue in men called gynecomastia. However the major cause of gynecomastia in the United
States in men is going to be obesity. Impotence and other sexual dysfunction can also occur
with a level of vitamin A that's outside of the therapeutic range. There can be calcium
loss in bones that can lead to osteoporosis and then these kind of vague symptoms of irritability,
nausea, headache, fatigue, dizziness and diarrhea. Certainly skin and hair changes, skin peeling,
itching, oily skin, hair loss, cracks at the corners of the mouth and in infants an abnormal
softening of the skull bone and poor weight gain. Now other consequences and this is particularly
of beta carotene is going to be again a little bit different than the preformed vitamin A.
Much less likely to be toxic but too much beta carotene can actually cause yellow, orange
skin. I had a client one time who absolutely loved carrots and felt that he needed to have
adequate amounts of carrots every day and he ate bags of carrots and you could look
at the palms of his hands and the soles of his feet and they actually had a nice orange
glow to them. Certainly in the early days of sun tanning pills they had high dose beta
carotene in them again as a way of turning your skin yellow, orange, maybe not the look
you were going for but it still gave you this nice glow to your skin. But now we come to
the other multitasker, vitamin K oftentimes known as the master coagulator. Well the bioavailability
and there is that term again, there are two primary different forms of vitamin K. Phyloquinone,
vitamin K1 comes from plants, the word phylo means plants. Menaquinone also known as vitamin
K2 comes from animals and specifically the bacteria in the gut, which makes a really
true requirement difficult to set. So in other words we can't tell how much the gut produces
and so we really can't tell anyone how much we require from outside sources. So the bacteria
in our gut make a lot of vitamin K. There is also a synthetic form also known as vitamin
K3. So we have got our three major forms, two primary with vitamin K3 bringing up the
rear. So what is the function of vitamin K? Well remember it comes from that German word
coagulation and is needed for the normal clotting cascade of blood via the synthesis of blood
proteins. Vitamin K is also needed for the production of what are known as GLA proteins
which are needed for the normal bone protein. So as you look at some of the supplements on
the market now they are actually saying vitamin K is added for the development of healthy bone.
Osteocalcin is needed for bone remodeling, increasing evidence that vitamin K may aid
in the prevention of osteoporosis. It forms a matrix protein which is found in cartilage
and so matrix protein provides the framework on which bone is formed. Well what food sources
contain vitamin K? Well kale, not terribly popular in Texas where I'm from, spinach
where the bioavailability is better cooked than raw, cabbage, broccoli, brussel sprouts
are all going to be great sources of vitamin K. Again the requirement, there is no true
requirement because we don't know how much the gut produces. But when no RDA exists there
is compelling evidence to set a requirement and the National Academy of Sciences sets an
acceptable intake or an AI. The current AI for women is 90 micrograms and 120 micrograms
for men, so women 90 men 120. Well what about the deficiency in the excess of vitamin K?
Vitamin K deficiencies are common among the following populations. Breast fed infants
because breast milk is low in vitamin K. Neonatal infants because the mother's placenta
transmits lipids in vitamin K relatively poorly, not great transfer across the placenta. And
babies are born with a sterile gut. They have no real bacteria, the bacteria comes from
the outside. So since bacteria produces vitamin K, newborns are usually given 1 milligram
of injection at birth. So I think the key thing is if a baby is going to be born at
home you really need to make sure that that baby goes to a physician relatively early and
gets vitamin K injection to prevent a poor clotting outcome. Well what about drug interactions?
Most notably vitamin K can interfere with anti-coagulant and anti-platelet drugs. Most
importantly antibiotics kill the bacteria that can make vitamin K, so anybody taking
chronic antibiotic therapy is going to be unable to synthesize vitamin K from the bacteria
in the gut. Well the great news is there really is no known toxicity of vitamin K. Now therapeutic
doses can be prescribed to reverse the anti-coagulant effects of warfarin or some of the other
anti-clotting drugs. Most patients on anti-coagulant therapy are asked to keep vitamin K intake
consistent. So what does that mean? What does it mean to say I'm going to keep my vitamin
A intake consistent? Well that means that you wouldn't eat a lot of broccoli one day
and then none the next. So you're going to have to make sure that if you're on any of
these anti-coagulant drugs that you're really working hard to have a source of vitamin K
every single day to make sure that you're not having a lot one day and none the next.
Physicians get a little bit unnerved when clotting times come back a little bit off
kilter so if you're on one of those medications make sure that you keep your vitamin K intake
consistent. It's also important that when you're trying to keep that vitamin K intake
consistent that you check your multivitamin that you might be taking. So again if you're
taking one with vitamin K every single day and then you go on vacation and forget it
for a week or two you're not keeping your vitamin K intake consistent. Now frequently
asked questions. I always hear I'm disturbed to hear about the negative outcomes of studies
that you mentioned and the bad side effects of too much beta carotene. Well what happens
if I snack on carrots all the time? Is it harmful? Well here's the key. Keep in mind
that the intervention studies that are designed to test the effectiveness or the toxicity
of a supplement must always use a supplement and not real food. Why? Because they have
to keep the beta carotene consistent or try and keep it consistent. So I think the challenge
is there is a difference between beta carotene that you would get in your diet and beta carotene
that you would take as a supplement. So some of the intervention studies that I mentioned
may have up to 25,000 micrograms of beta carotene. So I think the challenge is you're unlikely
to have an adverse reaction from eating carrots. You're unlikely to have an adverse reaction
of lycopene and lutein from a food but more likely to have an adverse outcome when it
becomes a supplement and when the dose is high. I'm pretty fond of saying that human
bodies like to drive down the middle of the road and when we start taking them in one
direction or the other we're actually living in the ditch. So the bottom line here is you're
not going to have an adverse outcome from food but from supplements absolutely. Now
another frequently asked question, what did people do before babies were given an injection
of vitamin K at birth? Were they more prone to bleeding? And the answer is absolutely.
So again now with the resurgence in home births or alternative birthing centers, new mothers
must understand that if they're going to do that perfectly okay to do that, if you're
going to do that make sure that you get to your health care provider and get an injection
of vitamin K otherwise an adverse reaction would be your baby's blood may not be able
to clot and it's something called hemorrhagic disease of the newborn. So again I think it's
probably pretty important. Well then the companion question is oh my goodness if newborns are
given shots of vitamin K shouldn't my baby have follow up injections? The answer is no
and the reason the answer is no is once the baby starts to nurse or drink from a bottle
there is going to be auto population. We're going to start to have bacterial growth in
the gut and some of that is going to be very friendly bacteria particularly if that baby
is being breastfed. So there really isn't a need for follow up injections nor probably
more importantly nor is there a need for a mom or a dad to start to think oh my goodness
I'm going to have to go get my baby vitamin K supplements in order to prevent hemorrhagic
disease of the newborn and the answer is you don't have to do that either okay. Now following
along those lines my daughter is breastfeeding her baby shouldn't she take extra vitamin
K and the answer is no she doesn't need to. Again keep in mind that you have three different
forms of vitamin K. One form is going to be from plants so everybody should eat a plant
based diet called phyloquinone. The other is going to be menaquinone made by the bacteria
in her gut as well as now her baby's gut and the third is going to be a vitamin K from
supplements so the bottom line is you don't need to do that. However it is important for
that breastfeeding mom to keep in mind that in order to protect her own bones she should
have a source of vitamin K absolutely every single day within her diet and thank you very
much.
