Welcome. In this lecture, we're going to look at the B vitamins, why they are important,
and why is caution needed. Start up by telling you an example in my clinic recently. We had
a young gymnast who came to see us with four fractured vertebrae in her back. And we were
looking at the reasons why was she overtraining all the other things that you could look at.
And she started to describe her fatigue. She said, I'm tired all the time and I just don't
have any energy. And my coach told me to take a lot of vitamin B6 because vitamin B6 is really
important to get energy out of my food. Well, as it turned out, she had vitamin B6 poisoning. And
what happened was she went to grab the uneven bars. She couldn't grip and hang on. She fell back
and broke her back. This ended her career. And it was caused by vitamin B6 poisoning. So the
challenges, as most of us know a lot about supplementation, lots about vitamins, one of the
things we have to be careful of is you have to be respectful of the fact that B vitamins,
even if they're water soluble, don't go through the body without having any kind of effect. But
what do we know about B vitamins? And when did we know it? Well, the scientists who first discovered
vitamin B soon learned that there was not just one B vitamin. Rather, it's a group of eight
substances necessitating the numbering system that we see today. Now keep in mind, sometimes you
hear the number and sometimes you hear the name. This group of eight compounds include
thiamine, vitamin B1, riboflavin, B2, niacin, B3, we skip the four, panathenic acid, B5,
pyridoxine, B6, biotin, B7, skip B8, folic acid or folate, B9, and synacobolamin, vitamin
B12. In this lecture, we're going to look at the most familiar of these B vitamins, the most
important aspects of each and what you need to know as a consumer, as well as some of the myths
associated with B vitamin nutrition. For more details about individual B vitamins, consult the
chart in your guidebook. Well, let's get down to the basics. What are the B vitamin basics? The
B vitamins are a group of water soluble vitamins, meaning they're the excess is excreted in your
urine that act as cofactors or coenzymes in the release of energy from food. And this is going
to be a really important concept. They don't provide energy, they facilitate the release. Well,
the analogy is metabolism is the engine in your body. And B vitamins are the lubrication to keep
the engine moving optimally. So they don't substitute for the engine, they just lubricate the
engine. A common misconception is that vitamins have calories. Where that ever came from is a
mystery to me. Some key points about the B vitamin family are the following. Always, and I do mean
always tell your primary care provider about any vitamin, mineral or herb that you might be taking
as they may interact with your diet or your medication. B vitamins as a family of compounds are
intertwined. Food sources are shared and oftentimes similar. And if you have a deficiency of one,
you more than likely have a deficiency of another B vitamin. Alcohol is the ultimate destroyer.
Alcohol destroys or alters the use of most B vitamins. And alcoholics can exhibit signs and
symptoms of deficiency of many B vitamins. B vitamin deficiencies are manifested in the
mouth. And keep in mind if they're manifested in the mouth, that means that they're going to be
manifested down the entire GI tract, but we just see them in the mouth. Now let's go through the
individual vitamins. Thiamine or vitamin B1. Historically, thiamine deficiency disease was
first described in Chinese writings over 4,000 years ago. But in 1885, a physician of the
Japanese Naval Medical Services cured sailors of a disease called berry berry by adding meat and
milk to their diets. Berry berry means I can't, I can't. So again, here's this example of not
being able to have lubrication of that engine, not being able to go. And berry berry means I
can't, I can't in single ease. What are the functions of thiamine? It's part of a coenzyme
that breaks down carbohydrate and powers protein synthesis. It helps in the production or the
synthesis of neurotransmitters. Now thiamine as a B vitamin is a little bit fussy. Heat destroys
the vitamin. Adding baking soda to vegetables, which my grandmother used to do all the time to
preserve their green color, destroys thiamine. Thiamine actually likes an acidic environment and
that's going to be a really important concept. If it needs an acidic environment, it really likes
the acidic environment of your stomach. So again, thiamine really likes an acid environment, doesn't
like a basic environment. Thiamine deficiency. Well, this can occur as little as 10 days.
Body systems with high energy needs deteriorate first. And so what might that be? Your central
nervous system is a major energy consumer. It also can cause pins and needle sensation,
particularly in hands and feet. But be careful with self-diagnosis here, because there are
other diseases and conditions. Diabetes, for example, that can cause that tingling in hands
and feet. So don't run out and buy thiamine if you're assuming, oh, I got pins and needle
sensation in my hands and feet. I bet you it's a thiamine deficiency. Be a little careful
with that. Thiamine deficiency is rare in developed countries. We have fortified foods. We have
a wide variety of food sources. But it's not rare among alcoholics. It is reasonably prevalent,
but oftentimes overlooked. And part of it is, if you go to the physician, they don't
oftentimes like asking you how much alcohol do you consume. But if you get berry berry,
if you were to have a significant thiamine deficiency, there's actually two different
types. Wet berry berry is cardiac damage and fluid retention, similar to what you would
see in congestive heart failure. Dry berry berry, on the other hand, doesn't have the
fluid accumulation, but it's damaged to the nervous system. Well, what about alcoholism
and thiamine? Thiamine, that's going to be that link. Approximately 25% of alcoholics
show signs and symptoms of thiamine deficiencies. Paramedics are very fond of saying when they
find an unconscious unknown or a homeless alcoholic on the side of the road, they are
automatically thinking thiamine deficiency. Toxicity. Well, again, this is one of these
B vitamins that doesn't have a known toxicity. It is truly a water soluble vitamin. You excrete
the excess. Our next member of the vitamin B family is riboflavin, also known as vitamin
B2. Well, it was originally thought to be part of the thiamine molecule. Remember, originally
we thought B vitamin was one compound. So there was some confusion of riboflavin and
thiamine. Excess riboflavin is excreted in your urine. So if you take a multivitamin
and you get this yellow kind of greenish color in your urine, that's the excess riboflavin
being excreted. The unique urine color changes are going to, again, be associated with vitamin
supplements and generally what you're seeing is excess B vitamin being excreted. Well, what
are the functions of riboflavin? Again, it's that lubrication. It extracts energy from
carbohydrate, protein and fat. But some newer roles of riboflavin suggest there may be some
relief with a higher dose of riboflavin in the prevention of migraine headaches. And this
actually was a review in the journal Headache. And we certainly see a lot of our children
at Texas Children's who have chronic migraines now being prescribed really large dose riboflavin.
But the key word here is prescribed large doses of riboflavin. Well, what about the
stability of riboflavin? Well, again, this is a fussy B vitamin. It can be destroyed
by ultraviolet light. Milk is a primary and significant source of riboflavin and it should
be in opaque containers. Why? As that milk is transported to the grocery store, if it's
exposed to UV light, the riboflavin in the milk can actually be destroyed. So one of
the things that we're seeing now is that we're now seeing almost a retro putting milk in
glass bottles. It's really a bad idea. It should be in paper cartons or in the white
opaque containers. The reason is if it's in a glass bottle, it's going to be destroyed
by ultraviolet light. Okay? What about riboflavin deficiency and toxicity? Again, here's that
linking theme. Riboflavin deficiency can occur in chronic alcoholics. It can be an inflamed
tongue, cracks and fissures at the corners of the mouth called glossitis and angular stomatitis.
The lips can become inflamed and split, which is called chelosis. And where I see this in
a non-alcoholic population is I see this in teenage girls. They don't drink milk. They're
drinking diet soft drinks. And you can see this, cracks and fissures at the corners of
the mouth. What appears to be dry lips, that's actually chelosis. And so again, when I exclude
that major food source and it's a water soluble vitamin, I've got some problems. Riboflavin
deficiency can also make other B vitamin deficiencies worse, such as vitamin B6 deficiency. So again,
in girls who skip breakfast, they're eliminating fortified foods and don't drink milk, you
can end up with a riboflavin deficiency. Riboflavin is non-toxic, so no upper limit
has been set. So again, now we've got two B vitamins that if you consume more than you
need, there's not a toxicity. That's going to change. What about niacin, vitamin B3?
It's actually named for two compounds, nicotinic acid and nicotinamide. In the 1940s, there
was confusion between nicotinic acid and nicotine, so the name was changed to niacin.
Certainly we don't want people supplementing themselves with nicotine. What are the functions
of niacin? Well, this is a powerhouse B vitamin. It participates in over 200 enzymes under
normal conditions and during times of intense activity. So if you're a runner or a jogger,
you're really going to ramp up that metabolic engine.
Tryptophan and amino acid is a precursor for niacin and provides about half of the niacin
needed. Tryptophan, as you might remember, is an essential amino acid and part of that
tryptophan is going to be converted over to niacin. Riboflavin, vitamin B6 and iron are
all needed to convert tryptophan to niacin, so a deficiency of these nutrients can worsen
a niacin deficiency. So as we're laying this groundwork, you can see this web of interaction
with all these B vitamins. What about a niacin deficiency?
Polygra is the deficiency disease of niacin and means rough skin in Italian. It describes
a dermatitis that is rough and blackened where the skin is exposed to sun. Now it's rough
and blackened, so sometimes you can see a black kind of ring around the collar and certainly
the 4 D's of polygra. The signs of this deficiency include dermatitis, skin, diarrhea, dementia,
and death. So polygra historically has been a killer of humans.
Chronic alcoholism and significant poverty also can contribute to a niacin deficiency.
Now what about niacin toxicity or niacin as a drug? And I think I'd like you to consider
niacin as a drug here because there's certainly some clinical usefulness.
Higher doses of niacin, higher than the upper limit of 35 mg per day, can be used to lower
cholesterol and it's very effective. So before the statin resins and some of the other drugs
were on the market, niacin was oftentimes a mainstay of cholesterol lowering. There's
a popular book on the market, it was popular in 1990, still used today, called the 8 Week
Cholesterol Cure, that touted high dose niacin. Now there are rare side effects of high dose
niacin, but they're pretty impressive. You can get a flushing and redness. You can get
an itching of your skin. I worked with a professor at the University of Texas and he also oftentimes
would bring in his students to take a look at what's called a niacin flush, that redness
itchy skin. Well then entered into enteric-coated niacin can reduce some of the flushing and
itching. Enteric-ly-coated just means it has an outside covering and it's going to be
time released. Here's the problem though. You can have elevated liver enzymes by taking
high dose niacin and it should be monitored by a physician. So if you decide your cholesterol
is high and you now have the fix, you're going to go out and take niacin, make sure you tell
your health care provider, you go in for a physical, your liver enzymes are elevated
and you're going to send your primary care provider on a wild goose chase that he or
she didn't need to go on. Niacin is also a vasodilator and that's one of the reasons
why you get that red flushing to your skin. So please be careful if you're taking high
blood pressure medication that also functions as a vasodilator. And probably the third caution
here is it may elevate blood sugar. So if you have pre-diabetes or metabolic syndrome
that we've covered in other lectures, slightly elevated blood sugar, niacin as a drug may
not be the compound for you. So again, if we're going to reinforce the fact that if
you decide to supplement, you really need to make sure you tell your primary care provider.
Niacin in this arena is functioning as a drug. This is above and beyond what you could normally
get in your diet. So again, too much of a good thing is not necessarily a good thing.
And in this case, niacin needs to be monitored. What about vitamin B6? There's multiple
forms of this vitamin, but collectively they're known as a compound called pyridoxine. What
does vitamin B6 do? Again, it's needed for the functioning here of over 100 enzymes. It
helps in protein synthesis, particularly that of non-essential amino acids. So in the lecture
on protein, we talked about essential and non-essential amino acids. And non-essential
amino acids are needed by the body, but you can make them. And so vitamin B6 is critical
for that synthesis of non-essential amino acids. It can convert protein to glucose if
energy needs are not being met. Well, is this a stable compound? B6 can be destroyed by
heat. So some of this you need to start thinking, how am I going to cook my food? Should I cook
these foods with minimum heat? Would they be better off cooked in a microwave, lower
exposure to heat? And oftentimes the answer is yes. B6 deficiency, it's rare, but when
it occurs, it causes a type of anemia called microcytic, which means small cell, hypochromic
pale in color. Now, this is where it gets confused with iron deficiency, because iron
deficiency, which we'll explore in a future lecture, bottom line is it causes the same
thing. So iron deficiency also causes a microcytic, hypochromic anemia. This can damage the nervous
system. It can elevate homocysteine levels, which are marker for heart disease. Vitamin
B toxicity, and what about its medicinal use? Well, this first became pretty prevalent when
vitamin B6 was linked with the treatment of premenstrual syndrome, also known as PMS.
Doses as low as 50 milligrams per day might be helpful, but again, more is not better.
A study in the mid 1980s identified a syndrome in women taking high dose B6, greater than
500 milligrams per day over a period of time, who developed what's called neuromuscular ataxia,
which means they couldn't put one foot in front of the other. They had an uncoordinated
gait. So the challenge was that this was the first time in modern history that a water
soluble vitamin exhibited toxicity. And there's a physician in Houston that still recommends
high dose B6 as a treatment for PMS. She calls it her happy pill. And again, you need
to start thinking as a consumer, more is not necessarily better. The upper limit of this
vitamin, the maximum you should consume per day is 100 milligrams per day. Yet supplements
are available on the market that contain more than this amount without any warning of toxicity.
So how many of you would have known that the upper tolerable limit is greater than 100 milligrams
per day? Not too many. So I think the challenge is you have to always think just because it's
water soluble doesn't mean it goes through my body without an interaction. Be real careful
when you're making those assumptions or those myths associated with B vitamins. Now what
about folate, also called folic acid? It's named for its primary food sources, foliage.
So when you're thinking of food sources of folic acid, think green and leafy. Multiple
forms of the vitamin exist. Folic acid is most stable and is the form found in most
fortified foods. Well, here's a little tip for you. Folic acid is often times sprayed
on breakfast cereal. The B vitamins are sprayed. So if you're eating your breakfast cereal,
great source of folic acid. But if you don't drink the milk, you've washed off some of
that water soluble vitamin into the milk. And if you discard the milk, you've discarded
some of the folic acid. What are the functions of folate or folic acid? Well, it's needed
for the metabolism of amino acids. It's unique in the fact that it's also needed in the
synthesis of DNA and it is absolutely critical for cell division. This will explain in part
some of the medicines developed around this function. It's needed for cell division. It
is absolutely critical for the development of the neural tube which forms in the first
six weeks of pregnancy. A neural tube develops before a woman might even know that she's
pregnant. And neural tube defects include both devastating diseases of spina bifida and
encephaly where the infant is born without a portion of his or her brain. Well, since
50% of pregnancies are unplanned, all sexually active women of childbearing age should take
a multivitamin containing folic acid. The unusual thing is we have a pretty high incidence
of neural tube defects in South Texas. And so Baylor College of Medicine, we did a study
taking a look at what would it take to keep individuals taking folic acid. The only way
we could keep impoverished youth, high prevalence of neural tube defects, from omitting folic
acid was to provide them a multivitamin. If we suggested that they buy a multivitamin,
they weren't going to do it. If we provided it, they would take it. So we also know that
in this Hispanic population, the cultural influences on pregnancy prevention were not
universal. And many women in our subject population actually believed that having a baby before
the age of 20 was beneficial and termination was not an option for them. So if they became
pregnant and had a baby with spina bifida, we could have prevented that by giving them
folic acid, provided they would take it. Now, what about folate and cancer? A Harvard
Nurses study suggested that women who took folate for over 15 years had a significant
reduction in colon cancer. Other studies suggest if the cancer is already present, but undiagnosed
folate may actually fuel the fire given its role in cell division. So let's think about
that for a second. If folic acid is needed for normal cell division, if the cancer is
already there, folic acid may provide the fuel to continue that cancer on its growth
path. So the challenge is if you have cancer, folic acid is probably not what you want
to be taking because it will cause cells to divide. Well, what about the bioavailability
of folate and folic acid? Well, the form is important. The body absorbs about 100% of
folic acid in fortified foods and supplements if it's on an empty stomach. So this is a
case where the folic acid that is sprayed on the breakfast cereal is actually more biologically
available than the folate in food. 85% is going to be absorbed if other foods are present
in that meal. So let's say, for example, you have breakfast cereal in the morning, you
have scrambled eggs along with that and some fruit. The more foods you add, the less bioavailable
that folic acid on your breakfast cereal is. Now, only between 50 and maybe 67% of folate
naturally occurring in foods is available. So although I told you green leafy vegetables
are a great source of food folate, the bioavailability of folic acid in broccoli, for example, is
not going to be as good as folic acid in breakfast cereal. Well, is it stable? That answer is
no. It's extremely vulnerable to heat and heat can destroy up to 90% of food folate.
So think about that broccoli. Maybe what you want to do is make sure that on occasion your
broccoli is raw or that you're mixing up a cooked vegetable with something else that's
green and leafy. Iceberg lettuce, for example, is not necessarily green. It's leafy, all
right, but it's not green. So spinach and romaine are going to be much better sources
of food folate than iceberg lettuce would be. Again, folic acid or folate has a body
garden vitamin C and vitamin C can actually aid in the protection of folate. Well, what
about folate deficiencies? Until recently, folate was one of the most common vitamin
deficiencies in the United States. But as a public health intervention in 1998, the level
of folic acid that was added to food was actually increased, which improved the blood levels
of Americans and reduced the incidence of neural tube defects. So this was an example
where we took a look at all the research in the U.S. Public Health Service as well as
other organizations actually added more folic acid to foods, and I think that was an important
consideration. Now, again, some cultures have an increased requirement, and so now as we
start to explore who needs what, there's actually going to be a little bit closer look at your
ethnicity, for example, in determining requirements. Folate deficiency influences red blood cell
development, resulting in blood cells that are oftentimes poorly formed. This actual
type of anemia is called macrocytic. Folate deficiency also impairs the synthesis of white
blood cells and compromises the immune system. Any rapidly growing cell is quickly affected
by folate deficiency, including cells in the GI tract in the mouth. So remember, B vitamin
deficiencies are manifested in the mouth. In the mouth here, there's going to be a swollen
red beefy tongue. Now, the deficiency of either folate or vitamin B12 produces an anemia.
Okay? So taking folate supplements can correct the anemia regardless of the cause. So what
does that mean? That means folic acid can actually mask a vitamin B12 deficiency because
it corrects the type of anemia that's formed. Prescription medicines are out there that
may actually act as a folate antagonist, and therefore the deficiency is intentional.
So there are times that we want to halt cell division. Methatrexate works as a folic acid
antagonist, and it's used to treat ectopic pregnancies, pregnancies that are growing
outside of the uterus, maybe in the fallopian tube, and rheumatoid arthritis, which again
inflammatory cells can accumulate in joints. The abnormal cell division can be corrected
within 48 hours of taking adequate folate. So I think the challenge here is that there
are medications that specifically induce a folic acid deficiency because of its effect
on cell division. Folate toxicity, there's no real known toxicity, but again it's so
important that large doses of folate can actually mask a B12 deficiency. So is there
a concern? The answer is absolutely yes. This concern actually delayed the increase in
fortification in 1998, as there was an increased risk of B12 deficiency with aging. So what
that means is that the older we get, the more likely we are to have a B12 deficiency, and
taking folate can actually mask or cover that up. So again, there's always going to be a
downside when we start to talk about enriching or fortifying the food supply, there are going
to be some individuals that actual fortification may be harmful. And there also may be some
individuals who actually have a hypersensitivity to folate. Okay, now what about vitamin B12?
Well this is actually unique to the B vitamin family. The body can store a supply up to
two years in the liver. So as opposed to all the other B vitamins that you really had to
have a consistent daily intake, vitamin B12 is actually stored in the liver for up to
two years. Well what does B12 do? It's needed in the production of red blood cells. So it's
got a companion with folic acid. It's needed in the maintenance of a normal central nervous
system. Certainly in the metabolism of fat, protein and carbohydrate are all real important.
The absorption of vitamin B12. This process requires a production of adequate stomach
acid. And it also requires intrinsic factor. An intrinsic factor is secreted by the parietal
cells in the stomach that unlocks vitamin B12 from food. It needs to be released. I want
to think about this for a second because gastric bypass used for the management of obesity
reduces the amount of acid that the stomach produces because the stomach is now smaller.
And it reduces the amount of intrinsic factor that interacts with the food. The loss of
the gastric juice or hydrochloric acid also occurs naturally with the aging process. And
about 30% of those over 50 years old can actually malabsorb the vitamin. So I want you to think
about this for a second. The physician told my mother that she had a problem with her red
blood cells. My mother assumed what that was was iron because that's what she knew. What
she actually had was a B12 deficiency. Not because she doesn't eat food sources of B12,
the problem is she didn't have enough intrinsic factor because she's 85 years old. B12 is
going to be found predominantly in animal proteins. So she eats meat. The reality is
that she didn't have adequate amounts of intrinsic factor. The challenge is B vitamin deficiencies
can take years to develop. So in someone going post gastric bypass, their first visit to
the doctor can have adequate B12 in their blood, not a problem at all. Over a period
of time, they lose that ability. They don't have adequate amounts absorbed from their diet.
So sometimes you can use injections or you can use a large oral dose up to 500 milligrams.
Here's the challenge here, is that the injections only work if you're B12 deficient. So you see
a lot of people out there believing that they need to have a B12 injection every month. That is
true if you are deficient. It is not true if you're not. Are there any populations at risk?
Absolutely. If vitamin B12 is found in animal products, if you are a vegan and consume no
animal products at all, the bottom line is you can end up with a B12 deficiency. If it goes on
and untreated, you can actually develop a form of anemia called pernicious anemia. It's an
inappropriate immune response. You end up with a macrocytic anemia, a large cell anemia. You can
have nerve destruction that's irreversible. So now here we have a disease associated with a B12
deficiency that is absolutely irreversible. So I think the challenge is making sure that you
have adequate amounts and if you're at risk, if you're in one of those vulnerable populations over
the age of 50, if you've had gastric bypass, you have to be a watchdog of your B12 status. Recent
research also suggests that a deficiency of B12 may also increase the likelihood of neural tube
defects illustrating again the interaction of B vitamins. Vitamin B12, no toxicity, no ill effects,
no known ill effects. Okay. Frequently asked questions. Is there a relationship between B
vitamins and heart disease? And the answer is yes. And again, here's where this synergy exists. B6,
folate and B12 all work closely together. And a deficiency of any one of these vitamins can
increase the level of homocysteine in the blood. Maybe some of you have had a homocysteine level
drawn by your health care provider. An increased level of this protein homocysteine actually is
a marker for an increased risk of heart disease and we could look at other diseases as well. So the
question then becomes is homocysteine, is it homocysteine directly that causes increased risk of
heart disease or is it a marker for a poor diet? I would probably also add there, is it a marker
for these dietary interactions, these B vitamin interactions? So say for example you eat great
but you drink significant amounts of alcohol with your friends on the weekend. Is it your poor diet
or is it the effect that alcohol has on all of these B vitamins? So keep in mind this is a wonderful
example of how nutrition is all woven together and the B vitamin family really illustrates this
probably as well as anything in clinical nutrition. And thank you very much.
you
