Greetings and welcome back.
My clinical practice, I end up going out and doing a lot of public speaking.
And I was at a local swim club not too long ago, and I started to talk about sports drinks.
And I could feel the crowd kind of shift, and I had a mom raise her hand and say, you
know, I really can't believe that you're a sports dietitian.
I cannot believe you would recommend that my child drink something that's artificially
flavored, has high fructose corn syrup in it, and has all this salt.
And I asked her to critique for me how much sodium was in the sports drink versus the
glass of milk her daughter had earlier in the day.
Well, actually an eight ounce serving of a sports drink has 110 milligrams of sodium,
and an eight ounce glass of milk has approximately 120.
So keep in mind that it's high sodium in relationship to what.
So I think there's a lot of confusion about sodium and its partner in crime, potassium.
And so we're going to take a look at these two very, very important electrolytes.
They play a very important role in regulating fluid exchange within body compartments.
As such, blood levels of these electrolytes are rarely affected only by dietary means,
and that should make sense if they are so integral to function.
Your body has to have a lot of defense mechanisms to keep the blood values of sodium and potassium
within narrow range.
These two minerals consequently play a major role in blood pressure.
Keeping blood pressure within normal range is very important because it reduces your
risk of congestive heart failure, coronary heart disease, kidney disease, and stroke.
And in general, the higher the person's salt intake, and please remember, salt is sodium
chloride.
The higher the person's salt intake, the higher the individual's blood pressure according
to the USDA guidelines for Americans.
So this is one of these major public health initiatives where we're trying to remind
Americans to leave the salt shaker alone.
Sodium intake in the United States regularly exceeds the recommended daily amount of less
than 2,300 milligrams, so we consume more than this on a regular basis.
Since sodium makes up about 40% of salt, this would be the equivalent of about a teaspoon
of table salt a day.
You might be thinking, I don't salt my food.
I can't possibly be getting that amount.
I think I'll probably surprise you as we go on.
There is about 4,500 milligrams of sodium in the typical Western diet, but this truly
depends on the region of the country you live in.
Being born and raised in Wisconsin, I might have had sodium in cured meats, but I certainly
didn't eat the spicy food that I experienced in New Orleans and in South Texas.
Since the body actually only requires 500 milligrams of sodium per day, that means many of us take
in almost 10 times what we need, but we've got to be practical here.
It's not practical to only consume the biological requirement.
Sodium isn't a lot of different foods and some maybe that you might not think of, and
so it's really not practical to try and reduce your sodium intake just to that biological
requirement.
That 4,500 milligram average is almost 20 to 30 times the amount of sodium needed to
replace normal losses.
We lose about 25 milligrams a day in our urine, 25 milligrams a day in feces, and for people
who are indoors, normal skin losses are about 100 milligrams per day, but as we'll learn,
that's going to change for individuals who are physically active.
Along with this problem of sodium overconsumption is the underconsumption of its antagonist
or the mineral that acts as its counterbalance, which is potassium.
Higher potassium intake helps to lower blood pressure by blunting the effects of sodium.
Diets rich in potassium are also associated with a reduced risk of developing kidney stones
as well as the reduction in bone loss with age.
So again, these two work in concert with one another and trying to get them to dance according
to the same step is oftentimes difficult to do.
So what are the functions of these wonderful electrolytes?
Sodium and potassium are necessary for the regulation of blood and other body fluids.
They help nerves to talk to one another.
They stimulate the action of muscular activity, proper gland function, and heart activity.
They are also really important for maintaining what is called the electrochemical gradients
and the membrane permeability in the cells of the body.
So what does that mean?
Sodium is essential for hydration because it pumps water into your cells.
Potassium functions in the pumping of byproducts or waste products out of the cell and are
eliminated from the body.
So they really serve as the body's fluid regulator and pump regulator, waste product regulator.
Well dietary sources of sodium and potassium and there are going to be more examples of
both of these found in your guidebook.
But here are a few examples of sources of sodium to get us started.
Sodium of salt is going to have 23, about 2300 milligrams of sodium.
A dill pickle that you might have with your sandwich is about 1700 milligrams of sodium.
A cup of canned chicken soup, 850, an ounce of pretzels, 486 and keep in mind an ounce
of pretzels would essentially get you close to your biological requirement.
That's why it's not practical to just shoot for that number.
And even an ounce of bread, really all types range between 95 and 210 milligrams of sodium.
So who would think that bread would have sodium in it?
But keep in mind it's not just sodium chloride table salt, it's going to be sodium propanate
which is added as a preservative, sodium bicarbonate, a leavening agent.
Now here are a couple sources of potassium.
A medium sweet potato that you would bake is 694 milligrams of potassium, eight ounces
of plain non-fat yogurt, 579, three ounces of yellowfin tuna, 484 milligrams of potassium.
Pork chop, again this is a non-cured pork chop but a pork chop 382 milligrams of potassium
and a fourth of a medium cantaloupe, 368.
Well again, let's raise that question, how much sodium and potassium do I need?
I cannot stress this enough, in general healthy adults should consume no more than 2,300 milligrams
of sodium per day.
African Americans, individuals who are middle aged or older, individuals who have high blood
pressure should aim to consume no more than 1,500 milligrams of sodium per day.
That becomes a real clinical challenge because keep in mind that the food doesn't taste like
it normally does, many individuals would rather not have it if it has no flavor.
One of the challenges with sodium regulation as we age is oftentimes we lose the ability
to taste food and sodium particularly in the form of table salt gives it a little extra
punch so reducing sodium alone for an elderly person oftentimes makes them not want to eat
the food.
The absolute minimum requirements for sodium intake are different for younger age groups.
For infants zero to five months, 120 milligrams, at a year 225 milligrams, two to five year
olds 300 milligrams and keep in mind as you approach adulthood we're looking at 500 milligrams
of sodium.
Now keep in mind we talked about some of the sodium losses through the skin but are there
times when individuals have excessive sodium losses through the skin?
Certainly one great example is what about endurance athletes?
What if you're exercising for greater than two hours you're going to have significant
amounts of sodium loss due to the loss of excess sweat.
The amount of sodium lost in sweat varies significantly among athletes and depending
on whether or not they are salty sweaters.
So how do you know if you're a salty sweater?
If you're done running and you can wipe the sweat off of your face or you can feel the
grains of salt on your face you are a salty sweater.
If you're living in a climate like I do where sweat doesn't evaporate off your skin so you
never get to wipe anything off other than water, another way that you can assess that
is if the sweat gets in your eyes is it very caustic, is it unbelievably painful to get
sweat in your eyes?
You may be a salty sweater.
The ultimate test though is if you hang up your gym clothes and you get the white salt
under your armpits you are a salty sweater.
What that means is you're losing more sodium in your sweat than normal.
Sodium losses in athletics are the highest for football players and can range up to 25
grams of sodium or 2500 milligrams per liter of sweat and why would that be true for football?
Think about what football players must wear, they have to wear helmets and pads and those
are for protection but they don't allow you to cool and so when the body doesn't cool
its only defense mechanism is to produce more sweat.
Again additionally the sweat tends to be saltier in the earlier stages of training and so one
of the adaptations is the more you train your body and its infinite wisdom actually reduces
the amount of sodium lost in sweat.
Certainly if an athlete is climatized to the heat or they're in shape they're going to
have less sodium lost in their sweat.
Athletes or individuals working out for more than an hour are encouraged to drink a sports
drink just for that reason something like Gatorade or Powerade with enough sodium at
least 100 milligrams per 8 ounces while exercising but for many athletes this is not enough sodium
and this is going to become real important on how do we address some of the cramps that
athletes can get.
Although fluid consumption is important for the prevention of cramping during exercise
it is almost always the excessive loss of sodium or salt that causes cramping.
I have the very fortunate job of working for the Houston Texans and again I live in south
Texas a lot of heat and humidity so I had an athlete who had cramped his whole athletic
career and he came to me and said I've tried everything but I'll give you a shot.
Now my buddy here was cramping within maybe 20 or 30 minutes of going out on the football
field.
His sodium losses were significant and our solution for his pre-game meal was V8 juice
relatively high in sodium, a breakfast cereal that had a lot of sodium in it but ultimately
what turned the corner is he had to salt his ham.
I'm going to give you another tip here he didn't like any of the foods that I recommended
he didn't like one of them but he was very agreeable to do this because he just had abnormal
sodium losses.
So the average person sitting at a desk may lose as little as 100 milligrams of sodium
in their sweat a day and again very athletic people can oftentimes lose excessive amounts
of sodium in their sweat.
Well do we have daily intake requirements for potassium?
Certainly for adults and adolescents it's about 4700 milligrams per day.
So the requirement for potassium is relatively large in comparison to sodium.
Children 1 to 3 years about 3000 milligrams, children 4 to 8, 3800 milligrams, children
9 to 13, 4500 milligrams and why does it increase with age?
Because body weight increases with age and because potassium is stored inside the muscle
the more muscle mass you make the more potassium that's needed to be stored.
So deficiencies in excess of sodium and potassium and I'm going to remind you here again your
body really works very very hard to keep the amount of sodium and potassium in your blood
normal.
But sodium deficiencies can occur and it's the name of a sodium deficiency is called
hypo meaning low, natremia, sodium loss in the blood, hyponatremia, low sodium in the
blood.
It is most often seen in endurance athletes who eat a large amount of fresh food, very
low sodium content and drink water excessively during exercise.
Now even the excessive drinking of a sports drink can cause hyponatremia because it's
just too much volume of fluid.
So one of the challenges is to get endurance athletes to back off on the fluid particularly
if they're relatively slow runners.
So say for example you're going to run your first marathon, you're anticipated to be out
in the course 4 to 5 hours, you may not want to drink at every aid station because you
could actually over drink.
This condition of hyponatremia can cause the brain to swell and it's characterized by
lethargy, lack of energy or enthusiasm, confusion.
I've actually heard of college fraternities hazing with water because you almost get the
same kind of look to the person as if they'd had too much alcohol.
Muscles twitching can occur with hyponatremia, seizures, coma and eventually death.
The first year the Houston Marathon, one of the guys that I work with is a medical director
for the Houston Marathon.
We actually had to admit four women for hyponatremia, they over drank on the course.
So again it can be caused by excess intake of fluid, fairly common problem during triathlons
and marathons particularly when they have a surplus of watering stations available.
The main risk for hyponatremia and endurance athletes, the main risk factors are being
female, often times this alters your choice of beverages.
I don't want to drink that evil sports drink so I'm just going to drink a lot of water.
I don't want to get dehydrated, good plan, but over consumption of particularly water.
Water doesn't have natural sodium in it.
If you're exercising for a long duration you can become hyponatremic.
Over hydration and the overuse of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs through some complex
physiology can also increase your risk of hyponatremia.
So I'll remind you again, calculate your fluid losses during exercise.
We went over this on the lecture on hydration but just as a reminder, if you're running
a marathon you should lose weight.
A marathon is over 26 miles and keep in mind for every mile you run you burned about 100
calories.
So you should lose some actual body weight in a marathon.
So if you start out a marathon at 120 pounds and you're ending at 120 pounds, chances
are you overdrank.
The worst case scenario is you start out at 120 and you finish the marathon at 125 pounds.
You are really at risk of becoming hyponatremic.
What about sodium excess?
There are no upper safety limits that have been established for sodium because excess
amounts are generally filtered and excreted by the kidneys.
Excess consumption of sodium, more than the recommended 2,300 milligrams, is associated
however with high blood pressure, edema swelling due to fluid retention and again high blood
pressure as a disease state is associated with an increased risk of aneurysm, heart
attack, heart failure and stroke.
Additionally, high blood pressure is the leading cause of chronic renal or kidney failure.
Also keep in mind that even a moderate elevation of arterial blood pressure can cause a shortened
life expectancy.
So we might want to look at that indirectly as a long-term consequence of sodium excess.
This is why controlling or limiting your sodium intake is so vital and so important.
Another gift that you can give your children is that when you have young children in the
house, don't salt your food.
Salt tends to be an acquired taste.
And so the more you introduce it in young children, the more likely they are to depend
on it, the older they get.
Well what about low potassium, potassium deficiency?
Again keep in mind these are rarely from dietary causes alone, but it can develop due to the
over excretion of potassium and again oftentimes that's medication induced.
Inadequate consumption in the daily diet, so maybe on a regular basis you eat no fruits
and vegetables.
And oftentimes caused by medications such as diuretics.
An underappreciated cause of low potassium is a low carbohydrate diet because low carbohydrate
diets because they're eliminating most fruits and vegetables contain very little potassium.
So what are the general symptoms?
Fatigue, muscular weakness, confusion, anxiety, temporary memory loss, diarrhea or constipation,
skin problems such as blisters and dryness, sleep disruption, ringing in your noise in
your ear.
But I'm going to tell you some of these symptoms are really vague and nonspecific.
So oftentimes individuals who have low potassium will tell me I just don't feel well, can't
put my finger on it, but I just don't feel well.
And particularly if they're taking one of the higher risk medications, that's oftentimes
my clue to say wait a minute here, you know maybe it's medication induced.
What about too much potassium?
Too much potassium, potassium excess is called hyperkalemia.
Again most often caused by abnormal kidney or renal functioning resulting in ineffective
elimination from the body.
So say for example you have long term kidney disease and you end up on dialysis.
You lose the body's ability to get rid of the potassium excess.
The bottom line is you have abnormal kidney functioning and you can't eliminate the excess
from your body.
So unfortunately for both of these electrolytes the major route of excretion is going to be
in the urine.
Now excessive intake causing hyperkalemia is rare but it can occur via salt substitutes.
Keep in mind if I use a salt substitute, I'm getting rid of the sodium.
So it's not sodium chloride anymore, but what am I doing here?
I have to put some other kind of mineral with that chloride to have it have a taste.
So oftentimes what they're going to do is have potassium chloride.
Well if that's you, if your doctor said use a salt substitute, here's a tip for you.
Salt substitutes as opposed to regular sodium chloride, so potassium chloride, salt substitutes
get bitter when they're heated.
So if you're opening a can of unsalted green beans and you put a little potassium chloride
in, salt substitute, you might find a bitterer metallic aftertaste.
So the tip here is you would use it as, you would use it as an addition at the end of
the cooking cycle.
But keep in mind, again not knowing your renal function, this would make me a little bit
nervous to recommend that everybody use a salt substitute because I can't look inside
and see whether or not you're one of these people that cannot excrete the excess.
Certainly dietary supplements can be a source of excess potassium.
Certainly if someone has had a potassium chloride infusion or they don't have normal kidney
function that can also cause hyperkalemia.
The symptoms are again general malaise, does this sound a little bit like too little potassium?
Heart palpitations or arrhythmias, muscular weakness, and sometimes sudden death and extreme
cases of hyperkalemia.
So let's come up with some practical tips here for reducing the sodium in increasing
potassium.
So think about this as your action plan to reduce your blood pressure without a pill.
Okay, percentage of dietary sodium in the American diet are as follows, 77% of the sodium
we get comes from food processing.
So the more processed the food is, and I generally describe that as the higher the ingredient
list, or the more hands that touch it, the center part of the grocery store, the more
processed the food is, the higher its sodium content, and in general the lower its potassium
content.
12% of the sodium is naturally occurring.
So it means that there's sodium naturally found in the food, not added by the manufacturer.
Again, some food items are just naturally higher in sodium than others, milk again is
a great example.
6% of the sodium is actually added at the table, and about 5% is added during cooking.
Now studies have also shown that an individual preference for salt is not fixed.
After a while, if you're reducing the amount of sodium in your diet, you quote unquote
get used to the taste, and your preference for salt will actually decrease.
You can use other flavoring in place of salt to help with the taste.
Now again, going to college and working and living in New Orleans and South Texas, I really
love spicy food.
So your food can be spicy, it just can't be salty.
So you can use chili, you can use red pepper, you can use all of those, but keep in mind
you want to flavor with a singular ingredient.
You don't want to use a seasoned salt, or a seasoned salt that's going to have a lot
of spice to it, but generally too much sodium.
Other studies have also shown that the amount of salt people add to their food at the dinner
table is generally stable.
I see many individuals before they even taste their food pick up the salt shaker and predictably
it might be six shakes, whether they want that amount of sodium or not, it's more habit
than it is necessity.
Meanwhile, even when people are eating lower sodium food items, they oftentimes typically
don't add more salt to their food, even when additional salt is readily available.
So it's most important to try and focus on food selection.
More fresh, less processed, less sodium laden food items.
Compare brands, keep in mind this is one of the things that's on the nutrition facts
panel on the back of food.
Because the larger source of sodium comes from manufacturing practices, it's important
to read and compare food labels of different brands.
And we're going to talk a little bit more on reading food labels in another lecture.
So for example, the sodium content in one brand of soup that you like, tomato soup,
might be over a thousand milligrams compared to 700 milligrams in another brand that you
like equally as well.
So choose the lower sodium.
Again, do this even if you don't have high blood pressure now.
Simple ways of limiting sodium again, avoid these overly processed foods, deli meats,
prepared meals and mixes.
Again, in general, the more hands that touch it, the higher the sodium content.
One of my favorite is the more instant of food is the higher the sodium content.
So think about instant puddings, ramen noodles, and those things that are quick and easy,
the more instant they are.
So if you made pudding the old fashioned way with milk and cornstarch and flavoring,
that's going to have the natural sodium that's going to be found in the milk.
If you make it an instant pudding, you can watch on the label how that sodium content
is going to rise.
Keep in mind that all animal products, all animals are bathed in saline, which is a
salt solution.
So naturally occurring, things like sodium and milk, 120 milligrams per eight ounces.
And in uncured meats, chicken and fish, that's not overly processed, 25 milligrams per ounce.
Not because it was added by anybody, but animals are going to be bathed in saline.
Simple things.
You can rinse off your canned vegetables and your tuna in water.
Balance your plate with 50% fruits and vegetables.
Your fruits and vegetables are where potassium is going to reside.
And so you want to make sure that you're balancing out the sodium with the potassium.
Certainly you can limit condiments such as steak sauce and Worcestershire sauce and accent.
I actually had a woman who was telling me she was so proud that she modified her meat
loaf recipe.
And she said, oh, Roberta, I don't put salt in my meat loaf at all anymore.
And I said, well, really, how are you making it?
She said, well, I'm now adding Worcestershire sauce.
I'm adding some ketchup and barbecue sauce.
And I found this wonderful seasoning agent called Accent.
Accent is monosodium glutamate.
So absolutely positively, she wasn't using any salt, but the sodium content of her modified
meat loaf was actually higher than the original one.
So she would have been better off leaving well enough alone.
So condiments are a hidden source of sodium.
Again, keep in mind, another invaluable way of reducing your blood pressure is to increase
your potassium intake.
So if you think, oh, I just can't live without salt in my diet, but what I'm going to do
is make an attempt to reduce my processed foods and add more fruits and vegetables.
That might be the perfect solution for you.
So again, to increase your potassium-rich diet, one of the things that you want to look
for is to include more leafy green vegetables, root vegetables, and fruits from the vine
in your diet.
All of these items are rich in potassium, and they have been shown to favorably affect
metabolic processes that can reduce your risk of kidney stones and bone loss.
The DASH diet wraps all of this up in a bow, and the DASH diet stands for Dietary Approaches
to Stop Hypertension, and that's discussed in another lecture.
It is a public health strategy that can help you to put all of this into action.
OK, frequently asked questions.
My aunt has kidney problems and must eat a low potassium diet, yet it seems that potassium
is so important.
Can you help me out here?
Well, here's an example where you really need to see a dietitian, because when there
is a medical condition limiting an essential nutrient, the disease process takes priority.
So we could argue, boy, she needs a potassium for many metabolic conditions, but the problem
is, if the potassium excretion is limited by chronic illness, an excess can be life-threatening.
So this takes priority.
When I worked in dialysis in New Orleans, I had a woman who just absolutely positively
loved potatoes.
Potatoes being a vegetable of sort is going to have a great amount of potassium.
So we actually took her potatoes that she dearly loved, sliced them into really thin
pieces, and soaked them.
By soaking them, we got rid of some of the potassium.
We added more water.
We soaked them again.
We added more water and soaked them again.
And so through this process, we were able to eliminate about 50% of the potassium.
She had to limit the potassium.
So we had to waste the potassium in the food preparation water to keep her from having
an arrhythmia or a fatal event from too much potassium.
Another question.
You always say that diuretic medications can cause hypokalemia or low potassium.
But what about coffee and tea?
Aren't they diuretics?
Yeah, they're both in that same family of diuretics, but they function differently.
So coffee and tea are not going to be a reason why the potassium in your blood is low.
Now, what about salt tablets?
I work with a lot of coaches to say, well, when I was playing football, I always use
salt tablets, and that's the way that I prevented cramping.
So are salt tablets ever the answer to a salt replacement?
What about hikers who are exercising and perhaps spend hours in the sun?
Yes, they can work, but you have to balance them with fluid intake.
So a salt pill for someone who's, even say, for example, is a roofer may be a good and
practical idea, but I will tell you when he comes down from that roof, he absolutely positively
must balance it with adequate fluid intake.
Now again, it seems very easy for us to get too much sodium and not enough potassium.
So a question that I almost always get is the 4,700 milligram per day requirement for
potassium seems so high, isn't this hard to achieve through dietary intake alone?
And a lot of that just really depends on what does your diet look like?
If your diet has a lot of processed foods, very few fruits and vegetables, absolutely,
you might struggle to get that 4,700 milligrams of potassium per day.
But if you're thinking, you know what, I don't want to count milligrams, I don't want to
look things up in a book, I don't want to do the math, how can I do it in a more practical
way?
It's not impossible to do that by increasing fruits and vegetables, as well as dairy can
be always to achieve the requirement.
So say for example, it's breakfast time, and you think, you know what, I do not want
a banana, I don't like bananas.
You might say I need something quick and easy, and so this might be a place where you want
to use a fruit juice.
You might say I'm going to have orange juice here, you're on the go, you're traveling,
you stop at a convenience store, having fresh fruit might not be practical, but my goodness,
you can go buy a low sodium tomato juice.
That might be an additional way to get fruits and vegetables.
So I want you to think 50% of your plate is fruits and vegetables, and when you think
this way, you're going to be able to easily get to that 4,700 milligrams of potassium
that we're looking for.
And thank you very much.
