Welcome.
In this lecture, we're going to take a look at the relationship between iron, zinc, and
selenium.
And I want you to start to think about those three minerals like dominoes.
When you knock down one, there's going to be a consequence to be paid down the way.
And I'm going to start up by telling you a little bit of a dilemma that I was faced
in my clinical practice.
Had a young person come in and they were being evaluated for metabolic syndrome, diabetes.
And in the discovery process, we saw that their HDL, their good cholesterol, was really,
really low, lower than anticipated.
And we prescribed exercise and all the other wonderful things that you can do to raise
the HDL, but it kept going in the wrong direction.
Little did we know that the mom was deciding that it was a really good idea because it
was cold and flu season to take a whole lot of zinc.
And again, think about that domino analogy.
When you start to take a whole lot of a good thing, is it still a good thing?
And the answer is no.
Zinc is important in the maintenance of normal HDL cholesterol, but too much actually gets
that cholesterol going in the wrong direction.
So the source of that low HDL in this adolescent, the source of the low HDL was too much zinc.
So now let's explore the first one on our list.
Let's take a look at iron and a few facts and functions about iron.
Iron is a component of hemoglobin, myoglobin, and many enzymes within the body.
Well, let's define hemoglobin.
Hemoglobin is the protein on red blood cells that's responsible for oxygen transport.
Its partner, myoglobin, is the protein found in muscle tissue.
Iron has an integral role in brain development and is absolutely critical in the first two
years of life.
Iron is vital in the production of the protective membrane in the central nervous system called
the myelin sheath.
It's also involved in the production of neurotransmitters, which are chemicals that carry signals
between nerve cells.
Well, infant formula contains iron.
Breast milk has very biological available iron, but cow's milk is devoid of iron.
So one of the reasons why the American Academy of Pediatrics recommends either infant formula
or breastfeeding for newborns and infants up for the first year of life is because cow's
milk is a very poor source of iron.
So I was in a clinic, a San Jose clinic there in Houston, and I had a woman coming in with
what appeared to be strawberry milk.
And when I asked her what this was, because her baby was profoundly iron deficient, what
it was was cornstarch was strawberry flavoring in it.
It looked like milk, but it wasn't milk.
It was a milk surrogate as she described it.
It was a pretend milk, infinitely less expensive than cow's milk, and certainly much less expensive
than infant formula.
So the cause of anemia or iron deficiency in her infant was that she was using the wrong
kind of milk.
It looked like milk, but it was actually just cornstarch.
Iron is a structural part of many enzymes that have a multitude of metabolic functions,
including, again, neurotransmitter, production and function, the synthesis of DNA and collagen.
It helps your liver's detoxification system, and as we hear all sorts of individuals interested
in detox diets these days, keep in mind that your liver does an amazing job.
Just make sure that you have adequate amounts of iron in your diet.
It's also integral in the maintenance of a functioning immune system, but I want to
caution you here, bacteria also require iron for growth.
So if you're taking lots and lots of supplemental iron that has not been prescribed by your
physician, keep in mind that bacteria can grow in the presence of extra iron.
It's for that reason that many nutrition support products, things that might be given
to you intravenously in the hospital, are iron free for this reason, not because you
don't need the iron, but what they're really trying to do is prevent bacterial overgrowth.
Well is iron bioavailable?
And the average is really no.
The answer is no.
On average, only about 10% of the dietary iron that you consume is absorbed by the body.
Again, in general, women absorb about 13% of dietary iron, and men absorb about 6%.
Why does that happen?
Why do men absorb less than women?
Well the reason it depends on biological need.
Absorption can range from as little as 1% to over 50% depending on your state of deficiency.
Absorption is more effective during times of deficiency.
So if you are deficient, your body actually ramps up the absorption.
Well dietary iron comes in two distinct forms, heme iron, heme from the word hemoglobin,
and non-heme iron.
Heme iron is found mainly in animal products and is absorbed much more effectively than
non-heme iron, which is found in grains and plants.
Why don't you think about that for a second?
So what does that mean if you're vegetarian?
If you're vegetarian and needing no sources of animal protein, your absorption of iron
might be compromised.
The presence of free amino acids, a breakdown product of protein metabolism, and the acidic
pH of your stomach actually will enhance the absorption of non-heme iron.
So most of us think the acid environment in our stomach is not physiologically unnormal,
but it's actually physiologically essential.
So is there anything that you can do to increase the absorption of iron?
Well actually yes, and your grandmother probably had the best answer.
Cooking with a black iron skillet can be a valuable source of contaminant iron.
It can increase the iron content of a meal from anywhere between 30 to 100 fold.
So in my work at the Houston Ballet, I always recommend to my ballerinas to go out and get
a black iron skillet, one because they are trying to manage their calories, oftentimes
they're vegetarian, and I want to enhance that iron absorption.
Iron absorption can also be decreased by antacids.
Well that should make sense, and antacids job is to alter the pH of the stomach, make
the stomach more basic, and keep in mind iron loves acid.
Well there are other things in the diet that can also influence the amount of iron that
you absorb.
Calcium, zinc, magnesium, and phosphorus can also reduce the absorption of iron.
In the environment lead will also reduce the absorption of iron, but from a dietary source
if you're thinking that you're taking calcium in any form for the prevention of osteoporosis
don't take it with iron.
So again think of that domino analogy, if I knock down one I'm going to knock down others.
Is there anything else that's going to influence this iron bioavailability?
And the answer is absolutely, and you probably had some for breakfast this morning.
Tannic acids sometimes known as tannins are found in coffee and tea, they're the bitter
taste.
So they also decrease iron absorption, so much that if you drink coffee or tea around
an hour before or after a meal, particularly when it contains non-heamed iron, you can
reduce your iron absorption by as much as 40%.
So if you're taking a multivitamin with iron, space it out where you're not having coffee
or tea.
Now this is true whether it's regular or decaf because it's not the caffeine, it's the bitter
or astringent taste in coffee and tea.
Certainly phytates which are found in fiber, oxalate that are found in many foods, and
even soy may interfere with iron absorption.
Now I'm going to give you a couple sources of dietary iron, but there's more examples
found in the guidebook.
And I picked out two that are probably not typical.
Clams that are steamed, about a 3.5 ounce portion, contain actually 22 milligrams of
iron.
Also another seafood choice, oysters that are cooked have about 8.5 milligrams of iron
in the same portion size, about 3.5 ounces.
Well how much iron do I need?
The million dollar question.
The daily reference intakes for iron are as follows, but they're based on age, gender,
and stage of life cycle.
Males between the ages of 19 and 70 require 8 milligrams.
Females between the ages of 14 and 18, 15 milligrams.
Females 19 to 50, about 18 milligrams.
And at the end of menstruation and the beginning of menopause, women 51 to 70 require only
8 milligrams, so they become close to their male counterparts.
What about a deficiency of iron?
On average, the typical American diet contains about 10 milligrams of iron per every thousand
calories consumed.
But this is the typical American diet that is going to contain heme iron or animal based
iron.
Deficiencies can result from chronic bleeding or malabsorption or bioavailability issues.
Children, pregnant or menstruating women, and repeat blood donors are at most risk for
iron deficiency.
One in ten premenopausal women in the United States has iron deficiency.
Well, in Houston, one of the challenges that we've had is how do we manage this level of
iron deficiency?
And so we had a project going on at one of the local schools in the inner city, Houston,
that was being remodeled.
And what happened was we were seeing a very huge prevalence of children in that school
being iron deficient.
Well, what it was, they actually had lead poisoning.
They were remodeling the school, they were refinishing the surfaces, and that leaded
pain became airborne, competed with iron for absorption, and all of these children undergoing
standardized tests actually had iron deficiency, which decreased their cognition, their ability
to perform on standardized tests.
So here's an example of a non-dietary interference with iron, it was actually lead poisoning.
Another place where you can see iron deficiency is in the use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs.
What happens with these medications is they actually erode the lining of the stomach and
cause a stomach bleed.
You don't have pain, you don't see blood in your stool, you don't have any of those
signs and symptoms, but the challenge is you can still end up overtly iron deficient.
So the number one reason that I see in my clinical practice, men with iron deficiency
anemia is from non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug use, using medications for pain for example.
Well symptoms of deficiency include short attention span, but that's mostly in children.
In adults it can result in extreme fatigue or poor immune system functioning.
Other biological markers that you might actually be able to see are pale inner eyelids, mucosal
tissue, behavioral changes, concave and pale nail beds.
Well iron deficiency occurs in stages and I want you to think about your bank account,
I want you to think about the amount of money that you have in your bank.
Ferritin is actually an iron containing protein in your cells and it's a measure of your storage
iron, so it's a measure of the amount of iron that you have stored, so it's kind of like
the amount of money that you have deposited in your bank account.
As ferritin becomes depleted as you're removing money from that bank account, finally you're
going to end up seeing it in your checkbook, you're not going to have as much money in
your checkbook anymore.
And that's when decreased hemoglobin comes in and decreased hemoglobin by time your physician
actually measures it for you, you've already exhausted your bank account, you spent everything
in your checkbook and you're down to zero and that's what decreased hemoglobin means.
So if you want to see if you're on the verge of iron depletion, have your physician check
for you a ferritin level.
As bone marrow iron stores become more and more depleted, the amount of iron that you
absorb increases to compensate, so your body tries to rally but it may not be able to rally
in a fast enough fashion.
Eventually though, deficiency is going to impair red blood cell synthesis and the results
are an iron deficiency anemia and this anemia is microcytic small cell and pale color hypochromic.
Well can you have an excess of iron and the answer should be yes, absolutely you can.
Iron toxicity due to the over consumption of dietary iron is not terribly common, especially
since non-heme iron absorption decreases as you eat more of it.
The excessive amounts of iron acts as an oxidant and iron overload can have very negative health
implications and what do they include?
Well it's a worsening of insulin resistance that we've chatted about in our metabolic
syndrome diabetes lecture and this worsening insulin resistant can actually make non-alcoholic
steatohepatitis worse.
Now iron poisoning is common when children eat vitamins like candy so I want you to think
about the vitamins that you have in your home whether for your children or your grandchildren.
Treat them like drugs.
Iron overdose from vitamins is one of the leading causes of poisoning in children under
the age of 6 years old.
Iron supplementation in those with normal iron stores can actually increase the level
of oxidative DNA damage and increase the likelihood of cancer risk.
Once you think about this we talk about antioxidants and the reason why antioxidants are so important
and now with excess iron what we've actually done is introduce an oxidant.
So too much iron acts as an oxidant and actually increases the risk or the likelihood of cancer.
And individuals who consume large amounts of calories are also at risk of iron overload
and in my athletic population this is a real concern.
Keep in mind that we fortify foods, we fortify breakfast cereals, energy bars, almost any
kind of grain product that you can look at is going to have iron in it.
So athletes who consume large amounts of highly fortified food should read labels alright
but they're going to struggle to find things that are not going to be fortified with iron.
So in my athletic population I have often times recommended go donate blood, you eat
a large amount of calories, you're eating a large amount of fortified foods and certainly
we now test particularly male athletes for iron overload.
People who receive repeated blood transfusions are at high risk for iron poisoning as are
people who consume large amounts of alcohol.
From a previous lecture we've already talked about alcohol's effect on B vitamins but large
amounts of alcohol can actually increase the uptake of iron in mucosal cells.
Okay, there's an upper limit.
The upper limit of safety for iron is 45 milligrams per day for adults and for teens and children
it's approximately 40 milligrams per day.
Now keep in mind if you have an overt deficiency your physician may prescribe higher doses
than that and that's not of concern.
We're talking about individuals who have adequate amounts of iron.
Well iron and drugs can interact, iron can reduce the effectiveness of antibiotics, iron
can reduce the effectiveness of drugs called bisphosphonates that are used for the prevention
of osteoporosis.
So keep in mind again just like our partner zinc too much iron is not a good thing and
now we're going to zoom on to facts and functions of zinc.
This is a pretty popular supplement on the market right now.
For half the body's zinc supply is found in muscle tissue.
It's also found in bone, eyes, prostate gland, testes, skin and kidneys.
Zinc is an essential mineral for over 100 enzymes.
Zinc is necessary for strong cell membranes, absolutely essential for wound healing and
I think a point needs to be made right here is that even though there may be a requirement
for zinc, if you've had surgery your zinc requirements are going to go up because you
have now an increased need for wound healing.
Zinc is also needed in tissue growth and repair and again post-surgically you may need supplemental
zinc.
It's needed for protein synthesis, DNA and RNA maintenance, blood clotting, taste perception
and interestingly in my clinical practice often times one of the first signs that I
see is when people tell me my food doesn't taste like anything or my food has a metallic
taste to it that could actually be a zinc deficiency.
It's needed in bone mineralization, healthy thyroid function, normal cognition, normal
fetal development and pubertal growth.
So often times when you look at zinc it's one of these minerals that has a wide variety
of functions so deficiencies can be a real problem.
Are there benefits from taking zinc?
Well there is conflicting results on the zinc lozenges used for colds.
Zinc gluconate may be the best form in lozenges but a recent Cochrane database review showed
no significant benefit from the use of lozenges and I want you to think about this for a second
because you can see what's coming, zinc can be toxic just like iron can be toxic.
So if I decide in my wisdom I'm going to take these lozenges all winter long or because
they're not necessarily working in the way that I thought they would I'm going to double
the dose you can end up paying a price for that.
Now there may be a mild protective effect in zinc supplementation against age related
macular degeneration.
Research from the 2001 age related eye disease study reported that 80 milligrams of zinc
which is a significant dose plus antioxidants and copper slowed the progression of AMD.
So this is an example where the science is suggesting that more than what's needed might
be beneficial if you're in that high risk category.
Supplemental zinc may also prove beneficial to the elderly as zinc deficiency may be more
common in this population.
So again if you have someone in your family that you're caring for that is complaining
that food doesn't taste great there can be lots of reasons for that but you may want
to think about could there be a zinc deficiency going on here.
Well what about bioavailability?
The body absorbs anywhere between 15 and 40 percent of dietary zinc.
Excess intake of iron or copper can interfere with zinc intake.
So again iron and zinc can compete with each other for absorption.
Two studies have showed that a high calcium diet and supplement decreased zinc absorption
in postmenopausal women.
So if you're postmenopausal you're taking additional calcium to prevent bone disease
you can actually decrease the amount of zinc absorption that you have.
Medications can also have an impact on zinc status.
Many of the high blood pressure medications, ACE inhibitors such as capterpril can interfere
with your body's ability to absorb and utilize zinc.
Oral contraceptives, aspirin, thiazide diuretics are all medications that can interfere so keep
in mind that your pharmacist may be the one healthcare provider that can help you to put
all that together.
Zinc can also reduce the absorption of tetracycline.
It can bind with warfarin which is a blood thinner.
And it may actually increase the toxicity of cisplatin which is used for cancer.
So again keep in mind anytime you decide to take a supplement your healthcare provider
must know.
I also recommend that if you're taking a lot of dietary supplements that you actually
put them on a three by five index card and put them in your wallet in case you were unfortunate
enough to be in a car accident or ill enough where you couldn't speak for yourself that
your healthcare provider would know what you are taking.
And I've done this for my children and my family.
Zinc from meat sources just like iron is about four to five times more bioavailable than
zinc from plants.
So vegetarians may need up to 50% more zinc given the issues with bioavailability.
Phytates again found in the holes, nuts and seeds and grain high fiber foods can also
decrease the bioavailability of zinc.
Dietary sources of zinc and again more examples can be found in the guidebook.
Want you to think about this zinc and iron often times share food sources.
So if you're deficient in iron you may also be a deficient in zinc.
Oysters again our seafood hero here cooked have 39 milligrams of zinc.
Ground beef has about 5.5 milligrams of zinc per three and a half ounce portion.
For some vegetarian sources we've got pumpkin seeds, a quarter of a cup of pumpkin seeds
has 4.2 milligrams and a quarter of a cup of soy nuts has 2.1.
So you can get a variety of different food sources for zinc but keep in mind that it's
going to be animal sources that are going to be probably the most plentiful.
Well how much zinc do you need?
One more time the dietary reference intakes assume that you are well and if you are well
the DRIs for zinc include males 19 to 70 need about 11 milligrams.
Females 19 to 70 need 8 milligrams.
So again if I had a serving of oysters and some pumpkin seeds chances are I'm going to
have more than enough zinc for the day.
The breakfast cereals are also going to be fortified with zinc and iron.
What about deficiency in excess of zinc?
Dietary deficiency of zinc in the United States is rare but it includes the elderly, low income
children, vegetarians and alcoholics.
The symptoms of a deficiency are not so unique that you could always pin it on zinc but include
anemia, delayed growth in children, slow wound healing, glucose intolerant, poor appetite
and taste and skeletal abnormalities if this occurs during adolescence and childhood.
Skin problems can develop around the eyes, nose, mouth and on the buttocks and by skin
problems usually what it looks like is almost raccoon in nature.
You can have kind of a greasy dermatitis around your eyes, the opening of your nose, the opening
of your mouth.
And so it's around the openings that you can see this kind of greasy dermatitis.
Toxicity, the upper level for zinc for adults is 40 milligrams per day.
So keep in mind that some of the research studies they are using a larger dose than
40 milligrams per day because what they're trying to do is correct a deficiency.
Zinc in excess of 80 milligrams a day can result in lower levels of HDL cholesterol,
immunosuppression, the reduction of white blood cells and an interference with the mineral
copper.
So my poor adolescent in the beginning whose HDL was not explainable was taking a large
dose of zinc over 100 milligrams per day.
It can also result in defective cholesterol metabolism as with all mineral excess can
cause GI disturbances such as vomiting and diarrhea.
So again this is a great example of too much of a good thing is truly not a good thing.
On to selenium.
Selenium's job is to reduce peroxide free radicals, compounds that are essentially that
are oxidants that are believed to cause aging and are implicated in various forms of cancer.
And this is one of these emerging stories that there's good news about this mineral and
then there's some bad news about this mineral.
It works synergistically hand in hand with vitamin E as an antioxidant.
It plays a valuable role in thyroid function.
And now on to the bioavailability.
Plants are the most common dietary source of selenium.
The amount of selenium that is in plant products that you eat depends on how much mineral was
in the soil where this plant was grown.
So if the plant was grown in selenium deficient soil the food in and of itself is going to
be deficient.
In the United States the selenium content or the concentration in that plant can vary
almost 200 fold from region to region.
Certainly when you're growing things on your own if you're growing a lot of plant based
products on your own you may end up not having adequate amounts of selenium in your soil.
Meat and poultry tend to be more reliable sources of selenium because their feed is typically
supplemented with this mineral.
But let's stop for a second and think about this.
As we go to this whole organic and sustainable movement one of the things that we're seeing
is animals that are going to be free range or they're going to be grass fed.
And now we are going to be dependent on the feed that they have i.e. grass to have adequate
amounts of selenium.
High doses of iron, vitamin C and heavy metals can decrease the absorption of zinc and selenium.
So keep in mind what we're looking at here is one more time your body loves to drive
down the middle of the road and when I decide to take it into the ditch there are going
to be health consequences to pay.
Well how much selenium do I need?
The dietary reference intakes for selenium for adults are about 55 micrograms with the
upper limit being 400 micrograms.
Dietary sources of selenium are plentiful and many examples can be found in your guidebook
but as an example a quarter of a cup of Brazil nuts has 1036 micrograms, oysters again are
going to be a great source, a cup of oatmeal that's cooked is 19 micrograms and a medium
boiled egg is 13 micrograms.
So selenium a good guy or a bad guy, well maybe it's both and here's a great example
of the studies that make us just shake our head on what should we do.
There was a study called the select study designed to see the effects of selenium and
other antioxidants in the prevention of prostate cancer.
After 5.5 years the intervention group showed no difference from the control group suggesting
that there was no benefit from taking selenium as part of the select study.
However there is a correlation between selenium levels in your blood and something called
c-reactive protein.
C-reactive protein is a measure of inflammation and the higher your c-reactive protein the
greater your inflammatory response.
So in some studies the higher the selenium level in the blood the lower your c-reactive
protein suggesting that selenium may reduce inflammation and this inflammatory response
is thought to be part of the etiology of heart disease as well as cancer.
Certainly beyond heart disease there is an ongoing interest in selenium supplementation
and immunity.
The original interest surfaced when about 180 men with HIV had a reduction in hospitalization
with 200 micrograms of selenium.
So we saw a resurgence in the health food stores of selenium supplementation being sold for
immune function.
Selenium supplementation may offer some protection from basal cell carcinomas but an increased
risk for squamous cell skin cancer.
So you're shaking your head and say oh my goodness am I confused?
Well you should be.
The take home point on all of these research studies is concentrate on selenium rich foods.
Don't concentrate on trying to micromanage or go in and say now how much selenium am I
supposed to take via supplement?
Eat selenium rich foods.
Well what about deficiencies?
Selenium deficiency is rare in the United States where selenium intake is typically 100 to
250 micrograms per day but selenium deficiency is on the rise again in the United States.
Well why might that be?
What we're seeing is that selenium deficiency exists and it's most prevalent post gastric
bypass surgery so as the number of Americans going for gastric bypass surgery increases
the cardiomyopathy the heart disease associated with selenium deficiency is on the rise.
Anytime someone with severe GI disorders gastrointestinal disorders they can malabsorb selenium and
there are selenium and drug interactions.
Chemotherapeutic drugs for example against this platinum may actually increase selenium
requirements.
Selenium may reduce the effectiveness of statin resins that are used to lower cholesterol.
Toxicity can exist but it's usually at doses greater than 900 micrograms per day.
Some concerns exist that increased levels of selenium may increase the likelihood of
glucose intolerance.
Selenium glucose intolerance is one of those things that's kind of a precursor of diabetes.
Okay what about our frequently asked questions?
Had a question that I've heard of a disorder called pica.
What does this have to do with iron deficiency?
Well pica's disorder where individuals eat traditionally non-food substances have a craving
for it.
It can include ice, clay, paper and cornstarch.
I had a young patient in New Orleans, he was on dialysis and hemo dialysis for kidney
failure is notorious for causing an iron deficiency and he used to come into dialysis with white
all over his face and what he was doing was eating cornstarch.
So I would ask him did you have cornstarch before you came and of course he knew he
wasn't supposed to do that and he said no ma'am I didn't have any cornstarch but yet
his body was telling on him because he had cornstarch all over his face.
Another question that I get on a regular basis is I was given a medication for anemia, iron
deficiency anemia.
At what point do I stop taking the supplements or reduce my dose?
Well this becomes a medical decision because only your physician can peek on the inside
i.e. your blood, can peek on the inside and say do you need to continue to take it or
are your levels corrected enough where you can stop taking the medication.
I'd want to know if my ferritin stores or my storage form of iron is corrected.
Do I have now an adequate ferritin before I'd want to stop taking it?
So again we've explored some of the dilemma of these three minerals and balance is going
to rule.
Thank you very much.
