Welcome.
In this lecture, we're going to explore the definition of a heart-healthy lifestyle.
In our previous lecture on the definitions of heart disease, we described it and described
a little bit in detail of how heart disease happens.
In this lecture, we're going to take a look at your diet and heart disease risk.
We've spoken generalities before and now we're going to talk about understanding and mitigating
your own personal risk.
So if you have a recent blood work from your physician that you want to pull out and have
it handy, that would be helpful.
What we're going to take a look at first and foremost is what should your blood cholesterol
and your blood level of triglycerides be?
What should those be?
The most public health recommendations are now telling us that total blood cholesterol
should be less than 200 milligrams per deciliter or lower.
Certainly some research suggests that your risk of heart disease starts to climb when
your total cholesterol is at about 150 milligrams per deciliter.
Now these are adult values.
These are not pediatric values.
For adolescents and children, the value should be less than 170 milligrams per deciliter,
according to the American Academy of Pediatrics.
Well, let's understand a little bit more in detail what this total cholesterol is.
Total cholesterol is an umbrella term.
It has lots and lots of spokes underneath it.
So it's made up of sub-fractions of other types of cholesterol.
It is designed to be a screening tool, but it may not be accurate to predict those who
are actually going to develop heart disease.
Because heart disease, as we know, is influenced by genetics, weight, saturated fat, trans fat
intake, all of those things.
But again, general values are less than 200 milligrams per deciliter.
Well, what happens if you're higher than that?
What's the disease risk?
If your cholesterol is between 200 and 239 milligrams per deciliter, the term is borderline
high.
If it's greater than 240, it's considered high.
I've been doing this a long time, and I can tell you I've watched these targets move.
I remember when I first got into clinical practice, we didn't consider cholesterol to be high
unless it was greater than 300 milligrams per deciliter.
Now we consider that an off-the-chart value.
Well, the same thing is true for triglycerides.
That target is moving, and quite honestly, the numbers are lower and lower than they
were in years past.
So triglycerides should be less than 150 milligrams when you fast.
Now this is an important concept.
Total cholesterol, you don't have to fast to have an accurate total cholesterol.
You do have to fast if you want accurate triglycerides.
So you have to make sure that you fasted for about eight hours before you have your blood
drawn.
So even if you've had a glass of juice, your triglycerides can be transiently elevated
from that, so make sure that you're fasting to get a true value.
So it should be less than 150 milligrams per deciliter.
If it's in the range of 150 to 199, it's considered borderline high, 200 to 499 is high, and greater
than 500 is very high.
I'm going to point out something to you here because it's a key concept.
What drives heart disease risk in diabetes oftentimes is this high triglycerides.
It is not uncommon for people to have high triglycerides with poorly controlled diabetes.
So why is this important?
Why are triglycerides now emerging on the scene as a risk factor for heart disease?
Well there's an inverse relationship between triglycerides and HDL.
That means the higher your triglycerides go in your blood, the lower your HDL.
Now HDL cholesterol is the good guy.
HDL cholesterol removes cholesterol from your blood supply.
I consider it the garbage collector.
It picks up the stuff that's not supposed to be in the blood supply and gets rid of
it.
It dumps it.
So the higher your triglycerides, the lower the good cholesterol.
So now we know that triglycerides by themselves are considered a risk factor for heart disease.
Now remember, triglycerides are the way that we store body fat.
They are an adipose tissue.
They are formed when the body needs to store extra calories.
So if I decided this week I was going to go out and gain 50 pounds, that was my strategy.
I can guarantee you the triglycerides in my blood are going to be elevated because my
body is trying to do something with those extra calories.
Now alcohol is metabolized close to fat, not identical but close to fat.
So excessive alcohol intake can elevate triglycerides.
Simple sugars, increases in processed carbohydrates can increase triglycerides most likely because
they're linked with insulin excess.
So I'm going to remind you, insulin is an anabolic hormone.
It's a building hormone.
So in the presence of extra insulin, I'm going to take any calories that are out there and
convert them to triglycerides.
So in insulin excess, you're going to have elevated triglycerides.
Now omega-3 fatty acids come to the rescue here.
They can reduce triglycerides up to 40% when given in the range of 2 to 4 grams per day.
Now remember, under 2 grams per day of fish oil, there really is very little risk from
taking that.
But if you need to ramp up that dose and say, for example, you decide on your own, you're
going to take 4 grams per day, I would encourage you to go to your physician first and foremost
so they can monitor you for any kind of side effect, but also you can get a prescription
form of these fish oils and you can get insurance coverage.
So there's a way of reducing your cost.
Now keep in mind, because oil and water do not mix, lipids can't circulate freely in
the blood because, again, there's that disconnect.
You've got to have something to carry it.
So they are bound to a carrier protein.
And this compound is called lipo, meaning fat, protein, being a carrier.
And I'll remind you that one of the major functions of protein is going to be as a transporting
agent.
This allows the transport of an oily substance, i.e. the lipid, through watery blood.
Cholesterol is going to be at the core of these lipoprotein structures.
The amount of cholesterol is different among the different lipoproteins, and it's a powerful
indicator of heart disease risk.
So remember, we've got this total cholesterol that's the sum of the parts, and now we're
going to look at each one of the prongs of our umbrella.
LDL cholesterol.
LDL cholesterol stands for low-density lipoprotein.
Low-density lipoprotein cholesterol.
It carries fat for the deposition in cells, including the smooth muscle cells of your
arterial walls.
Increased LDL levels are associated with a higher risk of heart disease.
Currently, the recommended level, the recommended amount, is less than 100 mg per deciliter.
But there are some agencies that are now challenging that and are actually suggesting
the lower your LDL, the better.
In fact, if you have pre-existing diabetes, many agencies are going to suggest that you
get that to less than 70 mg per deciliter, and you might not be able to do that with
diet alone.
You might require some medication support.
Another spoke of that umbrella is HDL cholesterol.
Again, this is my garbage collector.
It removes surplus cholesterol and fat from tissues, including the arterial wall.
So it comes in and scoops up the extra cholesterol and gets rid of it.
So the higher your HDL, the lower your heart disease risk.
Again, depending on the research you like, there are some suggestions that when your HDL
is greater than 60 mg per deciliter, it is a negative risk factor.
So I can tell you I'm very excited, although my cholesterol is high.
My HDL sits in that range of 90 to 95, and so I have less heart disease risk because
I have that high HDL.
Now if your value is less than 40 mg per deciliter in men, less than 50 in women, that's
your warning light, boy, your dashboard is flashing on you saying, uh-oh, you've got
an issue here.
So I've seen multiple, multiple people who have a total cholesterol of 200, and you think
that's pretty good, but their HDL is 20.
That's not so good.
So their disease risk looks a little bit different when I look at all the spokes of that umbrella.
Since it's an umbrella term, there are multiple values, multiple methods to evaluate this
risk based on the type of sub-fraction that you have.
Do you have LDL, HDL, what's going on?
So again, we have this man who has a total cholesterol of 200, HDL is 20.
What is his disease risk?
Risk of heart disease risk can look at combining this data for both men and women, and this
ratio of greater than 4.5 indicates a greater risk of heart disease.
Well let's do the math on our guy.
Total cholesterol is 200, HDL is 20, so his ratio is 10.
Well he's got a greater risk factor because the science will say a ratio greater than
4.5 is a higher risk of heart disease.
Only a ratio of 3.5 or lower represents a more desirable risk, but a very good friend
of mine is a cardiovascular nurse educator for a big metropolitan hospital in Houston.
And she reports that the average person having a heart attack at her hospital has a total
cholesterol of 210, 210 falls into what category?
210 is borderline high, but an HDL of 20, so that ratio is sitting at about 10.
So the key point here is don't just get your total cholesterol done because you can be
lulled into a false sense of security saying oh my total cholesterol is 200, I'm good.
Get the lipid profile.
The lipid profile is going to give you all the spokes to that umbrella.
Now there's some other terms that are emerging on the research scene.
One is called homocysteine.
Now homocysteine is a highly reactive, sulfur-containing amino acid that is formed from the metabolism
of an amino acid called methionine.
Now remember, methionine is an essential amino acid.
Homocysteine is a metabolite of that.
Homocysteine may contribute to increased damage to the lining of the arterial wall, which
opens that door for cholesterol building plaque in the arterial wall, which can lead to fatal
blockages, as we've learned in previous lectures.
An increased level of homocysteine in the blood is a result of the increased consumption
of protein-rich foods and insufficient consumption of vitamin-rich foods.
Now a lot of this science is emerging, but the proposed defense mechanism for this is
that the vitamins that are found in fresh fruits, such as fresh fruits and vegetables,
can catabolize or break down homocysteine, sparing the damage to your arterial walls.
Vitamins of particular importance include vitamin B12, B6, and folic acid, which we
have covered in past lectures.
Now certainly when we look at other ways of assessing our disease risk, another strategy
comes up.
Remember that many scientists believe that part of what's happening in cardiovascular
disease and other diseases is that inflammatory process.
Well, you can actually request from your physician, if you haven't had it done, something called
C-reactive protein, and it's a measure of inflammatory response.
It can be further refined to discriminate between general inflammation, oh, I bumped
my knee, and heart disease-specific inflammation, and it's called high sensitivity C-reactive
protein, oftentimes abbreviated HS-CRP.
It is probably the most predictive measure of heart disease for women, according to a
study in the New England Journal of Medicine.
High sensitivity CRP can also predict age-related macular degeneration.
So this is a great little tool that we can have to measure that inflammatory response,
and keep in mind inflammation is part of many chronic illnesses, and in this case, age-related
macular degeneration.
Values in general, and a lot of this depends on the lab that you use, values in general
should be less than one milligram per deciliter of blood.
Now some science will actually suggest that it also may be increased with infectious diseases,
most notably a sexually transmitted disease, known as chlamydia.
Certainly the Jupiter study indicated that those who had a near-optimal level of LDL,
but that elevated inflammatory marker CRP, had a 44% change in cardiovascular disease
risk when medication was given at reduced CRP.
So again, I'm going to suggest that modulating that inflammatory response is really pretty
important.
So now that I know my risk, what can I do?
Well, I can increase the dietary intake of polyunsaturated fats, decrease the saturated
fatty acid, increase monounsaturated fats.
So now again, we're talking about manipulating that fat profile in your diet, increase dietary
intake of omega-3 fatty acids.
Again, eliminate those trans fats, moderate your alcohol consumption.
Okay, well that all sounds good, that all sounds reasonable, and you think, okay, I
understand that, I understand I need to eliminate saturated and trans fats, but how do I translate
that into the food that I eat?
Well, instead of eating a ribeye, ribeye has a lot of fat in it, why not eat a top sirloin?
When you're shopping for red meat, remember that the word loin in the name, so in this
case, top sirloin, loin indicates lean.
So loin and lean are going to be synonymous terms.
So think about a pork tenderloin would also be lean.
You can also splurge and go out and get beef tenderloin, which is filet mignon, and that's
going to be a leaner cut of red meat.
Instead of heading that loaded baked potato with cheese and sour cream and all that high
saturated fat food, why not try a baked potato with Greek yogurt?
Now Greek yogurt is this unbelievably protein rich, very, very thick yogurt that has that
sour taste that sour cream does.
So I use it in all recipes that call for sour cream.
Now you can't boil it, you can't get it real hot, but it really serves as a great surrogate
for sour cream on baked potatoes.
Instead of salad with ranch dressing, get salad with reduced fat salad dressings.
And so the difference in the fat grams is in that first meal, the rib eye, the salad
with ranch, the loaded baked potato.
The total fat content of that meal is 114 grams.
My modified meal, I'm still having red meat, I'm still having a baked potato and I'm still
having salad, I've cut that down to 45 grams.
So I'm going to say I think that's a pretty significant change, so you can still have
foods that you like, you're just being a smarter fat consumer in order to reduce your
risk of cardiovascular disease.
So as a reminder, these saturated fats are solid at room temperature, they can come from
animal implants, polyunsaturated fats are liquid at room temperature and primarily oils, but
not coconut oil or palm oil, and mono unsaturated fats are those from nuts, oils and seeds.
Okay, now we've got this new emerging hero on the American food scene.
There are plants and animals that contain sterols, and keep in mind cholesterol is a
sterol.
But plants also have sterols that can act as cholesterol imitators.
They can actually block the absorption of cholesterol from the gut.
Now food manufacturers are now adding these to things such as margarines.
So you can find many of the heart health margarines that if you look at the label, it'll just
list plant sterols, sometimes known as plant stanols.
So look for that.
There's a whole line of orange juices that are on the market now, and the brand that
comes to mind is MinuteMade Heartwise, that actually have these stanol esters added to
food.
Oftentimes these are soybean derivatives, so if you're allergic to soy, keep that in
mind.
These stanols and sterols are now found in breakfast bars.
You can take them in supplements.
But it appears that in its liquid form or semi-liquid form, that these are a little bit more effective.
So again the orange juice might be a better idea than for example trying to get it from
a breakfast bar.
Now what the science will suggest is two grams of plant sterols per day can lower your cholesterol
by up to 10%.
I'm going to tell you that's a pretty significant finding.
Pistachios as a nut contain sterols and stanols, and although estimates vary on the cholesterol
lowering effect, there are some studies that suggest about 8% cholesterol lowering, and
again part of the reason why nuts can make that heart health claim is because of the
stanol and sterol esters.
Well dietary cholesterol, what role does this play?
American Heart Association again recommends a ceiling of cholesterol of no greater than
300 milligrams per day from food.
Your liver produces a lot of cholesterol, and again estimates suggest between 800 and
1500 milligrams per day, and this is under genetic control.
Again your liver has to make this much because it needs it for bile and sex hormones and
vitamin D. So since it's a powerhouse, keep in mind over and over and over again it's
important to stress your dietary requirement is zero, nothing.
Again 25 milligrams per ounce of meat is an average from plant, I'm sorry from animal
foods.
I think that the challenge is we need to go to a more plant based diet.
Dietary cholesterol can raise blood cholesterol but in much less predictable fashion than
saturated fat.
Organ meats are a very rich source as is egg yolk, and again shellfish depending on the
specific one can have somewhere in the range of about 100 milligrams per half cup serving.
Shellfish however again is low in saturated fat which can be a significant factor in raising
cholesterol.
Now what about insulin?
Insulin as we've learned is this anabolic hormone and insulin resistance as you see
in type 2 diabetes and metabolic syndrome can result in your body making more insulin
that it needs.
It's resistant to insulin so it cranks it out and many experts believe that elevated
levels of insulin in your blood are considered an independent risk factor for heart disease.
Again it is an anabolic hormone, it increases nutrient transfer from the blood to the cells
where it can be stored as energy and fat.
Increased insulin resistance and increased output may be associated with this increased
risk of heart disease.
Increased body fat increases insulin resistance so the more weight I gain in the form of body
fat the more resistant to my insulin I become and the more insulin I'm going to need to
do the same thing.
Well keep in mind insulin is anabolic for carbohydrate.
You've learned that insulin is needed to transfer carbohydrate from the blood to the
cells where it can be used but it's not just anabolic for carbohydrate, it's anabolic for
protein, fat, sodium, potassium, phosphorus, fluid.
So it is a major powerhouse in terms of getting nutrients inside the cell.
So high insulin levels can facilitate fat synthesis and that should make sense because
the more of this anabolic hormone that I have, the more insulin I make, the more fat
storage that I promote.
High insulin levels increase triglycerides.
Why is that the case?
Triglycerides are the way we store excess calories and if I'm producing a lot of insulin I'm
going to really try and put more of my calories away in storage and again it's going to increase
my triglycerides.
Some recent evidence suggests that the best measure of triglycerides should not be fasting
but rather after meals.
So how does your body process that food?
Can we get a sense of what your triglycerides are in the presence of that extra insulin?
This may be a better measure of how insulin can transfer the nutrients into the cell.
If the triglycerides are high, it may signal that you've got some kind of defect in insulin
metabolism.
Well, does fiber have a role?
You bet.
Fiber slows the rate of digestion of glucose after a meal and this low fiber meal is going
to stimulate less insulin than a high fiber meal.
Less meals high in fiber may minimize the amount of insulin secreted.
Why is that?
The amount of food reaching the blood is delayed with that high fiber meal and again remember
fiber is going to bind bile.
Alcohol consumption.
Now this is really pretty tricky.
What can it do?
Drinking excess amounts of alcohol can raise your blood pressure.
It can contribute to heart failure, lead to stroke, high triglyceride levels, obesity,
heart arrhythmia, liver disease and cancer risk.
Now that's excess amounts of alcohol.
What about moderate amounts of alcohol, which I'll define for you?
Modern amounts of alcohol are one drink per day in women, two drinks per day in men.
Certainly we know that the risk of heart disease in people who drink moderate amounts of alcohol
is lower than in non-drinkers.
It may be because of the polyphenols in red wine and polyphenols are a group of compounds
that I like to describe as just think of the colors of red wine.
It's red, so the color is going to be contributed by the polyphenol content.
The polyphenols in red wine may actually inhibit LDL oxidation, which stops the arterial
plaque formation.
So every once in a while you hear about the French paradox, how can they not have as
much heart disease but yet they eat cheese and maybe don't exercise as much as us Americans
might debate on that one.
If you don't want to drink red wine or you are a tea totaler, perfectly okay.
But grape juice has the polyphenols for those who don't drink.
Dark berries and cherries provide the same kind of benefits as the polyphenols found
in red wine.
So red does equal red in this case and you're going to be able to mitigate your risk.
The challenge is, and this is a true challenge, is keep in mind that we've already decided,
that 4 to 6 ounces of juice is all that you should have.
So keep in mind as you're trying to protect heart health, you could also do that, you
could also do that by just eating more fresh fruit instead of drinking the juice.
Okay, the American Heart Association recommendations regarding cardiovascular disease.
So this is kind of our, we're going to put a ribbon on this package and tie it up.
In a healthy weight, try and match your calories in with the calories that you expend over
the course of the day.
Increasing weight increases the workload on the heart, it increases blood pressure, can
increase blood cholesterol and triglycerides.
Try to get 30 minutes of moderate to vigorous physical activity in most days of the week.
Now why is that the case?
Exercise is going to be a key factor in terms of burning calories.
We know that people who exercise can have lower blood pressures, there's lots of heart
health benefits.
The other reason why exercise is so key in here is that exercise is one of the few things
that we can do to raise HDL or good cholesterol.
Eat a variety of nutrient rich foods.
I usually tell people choose from the colors of the rainbow when you're looking at fruits
and vegetables.
You know the white and apple has benefit, the red and berries we've already discussed,
the green and broccoli, choose from the colors of the rainbow and when you do that with fruits
and vegetables, you're guaranteed this variety of nutrient rich foods.
Choose fat free or low fat dairy products over higher calorie choices.
Keep in mind, fat free means that they've taken out the saturated fat, they've reduced
the cholesterol and those are going to be better options.
A tip for you here might be that if you have to cook with a milk based product, use evaporated
skim milk in your recipes.
It's skim milk, they've taken out some of the water, it's a little bit creamier and
gives you the mouth feel of regular cream or whole milk in your recipes.
Eat fish at least twice a week and I would stress eat two cold water fish meals per
week and again salmon, trout, herring and other fish may help to lower your risk of
cardiovascular disease.
Eat fewer nutrient poor foods.
Now what is a nutrient poor food?
Something that may have a lot of calories but not necessarily a lot of nutrition.
So we can think of a lot of cereal bars and candies and things along those lines that
would be considered to be nutrient poor foods.
We would also want to make sure that we're trying to lower the fat content.
We want to choose poultry without skin, lean meats, prepare your foods without saturated
fat or trans fats.
Now keep in mind, cooking lower fat means that you might have to modify your food preparation
techniques a little bit.
So if you're going to cook a meat without any fat, you might want to cover it, you
might want to make sure that you add some moisture, you could use heart healthy marinades
in your food and that might be a way of preventing those foods from drying out.
Reduce your consumption of foods containing those partially hydrogenated vegetable oils
to reduce trans fats.
Remember partially hydrogenated means they're twisting that molecule and when they twist
that unsaturated fat, it contributes to the formation of trans fats.
Cut back on beverages and foods with added sugar.
Can be a label detective keeping in mind that milk sugar is going to count as a sugar
on your label but look for words like sucrose and dextrose and maltose added to foods and
that's going to be your tip that maybe those are going to be foods that you want to modify.
Cut back on foods high in cholesterol.
Aim to eat less than 300 milligrams of cholesterol each day remembering you can go to zero with
no problem.
If you drink alcohol, do so in moderation.
One drink per day if you're a woman, two if you're a man.
Watch your portion sizes.
In general, a general rule of thumb is that a portion size of something starchy or protein
should be no greater than the size of the palm of your hand.
So the next time you go and in Texas we get chicken fried steak and it's hanging over
your plate, that's probably can feed your family of four.
That's not an individual serving size.
Normally don't smoke or chew tobacco in any form and consider adding about two grams
of plant sterols or stanols to your diet every day to lower your cholesterol.
Okay, now we get to this concept of frequently asked questions.
What about natural remedies?
You know what?
I don't want to take the prescription medication that my physicians prescribed.
I don't want to take an evil pharmaceutical to lower my cholesterol.
So what I'm going to do, I'm going to go to a health food store.
And I'm going to take Chinese red yeast extract to lower my cholesterol.
It's all natural, isn't it?
Isn't that much better than the evil pharmaceutical?
And the answer is beware.
The active ingredient in Chinese red yeast extract is actually the same compound that's
in the statin resin that your physician prescribed.
The difference is pretty critical here though.
If your physician is prescribing a statin resin, he or she is going to monitor your liver
enzymes to make sure there's no liver damage.
And if you have any muscular soreness, achy muscles, that could be a consequence of taking
that medication and your physician would tell you to discontinue it.
Since the same compound, the same drug, and yes I am using the word drug, the same drug
is found in Chinese red yeast extract, who's monitoring me?
Or what if I decide, you know, I'll take a little bit of this prescription medication
and then I'm going to take something all natural.
I could now be doubling my dose with no knowledge, absolutely no knowledge.
So I would suggest if your cholesterol is high and you have tried everything under the
sun to get this corrected, my suggestion would be if you're amenable to talk to your doctor
about treatment options.
But to try and go and fix this on your own with Chinese red yeast extract, I would tell
you don't do that.
My doctor told me to take niacin to lower my cholesterol.
Another frequently asked question, does it work?
And actually it does.
But you're using niacin, which is a B vitamin, you're using it like a drug.
And as any drug, it's going to have a side effect.
Side effects can be itching and tingling in your skin.
You can actually get what's called a niacin flush, where you can kind of feel that pins
and needles sensation in your skin, you get beet red, and you think, oh my goodness, what's
happening to me?
Am I having a heart attack?
Is this angina?
No, it's the niacin.
Niacin enlarged doses is more than you could get from your food, and there is some evidence
to suggest it may raise your blood sugar, which wouldn't be so great if you had diabetes.
So again, don't go take over the counter niacin, which you can easily do.
Let your physician prescribe a version for you, so at least you have monitoring.
Now if you decide, you know what, I don't need my doctor to prescribe it, I'm going
to take it anyways, tell your primary healthcare provider of any supplement that you're taking.
Because that way he or she can educate you on, yes, you're taking an all-natural version,
but did you know there are side effects?
Now what about coenzyme Q10?
I've heard this is really good for heart patients, what does it do?
Well, one of the consequences of these statin resins is it appears that coenzyme Q10 gets
chewed up or quickly metabolized when you are taking a statin resin.
So there is some evidence to suggest that one of the only groups of people that can
become coenzyme Q10 deficient are those individuals who are taking statin resins.
So the key take-home message with all of these niacin, coenzyme Q10, in Chinese red yeast
extract is buy or beware.
Keep in mind there may be some wonderful benefits of doing this, but please tell your physician.
Please arm yourself with some good data and again, make sure that you do the best thing
that you can do for heart health and that's to watch what you eat, exercise and get tested.
Thank you very much.
