Well, welcome. How many of us have ever tried to successfully manage our weight? I'll give
you an example. I was working with a very busy attorney in Houston, and he had three
law offices all around the country. And his challenge was he was in the airport so much
and ate out so much. Those were his barriers. And so what we worked on was getting him to
be more active, and instead of sitting down waiting for his plane, because he spent lots
of time in the airport, we got him a pedometer, and he counted how many steps he got in the
airport. And then we changed the way he ordered from the restaurant menu. And I'm happy to
tell you he's now 36 pounds lower than he was in the past. So what we're really looking
at here is how do we affect weight change? We have to really think about it as an equation.
Total energy intake, I got to reduce how many calories I'm taking in, and I've got to change
how many calories I'm expending. And the example of my attorney is a great one to illustrate
that point. Well, total energy intake is actually determined by the amount of calories you
take in, and it's composed of carbohydrate, protein, and fat. Total energy expenditure,
how many calories you're actually burning, is determined by your basal metabolic rate,
the thermic effect of food, and your physical activity level. Now, keep in mind, this is
a review on basal metabolic rate formula. First, you've got to calculate your ideal body weight.
So if I'm a man at 5'10", I would allow 106 pounds for the first 5 feet of height,
and 6 pounds for every inch after. So roughly speaking, we're looking at between 16 and
1,700 calories would be his calories for weight management. But along this path of optimal
wellness, we got to take a look at goal setting. How am I going to set my goal? Well, first
and foremost, what you should aim to strive for is a body weight that optimizes your health.
So even though we talked about an ideal body weight, that may not be a practical goal,
how can I optimize my health? And first step is, prevent or stop weight gain. If you've
been gaining weight on a regular fashion over the last couple of years, the goal is, can
we stop that? Can we hold you steady in your tracks? You also want to aim for metabolic
fitness. And what metabolic fitness means is that the biochemical risk factors, high
blood pressure, triglycerides, all of those improve. And again, some science is going
to suggest you can do that with losing somewhere in the range of 5 to 10 percent of your total
body weight. So again, if I'm trying to lose 10 percent of my body weight, and my ideal
body weight, say for example, is 120, and I weigh 200, even getting down to the range
of about 180 pounds is going to help me to reduce my risk factors. Then a challenge for
all of us is we have to focus in on a lifestyle that includes eating healthy foods, getting
exercise, thinking positively about our food choices, our body image, and learning how
to cope with stress. Adopting this healthy weight management lifestyle is just that.
Most of the weight problems we have are lifestyle problems. My attorney's an example. Very bright
man, unbelievably successful. He just wasn't able to negotiate around the barrier of travel
and dining out. And that's why I was able to step in and give him some guidance. If
you develop a lifestyle for successful weight management during early adulthood, healthy
behavior patterns have a better chance of taking hold. You also need to adopt behaviors
you can maintain. So what might work best for me isn't what's going to work best for
you. So you really have to look at what's going to be practical for me. What am I going
to be able to do? Again, if we're looking at these dieting and eating habits, we've
got to always, always address total calories. To lose weight, simple equation, you've got
to take in less calories than you burn. Actually, that is the most effective strategy to control
your weight is managing your energy balance. If you're trying to prevent weight gain, restricting
your diet just by two to three hundred calories a day will long term help you to manage your
weight. Now there are tools out there to do that and certainly we want to focus in on
the balance of the food. And there's a great tool online called MyPyramid.gov that really
can help you to balance your food intake and they actually have some weight management
planners on there as well. Overconsumption of food, as we've learned, is always going
to be related to portion size. Most of us significantly underestimate the amount of
food we take in and I will tell you, I have difficulty judging portion sizes and calories
as well. I did a television interview in Houston where they asked me to go to some very popular
Houston dining out experiences and they asked me to estimate the calories. Well, it was
a chicken fajita, no sour cream, no cheese, just meat, onions and a tortilla, rice and
beans. And I came in and I had my books and my math and I estimated that meal was about
twelve hundred calories. Well, as we actually analyze that food, it was sixteen hundred
calories. So when I say most of us significantly underestimate the amount of calories in food,
that includes even health care providers and including myself. What we also have to do
in terms of this healthy weight management is to realize crash diets don't work. These
are diets that only contain minimum calories and the example I always give is you can decide
in your wisdom you're going to eat five hundred calories. You can set that up as a goal and
sooner or later when the hunger kicks in, you're not going to be able to control it.
And what do we think? Well, what's wrong with me? I should be able to make better choices.
You know, why did I cave into the hunger? Why did I go eat that cookie? I liken that
to sleep. I can set a plan that I'm only going to sleep two hours a night. Look at all the
work I'd get done. But the reality is when the fatigue sets in and I fall asleep in front
of the television, I probably wouldn't beat myself up the same way as I would if I overate
on a very calorically restricted diet. So I think as we look at crash diets, we have
to balance that out with safer dietary approaches and some of the more popular ones that are
out there now and we're going to cover that in a future lecture. So how do I balance these
energy sources? Well, fat at nine calories a gram is going to be the easiest place for
us to trim off those calories. And you should avoid eating overly fatty foods. I think most
of us know that. It's a fat is the most concentrated source of calories and if you limit the fat
in your diet, it can help to limit your total calorie intake. Also, fat calories are more
readily converted to body fat than calories from protein and carbohydrate. So there's
another good reason to do that. Fat intake should be lowered modestly to 20 to 35 percent
of your total daily calories. High fat low fiber diets tend to make us not feel very
full and encourage overeating. Now the trick is that foods that are labeled low fat or
fat free can actually be high in calories. Despite lowering their fat content in order
to make the food taste good, oftentimes what they do is increase the sugar. And I remember
when snack wall cookies were popular years ago and they were fat free, the message was
if it was fat free, I could eat all that I wanted. And it's actually been termed the
snack wall effect because people just ate more cookies. Part of it is the fat makes
the food taste good and when I take that out, it doesn't have the same sensory experience
as if I ate a real cookie. Balancing energy sources should also include looking at the
carbohydrate intake of your diet. Most authorities are going to suggest between 45 and 65 percent
of your total daily calories should be based from carbohydrate. However, some people are
going to do better with a reduced carbohydrate intake and those are our friends who have
insulin resistance. Avoid mixing these carbohydrate sources with high fat toppings and again the
best example is a baked potato. You take this lowly baked potato at 80 calories, you add
all the stuff that you're going to pile onto it and now I've got a potato that could sit
at 300, 400 calories. High sugar foods also are things you've got to be challenged with
in this carbohydrate intake because they provide calories but really few nutrients and so the
goal is I want something that's nutrient dense, not energy dense. Certainly in balancing energy
sources protein is going to be a great way to do that but that doesn't mean a high protein,
low carbohydrate diet is going to help you. It doesn't conform to the dietary guidelines
for Americans. It certainly isn't going to fit in the dash diet for hypertension and
so again I think the challenge is when I go to one extreme instead of driving down the
middle of the road I'm trying to live in the ditch. Eating an all protein diet is not going
to promote optimal wellness and I'm also going to suggest to you we're looking at a lifestyle
modification. Certainly diets that are higher in complex carbohydrates and moderate in protein
is going to be a better path to take. Protein helps to promote a sense of fullness but again
you've got to be careful here because foods that are high in protein can also be high
in fat. Protein should be in the range of about 10 to 35 percent of your total calories.
Eating habits. This really kind of gets us into more of the behaviors of food. It's important
to weight management and some eating habits out of work. The science will suggest eating
small frequent meals on a regular schedule can work for many people. However if you can't
define small, if the definition of a small meal is beyond your capabilities I'm going
to define it for you. A small frequent meal should be between two and three hundred calories.
So if your small frequent meal is six to seven hundred calories it's now turned into six
large meals instead of six small meals. Morning intake is really much more filling than late
night eating and also tends to reduce overall energy intake. Think about this from a practical
standpoint. If you're eating at night are you generally having a bowl of cereal or a
scrambled egg? Are you having a turkey sandwich? No we tend to go for sweeter savory snacks
later on at night and again high calories, low nutrition. We know that skipping breakfast
and yes you are right and your grandmother was right breakfast is the most important
meal of the day. We know that skipping breakfast can alter the way we use insulin. It can raise
LDL cholesterol and total cholesterol and often times skipping breakfast leads to higher
energy intake later on in the day. So you skip breakfast and you say I don't really have
much of an appetite, I'm okay. Lunch comes, you eat lunch and then all of a sudden that
hunger that was actually there kicks in. Three o'clock in the afternoon you're starved and
then you go for a cookie or even an energy bar. You go and get a coffee drink with whipped
cream and now you've really exceeded your calorie intake for the day. So no food needs
to be entirely off limit and everything in moderation but you gotta eat breakfast. Physical
activity. Physical activity is essential to weight management and it promotes fitness
and overall good health. It also has a really nice side benefit is that it can discourage
overeating by reducing stress and really produces some positive feelings of well-being. Most
scientists will say it's because of the endorphin release that you get from physical activity.
Now the secret is if you're just trying to maintain weight and you're at an ideal weight,
30 minutes of moderately intense physical activity every day is good. If you need to
lose weight you probably need to aim for 60 minutes per day. Again I'm trying to create
a calorie deficit. How do I control or set up this exercise program? Create a program
that includes some kind of cardio respiratory endurance and certainly I want resistance
training and stretching exercises. Cardio exercise, walking, biking, I would put gardening
in there that you can sustain for about an hour can help to trim that body fat permanently.
However strength training can help to increase lean body mass. Lean body mass burns more
calories at rest. It is more metabolically active. It's more metabolically active than
body fat. So the key would be I might want to go out and walk, garden and it doesn't
have to be all at one time. I can certainly go out and take a 30 minute walk in the morning
and I can ride the exercise bike at night. That might be a strategy to get those 60 minutes.
Strength training, you want to concentrate on big muscle groups, you want to lift heavy
enough weights where it becomes a little bit of a challenge and always I will encourage
you to take a look and talk to your physician or your primary health care provider to make
sure that you're physically able to do that kind of exercise. So in addition to creating
this overall exercise program, you almost have to reframe the way you think about yourself
and your world because that's going to influence how you feel and act. When we compare ourselves
to that ideal self, we are more likely to have low self-esteem. In a perfect world,
I'd look identical to the way I did when I was 20 years old. That might be my ideal
self in my mind. That's not going to be a realistic goal and if I strive to do that,
I can end up not feeling really very great about myself. When you do that, you're setting
perfectionistic goals that are hard to attain. So what you really want to do is replace that
with really positive self-talk. When you take yourself through the steps of a job and then
you praise yourself when it's successfully completed. So I'll give you an example. Say
for example, every afternoon you're having a regular soda and you make a conscious effort
and it's in your behavior plan, I'm not going to do that anymore. I'm really going to work
on getting rid of that and maybe for the next week, five out of seven days, you've given
that up. Don't concentrate on the two days you didn't do it. Concentrate on the five
days that you did. That can be, again, the opposite of that negative self-talk. We make
self-deprecating remarks or angry or guilty producing comments when you blame yourself
unnecessarily. So if you say, darn, why did I do that? I have no self-control. I have
no self-discipline. Realize that you're human and the reason why you do that is you haven't
really explored how can I manage my environment. So for example, if I'm a soda person, maybe
the environmental management that I need to avoid the negative self-talk is you know what?
I'm just not going to buy this. I'm not going to bring it into my house. So if I really
have an urge to do that, I'm either going to have to stop on the way home or I'm going
to have to go to a vending machine and I'm going to give myself just that minute to think
about it. We can also look in terms of changing our emotions and behaviors around food. We
can also talk about stress management. How do I manage stress? Because oftentimes it's
not a knowledge deficit that contributes to weight. It's I don't know how to environmentally
control it. So we can look at one model and this is the ABC model of behavior. It helps
you to manage the events that trigger behaviors and factors that reinforce them. So we have
the antecedent. That event that precedes the behavior and might trigger it. So again, maybe
it's a time thing for you. It's three o'clock in the afternoon. Maybe it's the weekends
where you say, aha, Saturday's coming. I'm going to take that day off and I'm going
to eat whatever I want. So there's something that precedes it that triggers the B, the behavior
and that follows with the consequences. And so unfortunately sometimes this ABC model
could be desirable that you're doing something great or undesirable. The consequences that
occur have the greatest influence in terms of helping us to manage that. So I think as
we look at this, give yourself an example of that might be personal to you. You have
a fight with your spouse, you go into the pantry, you get a cookie and then you feel
really guilty about that. I'm going to suggest replace the guilt or replace the consequence
with some positive self-talk. You've now identified something that you can change. You can change.
You can identify the cues that trigger the overeating and that really is the first step
to changing or avoiding these triggers. You can manipulate the antecedents to promote
positive behavior. You can say, you know what? Every single time I get in a fight with my
spouse, I end up eating cookies. And so what you might do is realize you're vulnerable
during that period of time. And so you don't allow yourself to get so riled up in that
discussion that you're going to trigger that behavior to go back to food. Positive consequences
and I would probably say positive rewards can help to reinforce those new behaviors.
You can also use that in terms of your weight management. Say for example, you're controlling
your weight rather than rewarding yourself with food, you're going to say I'm going
to reward myself by going out and going to a movie or I'm going to buy myself something
new. So balancing this acceptance and change really means that you're accepting yourself
for who you are and you're going to really work hard to improve your general life satisfaction.
If you must diet, if you really need to lose a significant amount of weight, you do it in
a combination of exercise and avoid those very low calorie diets. So again, how do I
set that goal? I'm modifying my behavior. I'm understanding my triggers. Do I have a realistic
weight goal? A realistic weight goal is between a half a pound to a pound a week. Now I know
what many of you are thinking, well gee, I have a lot of weight to lose. I don't want
to wait that long. Well my response to that is you didn't gain the weight in 15 minutes
and you're not going to lose it in 15 minutes. So you really have to look at strategies and
lifestyle management rather than the quick fix. Okay, what do we know about life and
long term weight management success? Okay, for most individuals, initial success and
weight loss relates poorly to your long term success efforts. How does that work? Well
if everybody's dieting and everybody's on a fad diet, the likelihood of them keeping
off that weight really isn't going to be very likely. It's often been said that between
90 and 95% of people who lose weight regain that weight later. And again, that's because
they're looking for a quick fix. This also highlights the difficulty of trying to maintain
a low calorie diet, particularly if that low calorie diet is outside of the bounds of what
you can tolerate or maintain. Weight loss plateaus oftentimes are triggers to individuals, again
think about that ABC model. Weight loss plateaus are often times when your behavior changes,
your behavior changes and you think here I go again. You know, every time I go on a
diet I lose weight the first week and lo and behold I can't lose any the second and so
I'm just going to give up. I'm going to quit trying. Weight loss plateaus occur for a couple
reasons. One, your metabolism slows. If your calorie levels are too low, your body looks
at that and says, wait a minute, there's not enough energy coming in and it's going
to lower the metabolic rate. This makes your diet increasingly less effective despite your
restricted caloric intake. As you lose weight, this is good news and bad news, as you lose
weight you become more energy efficient and you require less calories to maintain your
lower body weight. Okay, well you also have to understand a little bit of the physiology
of, in addition to the changes in metabolism, there's a difference in fuel use. During the
first few days of a diet, your body is burning its limited carbohydrate stores and some lean
mass. I want you to go back and remember, how many calories are there in a gram of protein?
How many calories are there in a gram of carbohydrate? Four. So it doesn't take very long to burn
those calories off. Additionally, because lean mass, muscle mass, is predominantly protein
and water. If I lose a pound of muscle, the estimates are that there's about 2,000 calories
in a pound of lean mass and 3,500 calories in a pound of body fat. So the challenge is,
if I lose that lean mass, it takes me less time to burn 2,000 calories than 3,500 calories
and so lo and behold, what ends up happening? Okay, in most weight loss science, it'll
suggest that it takes you about 3 to 5 days to actually start burning body fat. Now you
think, why, why wouldn't I use my body fat first and hang on to my muscle mass? And that's
because your brain must have carbohydrate. In the short run, your brain can't use anything
other than carbohydrate. So the challenge is, your body is going to have to burn protein
because that can be converted into carbohydrate. It's going to have to use its limited carbohydrate
sources because obviously that's carbohydrate. And your body is going to have to have a time
to adapt to using less carbohydrate from the central nervous system. So that weight loss
plateau usually occurs about the second week and what that really is signaling is, yes,
you might have a decrease in your metabolic rate, but you're also now burning more fat
than you are protein. So the question I'm going to have is, how many of us celebrate
that? How many of us say, oh gee, great, I'm on week two of my weight management plan
and I'm not losing as much weight as I did the first week? We don't celebrate that. I'm
going to suggest you should. When the weight loss slows, it means you're using more of
your body fat as an energy source. So again, don't get discouraged. Celebrate. Trying to
reframe the way you think about this. So the key message here is when weight loss plateaus
occur, stick with it. Now, part of this means you've got to weigh yourself every once in
a while. And I'm going to say you only weigh yourself once a week, but you've got to weigh.
One of the biggest triggers for who's going to be successful long term are individuals
who hop on the scale. Now if you hop on the scale two or three times a day, you're really
only measuring changes in your fluid status and I would really discourage you to do that.
But to lose weight, you've got to restrict those calories to about 500 calories less
per day. So again, some tips that we can have to cut calories and change behavior, both
are important. Now I'm going to suggest that you're going to refer to the guidebook, but
I'm going to walk you through some of the tips from the American Dietetic Association.
They give you 10 easy ways that you can cut calories. First and foremost, get the facts.
Foods that can seem surprisingly healthy can be loaded with calories and fat, so check
out the nutrition facts panel. Because again, in terms of the weight management strategy,
calories rule. So although nuts are unbelievably healthy for you, depending on the nuts, 70%
of the calories are coming from fat. So a cup of nuts can be as much as 600 calories.
Great nutrition, but what I'm seeing now is a lot of people who are becoming increasingly
heavier with healthy foods. Because as we talk about all the healthy foods that are
out there, they tend to overdo those portions and again, get the facts. Limit alcohol. Although
it's fat free, alcohol contains about 70 calories per ounce and that goes again for
many of the other sweet drinks. So one glass of sweet tea and one 8 ounce glass of soda
a day are 320 additional calories. Now I can eat about 4 medium apples for 320 calories.
If I did this every day, this equates to over 116,000 extra calories and if this is above
and beyond what I need, this is in addition to what I need for my energy balance, I can
gain 30 pounds in a year. So the key tip is don't drink your calories. Do not drink your
calories. Chew your food, don't drink your food. Switch to smaller plates. If you have
a regular size dinner plate, what does that mean? So one of the strategies that you can
do is just put your food on a smaller salad size plate. That way you can reduce your portion
sizes. When you go out, when you go out to eat, order either child size portions. Again
you can get the kid size popcorn at the movie theater without any butter, may have 150 calories.
But if you get the bucket, it can easily top 1,000 calories and keep in mind we tend to
eat what's in front of us. So if I only order the smaller size, I can finish all that and
not have any problem. If I order the larger size, I'm going to overdo every single time
I go to the movies. Another tip, serve in the kitchen, eat in the dining room. If you
bring your plate to the table already filled, you won't be tempted to pick from the serving
bowls in front of you. I have to tell you I'm a picker. So I can easily pick myself
into an entire meal. So that's a tip. Serve your plate in the kitchen, don't bring the
serving bowls to the table. Eat slowly. Now this is hard for a lot of folks, it's unbelievably
hard for me, but put your fork down and take a sip of water in between bites. My strategy
when I go to a restaurant with friends is I actually sit on my hands because that way
I'm not going to go grab something. I have to give myself that environmental cue, you
know, maybe I can eat something. Use plates, snacking from packages, you know, you can
use plates, snacking from packages or picking out of a brownie tray, absolutely deadly.
Your brain only remembers what it sees. And so if I decide I'm going to have a cookie,
I make it an event. I put it on a plate, I sit down and enjoy it. I don't grab the cookie
out of the pantry and just snack on it. Certainly over and over again we're going to say fill
up on plant foods. Fruits, vegetables and whole grains take up stomach space. They take
time to chew, they take time to eat. For every member in your family over the age of two,
switch to lower fat dairy products. Reduced fat, low fat or fat free dairy products can
contain significantly fewer calories. So if you just switch to drinking from two glasses
of 2% milk to skim, you're going to save 80 calories every day. Over a year that represents
almost 30,000 calories and that can represent again close to a significant change in weight.
Another tip, you want to make these small permanent changes that you can live with.
That can make all the difference in the world. Well here's a small permanent change when
you eat out. Dull is good. I'm not talking about being boring, not dull as in boring,
but dull as in not shiny. When you see anything at a buffet or a salad bar, if it's shiny,
it usually means that there's been a coating of vegetable oil that's been added to the
vegetables. So when you eat out, for example, at a nice restaurant, you just say, I want
you to grill my steak, chicken, fish, fill in the blank, dry. They can put a rub on it,
you know, they can put spice on it, but you want them to grill it dry. If it comes to
your table shiny, they could have easily poured 300 to 400 calories of butter onto that plate.
So again, from my attorney, that was his major dieting strategy. Here's what he did when
he went to a restaurant. Everything was ordered dry. And so we actually calculated some of
his restaurants in Houston as well as Dallas and New York where he traveled to. We calculated
that he was saving 400 calories a meal by just changing what he ordered. And so additionally
what he would do is ask to have the smallest steak on the menu. He had the smallest steak
and then he always ordered a double order of vegetables. So since he had to entertain
and eat out and that was part of his job, this was a really good way of him doing that.
Now also he loved drinking wine. Absolutely loved it. So my suggestion was buy the most
expensive glass of wine that you can, get a really great bottle, really enjoy it, savor
the wine, but you don't feel like you need to have three or four glasses of wine. So
I can't tell you he went to zero, but he's significantly cut his alcohol consumption
and that again has translated into some great weight loss form. But what about the other
side of the coin? What about individuals who struggle with being too thin? Again I think
the causes are multifactorial. Certainly it can be an altered response to hunger, appetite,
and external cues. I have individuals who if there wasn't a clock on the wall would
forget to eat. There are some people who have a distorted body image. They compulsively
diet or over exercise and that's a different category. Certainly you can have metabolic
and hereditary factors as everybody in your family lean. I describe it as the weight falls
off of some people. They skip one meal and their metabolic rate is so high they struggle.
Prolonged stress, stress hormones can really influence your hunger and fullness response.
Certainly some other relatively significant problems addiction to alcohol or drugs can
mask that appearance. Bizarre diet patterns are inadequate diets and certainly there can
be an underlying disease because illness almost always speeds up metabolic rate. What
about people who are trying to gain weight? Small frequent meals but what we're going
to do is not only have nutrient dense but energy dense foods. This would be a great
time to pull out the nuts. In fact my favorite weight management strategy for individuals
who need to gain weight is actually trail mix. A variety of different nuts, some dried fruits
and now you've got something that a lot of nutrition in a relatively small space and
a lot of energy in a small space. Another tip for people who want to gain weight is
drink fluids at the end of the meal or between meals to avoid filling themselves up. Individuals
who need to gain weight may actually want to pull out the juices because again the juice
is going to leave your stomach quickly, it doesn't fill you up and again it can be a
valuable source of calories. I will also suggest individuals use timers or other cues to prompt
eating. I had a very dear friend who had metastatic cancer and we actually got her
a sports watch and the timer went off every 30 minutes and that was a cue to her that
even if she didn't have the signal for hunger she was actually hungry. Take a well balanced
vitamin and mineral supplement to make sure you've got all your nutrition needs and again
exercise is still important but you may want to do some isometric exercises or some strength
training to promote lean body mass gain and maybe cut back a little bit on the aerobic
activity so you're not becoming a calorie burning machine. So in summary weight management
becomes a lifelong strategy and by managing it lifelong you're going to have the best
strategy to prevent the tsunami of obesity that we're seeing in this country. Thank you
very much.
