Hello and welcome.
My clinical practice dates almost 30 years.
In the beginning of my clinical practice, I worked at Tulane University Medical Center
in New Orleans and we had a significant number of tube-fed patients, patients who couldn't
eat voluntarily on their own.
And what we noticed is that the longer they were tube-fed, the more likely they were to
develop diarrhea.
So one of the strategies that we implemented was adding yogurt to this tube feeding to
blunt the diarrhea.
Didn't really know why it worked, it just worked.
And so now as we fast forward, we have this whole new exciting arena of pre and probiotics
that we're going to explore.
It has been said that our body is formed around our gut.
As such, think about your intestinal tract as the body's gatekeeper.
This intricate balance of good and bad bacteria, healthy intestinal tissue, and optimal diet
can keep the gut function normal as well as confer some additional health benefits.
Well this lecture is going to explore the science of prebiotics and probiotics as well
as supplements that can help maintain good intestinal health.
But let's start with some definitions.
What is a probiotic?
Well simply stated, a probiotic is healthy bacteria.
It is found in foods and now is food additives or in functional foods.
Examples of food sources containing probiotics are fermented foods such as yogurt.
Yogurt products like kefir.
However watch out you chocolate lovers, some chocolate yogurts are pasteurized and that
pasteurization process is high heat and it kills the probiotics.
These are live cultures and are killed with heat.
Other fermented products include soy products like tempeh and miso and some soy beverages.
Some juices, pickles and sauerkraut are also fermented products and therefore would contain
some probiotics.
In probiotic foods and supplements, the bacteria might have been originally present or they
may have been added during the preparation and production.
Another way of looking at probiotic, it means pro-life.
The necessity of these compounds was first identified by Dr. Eli Mechnikoff, a Nobel Prize
winning scientist in the early 1900s.
Dr. Mechnikoff observed that Bulgarian peasants who consume fermented food and milk products
lived longer and healthier lives.
Probiotics as a definition are defined by the World Health Organization and the Food
and Agricultural Organization as live microorganisms, that's a key point.
Live microorganisms which, when administered in adequate amounts, confer a health benefit
on the host.
Although an accepted definition exists, there are no national standards for identifying
the level of active probiotic in foods or supplements.
Also, there is no true requirement for the amount of probiotic needed when this compound
is found in food.
Little concern exists regarding the amounts needed because remember, these are live organisms
and once they are in your gut, can auto-populate and live there very happily on their own.
So, is this just a passing fad or is this the fountain of digestive health and wellness?
Well, let's take a look a little bit at the types of probiotics.
In general, they are bacteria and yeast.
Two major bacteria types include lactobacillus and keep in mind, lactobacillus is the name
of the central organism but there are multiple species and you might be familiar with acidophilus
as a lactobacillus culture.
Bifidobacterium bifidus is also, again, the general name, bifidobacterium is a general
name with bifidus being the particular strain that we're looking at.
The type of bacteria confers the function and benefit so not all bacteria is going to
have the identical function.
Some bacterial strains may confer immune protection, others promote optimal gut function
or regularity.
Another probiotic type is yeast with the major type being Saccharomyces bolardii and again
this is a probiotic yeast and sometimes you hear it referred to as nutritional yeast.
But because these organisms are live, we have to feed this bacteria and probiotics rely
on the fuel provided in the diet.
I want you to think about this for a second.
We can either have a really healthy diet with adequate amounts of great food for the bacteria
or we can have a highly processed diet and again not going to provide adequate amounts
of food for the bacteria.
The fuel that feeds the probiotics is called prebiotics and as a definition it is non-digestible
food components that support the growth or activity of probiotics.
To put, prebiotics are the food for friendly bacteria.
Fiber compounds are the most significant prebiotics, specifically inulin and don't confuse that
with insulin which is a hormone.
Specifically inulin is a type of fiber and its byproduct fructo-olegosaccharides FOS
and galacto-olegosaccharides GOS.
Now let's pause for a second and define these terms.
In the carbohydrate lecture we talked about mono and disaccharides, one or two glucose
units and then we jumped to polysaccharides, 20 or more glucose units.
Well there's an intermediate called oligosaccharides and these are 8 to 10 carbohydrate units.
So fructo-olegosaccharide would be a compound predominantly made of fructose with 8 to 10
carbohydrate units in that chain.
The major food sources of inulin and its metabolite fructose-olegosaccharides in the American
diet includes foods maybe that you don't normally consume, things like chicory root, Jerusalem
artichoke, leeks and onions.
The amount of inulin and fructo-olegosaccharide in chicory root for example is there's 24
grams of inulin and 43 grams of fructose-olegosaccharide in a 3 ounce serving.
So here's the key point.
If you look now at a lot of high fiber breakfast cereals and bars they are using chicory root
as the fiber source.
So when they use chicory root they are adding essentially inulin and fructose-olegosaccharides
to that food without naming them, they're just talking about the chicory root and you'll
see this popping up in grocery stores.
Fructose-olegosaccharides are also being added to liquid nutritional meal replacements such
as insure.
So if you remember back to my example about my tube fed patient, one of the challenges
was in the early days of tube feeding we didn't know anything about fructose-olegosaccharides
had no clue.
And now when fructose-olegosaccharides are added to these liquid nutritional meal replacements
some of which you drink orally, some of which are in a tube feeding, what happens is you
can now blunt or reduce the incidence of diarrhea by consuming these products that have FOS
added to them.
Now as with almost everything in clinical nutrition more is not better.
Doses of above 15 grams of these prebiotics can cause gastric upset which should make
sense because these are basically fiber containing foods.
So together this marriage of pre and probiotics work to fuel this wonderful complex called
a synbiotic.
They work synergistically together to optimize gut function.
So now let's take a look a little bit more at the gut environment.
At birth your gut is sterile, there's no bacteria in your gut.
It is colonized by bacteria depending on the mode of feeding.
Well breast milk contains oligosaccharide so once again Mother Nature steps in and provides
us with the nutrition that we need.
The oligosaccharides from breast milk function as a prebiotic.
The breast milk itself contains probiotic bacteria that can help to confer some of the
benefits that we associate with breastfeeding.
These bacteria support the immune function through a unique and wonderful physiological
response.
The intestinal tract is also involved in the immune response through gut associated lymphoid
tissue which is also known as galt.
Large areas of lymphoid tissues are found in the gut in the pyrus patches and we learned
a little bit about these in the lecture on digestion.
The intestinal tract represents a portion of the immune system.
So how many of you have ever thought gee I wonder where my immune system resides?
Well good percentage of that is going to reside in your intestinal tract and does that make
sense?
If our bodies are wrapped around our gut we need to have an immune defense system in
our intestinal tract to prevent bacterial invasion to our blood supply.
Also it aids in the prevention of food borne illnesses.
In gut injury or infection dangerous or unhealthy pathogenic bacteria can translocate and what
does that mean?
It means that these bacteria or their toxins can leave the small intestine and cross into
the blood supply causing blood borne infections.
Some studies suggest that even healthy bacteria may be able to translocate.
So you better check with your healthcare provider if you've had a significant bowel injury or
surgery because any bacterial translocation good or bad that's not supposed to end up
in the blood supply can make you ill.
Bacterial translocation is considered to be a major cause of infection particularly in
ill or the hospitalized patient.
Well now we've got health claims that are being made for prebiotics.
Some studies suggest improvement in blood sugar and blood cholesterol but results are
not consistent and why might that be?
Why aren't we always going to have consistent results when we start to talk about some of
these research studies?
Well part of that is because we're all not identical twins and we're all going to have
unique physiological responses.
The other reasons why we're not seeing consistent results is because the science of pre and
probiotics is relatively new.
Improved magnesium absorption is also being claimed along with a slight increase in copper
absorption.
However improved mineral absorption really is not a valid reason for taking prebiotics.
And again I think what ends up happening is that as the science emerges marketing jumps
on the nutritional bandwagon and now we're going to have a lot of different products
on the market claiming pre and probiotic benefits.
Prebiotics may also reduce atopic dermatitis as well as infections in the first two years
of life.
Now why would that make sense?
A nice little study was done taking a look at two groups of infants with parental history
of allergies who were randomized to two groups.
One group got prebiotics and the other did not.
Those in the intervention group, those receiving the prebiotics had significantly less dermatitis,
skin irritation and fewer infections.
The benefits extended beyond the length of the intervention.
Now why might that be?
Keep in mind these are live organisms and the gut can colonize good bacteria and that's
the plausible explanation.
The reason why the benefits continued beyond the study period was because the gut had colonized
these good bacteria set up shop and they were growing in the small intestine.
What does the science say about probiotics?
In general probiotics can assist in optimizing health.
Lactobacillus acidophilus is one of the Lactobacillus strains that has beneficial effects.
Some evidence suggests that Lactobacillus acidophilus culture dairy products including
sweet acidophilus milk and yogurt can reduce vaginal yeast infections.
Other studies suggest that probiotics may actually prevent sexually transmitted diseases
via changes in vaginal pH.
Now I probably would not suggest that that would be your only protection against sexually
transmitted diseases.
I don't think I'd hang my hat completely on prebiotics.
Lactobacillus may also aid in the reduction of cholesterol.
In a study done with one cup of yogurt with active cultures or a placebo, individuals consuming
probiotic rich foods showed a 2.9% reduction in cholesterol.
The mode of action here appears to be inhibition of the cholesterol producing enzyme.
Probiotics have recently been associated with the reduction of obesity in pregnant mothers
after they receive probiotic during the first trimester of pregnancy.
Approximately 25% of those receiving probiotics develop central obesity compared to a higher
percentage of those who receive diet advice alone.
So this was presented at the European Society for Obesity and this is the first study suggesting
an association between probiotic use and body fat management.
Now again, this science is in its infancy so we cannot make the quantum leap to say
that if you're going to reduce body fat, everybody should be using probiotic rich foods.
Major benefits of the lactobacillus organism for digestive health are relatively well known
and in those with lactose intolerance, the inability to digest lactose, milk sugar, up
to 50% of the lactose-infermented milk is actually digested by the lactase that is produced
by the lactobacillus organism, providing an easily digested high-calcium dairy product
for those who struggle with lactose intolerance.
Okay, one of the original review studies with lactobacillus acidophilus and other probiotics
suggested that this family of probiotics has been shown to reduce diarrhea and other digestive
diseases.
Okay, the proposed mechanism is that these bacteria reduce the pH of the gut and crowd
out pathogenic bacteria so they prevent that translocation, they prevent some of the concerns
that are associated with these pathogenic bacteria.
As such, some studies suggest, although not all, that probiotics may actually decrease
the symptoms associated with traveler's diarrhea, irritable bowel, and even Crohn's disease.
A recent meta-analysis indicated that probiotic therapy can significantly reduce the bloating
associated with irritable bowel and improves overall symptoms of inflammatory bowel disease.
Okay, here's a tip for you.
For many of the women that I deal with that are struggling with IBS-like symptoms, the
addition of a probiotic, in my experience, reduces that bloating by up to 40%.
So it's a really great and very healthy strategy to take.
Now what about antibiotic-associated diarrhea?
Take back to all my folks that were too fed at Tulane.
One of the reasons why everybody developed diarrhea is one, the products didn't have
the wonderful prebiotics of fructose oligosaccharides.
The other reason everybody was on antibiotic therapy.
So if you're taking antibiotics, keep in mind that antibiotics kill all bacteria.
And if indeed you're given probiotics, it can reduce the severity and the intensity
of the diarrhea.
I'm going to say that again.
Antibiotics kill all bacteria and probiotics can repopulate the gut with healthy bacteria.
But I'm going to caution you here.
Think about taking your antibiotic and your probiotic at the same time.
It's probably not how you want to time them because if indeed I'm taking a medication
that's going to kill bacteria, I don't want to take my probiotic, so spread those out.
Well you know how it goes.
If we get a little bit of good press on these prebiotics, now we enter into the supplement
world and supplements can create challenges.
Keep in mind all of the studies that have been done have been done on whole foods.
So when we talk about supplements, we have to remember purity and standardization remain
issues as they do for other supplements.
Currently the issues associated with probiotic supplements include.
Should they be contaminated with other less desirable organisms?
There's certainly disagreement on the amount of probiotic needed.
Some authorities recommend at least one billion organisms a day, and I know that sounds huge,
but we have trillions of bacteria in our digestive tract.
A recent analysis showed that only 8 out of 13 products claiming to be probiotics listed
the amount of probiotics on their label.
Currently we have to be concerned about the issues of probiotic viability, and what does
that mean?
As opposed to other supplements, probiotics are live and are not going to survive harsh
conditions.
So one of the things that you can do is to refrigerate these products and it may prolong
the life, and we're trying to reduce their exposure to high temperatures.
Exposure to moisture, like in your bathroom, may reduce the effectiveness of these products.
We also have to consider, will these products survive in stomach acid?
And the avoidance of competing pathogenics are key concerns in probiotic supplements.
Although not all probiotics can withstand that very low pH in stomach acid, there may
be still some benefit from them.
Some of the bacteria species that do not survive stomach acid produce by themselves significant
amounts of lactic acid, which may inhibit the growth of unfriendly bacteria, which is
a really good thing.
So again, it may not be the probiotic itself, it's the byproduct, in this case lactic acid.
Well, we've got to ask the question, are probiotics always safe?
And the key point here is gut integrity.
Damage to the gut wall can allow any bacteria to translocate.
However, the long positive history with probiotics, and I'm going to make my own comment here,
probiotics in food have allowed them to be granted what is called grass status, meaning
generally regarded as safe.
As we have seen, probiotics can assist in optimizing good health.
However, some studies suggest that those with an altered immune system should be cautious
of products containing probiotics.
Clearly, more research needs to be conducted to find both additional benefits and possible
concerns with their use.
Keep in mind, our bodies like to go down the middle of the road and probiotic foods are
very beneficial.
The question is, what about probiotic supplements?
So where does this leave us regarding probiotics and prebiotics in the American diet?
First and foremost, if you get enough fiber in your diet, then you are getting enough
prebiotics.
Certainly if you're eating fiber-enriched foods, foods with chicory, inulin, you're
certainly getting adequate amounts of prebiotics.
Keep in mind though, vary your fiber sources and just don't label read for chicory root.
As for probiotics, consider adding some fermented foods to your diet.
One of my favorite suggestions is to use Greek yogurt to replace sour cream in recipes,
from dips to toppings to baked goods, and even beef stroganoff.
The key, however, is just don't boil it, so if you're making a wonderful beef stroganoff,
add the Greek yogurt at the end of the cooking period, not at the beginning of the cooking
period.
Well, now we come to frequently asked questions.
What happens if we don't consume probiotics or prebiotics?
Is this detrimental to the effect of our health?
Well historically, have people always had a source of this nutrient?
Certainly throughout time, when we ate more whole foods with fiber, and isn't that the
key?
It's the whole foods with fiber.
In some fermented products, we had exposure to a wide variety of pre and probiotics.
But have we moved away from this as an American culture, and the answer is yes.
The more highly processed a food becomes, the more hands that touch it along the way,
that means what we're actually doing is removing some of the fiber, adding more sugars and
fats, and reducing even the prebiotic content of our diet.
Certainly, by making this switch in the American diet to more convenient and fast foods, we
have now made our guts more nutritionally challenged.
Another question.
You said that exposure to moisture may reduce the effectiveness in probiotics, but isn't
our digestive tract full of moisture?
Well, yes, that's absolutely true, but what we're looking at is chronic exposure of the
supplements to moisture, like in your bathroom, in a hot, if you're transporting fiber supplements
back and forth to work, probiotic supplements back and forth to work, the heat in your car,
the moisture in your car would also be very detrimental.
Well, are there certain times in the life cycle that probiotics and prebiotics are important?
What about illness, pregnancy, times of stress, times of unusually great physical activity?
Okay?
Well, the major reason why individuals get gut challenged is antibiotics, and the major
reason why individuals end up with this imbalanced bacterial complement, again, is antibiotic
therapy.
It doesn't mean that you can eliminate antibiotics from your repertoire of treating disease,
but you have to be conscious that once I introduce antibiotics, once antibiotics are part of
my medical treatment, I'm going to have to make sure that I repopulate my gut with what
it needs.
So again, you could start out by just having additional yogurt when you're on antibiotics.
You could have some additional fiber when your gut's a little bit resolved from that
antibiotic therapy.
Keep in mind, there's a famous way that we always treated antibiotic diarrhea, and it
was called the brat diet, and it was bananas, rice, applesauce.
Some people say tea, others say toast.
I'm going to modify that for you and call it the bray diet.
And I'm going to say bananas, rice, applesauce, and add some yogurt.
And now we've got, again, a little bit of fiber, and the bananas and the applesauce.
We've got some carbohydrate.
And lo and behold, we've now introduced a probiotic into the mix.
Now, should I add probiotic and prebiotic supplements to my children's diet?
What about my aging parents?
Unless there is an unusual gut disease, I would say probiotics are safe, and some cultures
add yogurt to the diet of infants as one of the first food given.
Keep in mind, breast milk has not only a prebiotic in the fructose oligosaccharides,
it also has probiotics in it.
So the first food that we're feeding babies, breast milk, is also going to be a great source
of pre-improbiotics.
As for aging parents, the same recommendation holds true.
Fermented foods are always going to be a good idea, again, with some gentle sources of fiber.
Another question, I'll be traveling to some countries where I have to drink bottled water.
Would eating the local yogurt help me to avoid travelers' diarrhea?
Possibly, but I don't think I would risk a water-borne illness, such as a parasitic
infection, and think that a probiotic will ride on its white horse to save you.
You have to have common sense that prevails, but I would encourage you that if you're traveling
and you're in a foreign country, one of the key things that I would like you to think
about is can I try some of the local yogurts?
Would that be a great way of introducing some wonderful prebiotics and probiotics into my
diet?
Again, in many foreign countries that are still, particularly when you travel to more
remote regions, they're still eating a whole food diet.
So I think the challenge is that when you eat a whole food diet, lots of fresh fruits
and vegetables, adding in some fermented foods, that is going to be your best defense against
these chronic food-borne infections.
Now, the other question that I get on a repeat basis is, well, I don't like yogurt and I
don't really want to eat fiber, so what do I do?
Can't I just take a pill?
And certainly throughout these series of lectures, we're making the case, we're laying
the framework for whole food is always going to prevail.
So maybe you don't like yogurt, but could you eat a different fermented food?
Could you have a soy drink that's fermented?
Could you try miso or could you try tempeh or some other fermented foods?
Maybe if you're from the part of the country that I am where sauerkraut is really very
popular, maybe it's not yogurt, but it's sauerkraut on your very lean or low-fat hot dog that
you're having when you're grilling at home.
So there's lots of ways of introducing these.
I think the common sense is don't always think pill.
We've got a lot of issues with dietary supplements in this country, and again, with probiotics
just like every other supplement that's out there, we've got challenges that make that
not the first choice.
It is a choice, but not necessarily the best choice.
So keep in mind common sense prevails, mother nature laid the framework by putting all these
wonderful things in breast milk, and it's our job to make sure that we continue on this
great path to optimal health.
And thank you very much.
