Hello, and welcome back.
Well imagine this, you're in the grocery store, you're looking at food labels on five different
cereals or five cans of soup or whole grain breads, and which one do you choose?
How do you sort out the front of the package and the back of the package?
Well a tip for you might be, don't be hooked in by an ingredient on the front label.
Just because the food says turkey on the front and you think that's a lean protein, this
is all good, don't be fooled and think, okay because it says turkey, automatically that's
a better food choice for me.
You have to flip over the back of the package and read the food label.
Now we all have read a food label, we know it's required by law to include the ingredients
of a particular food such as calories, fats, protein, sodium, fiber, and other nutrients
per serving.
And because there's so much legislation and legalities associated with food labeling,
I think oftentimes people become inundated and think, well I'm just going to choose
by the ingredients and not necessarily look at that nutrition facts panel.
But what do we really need to know to read a food label that can help us to make wise
choices?
Because that's the point, isn't it?
We want to use the nutrition labeling on a food to make a better or more helpful choice
or in reverse avoid a food ingredient that we may have a sensitivity to.
So here are some useful tips for healthier consumption.
What to look for in the grocery store.
First and foremost, always examine the back of the package for nutrition information.
A key consideration here is does it list what you're going to purchase?
As a food, which your tip is going to be, it will have a nutrition facts panel or is
it actually a supplement and the label on the back of the package is going to say supplement
facts panel.
So again, we have two abilities to buy a whey protein product.
One you flip it over and it has nutrition facts panel.
The other product has a supplement facts panel.
You must know that a nutrition facts panel or a food is going to be regulated in a different
way than a supplement.
So when you're looking at this label and you've actually decided what you're purchasing
as a food, it has a nutrition facts panel.
Pay very close attention to the serving size and the number of servings in a package.
Give you a great example.
I was looking at diabetic candy bars and I looked at the label and just like you I screened
it very quickly and I saw that per serving it had 70 calories and I thought wow, a candy
bar at 70 calories?
Well actually when I looked at the number of servings it had 7 in the candy bar.
So the reality was it wasn't such a good deal and in fact it had more calories than the
regular version at about twice the cost.
So before you buy the food you have to be realistic with yourself on how many servings
you are likely to eat in a sitting.
So here's another example.
Sure the nutrition label on a personal pepperoni pizza says something like 210 calories, 70
calories from fat, 8 grams of fat, 3 and a half grams of saturated fat, 520 milligrams
of sodium and automatically that doesn't make it sound delicious does it?
But it doesn't sound all that bad.
But then you look at the serving information and that's for one fourth of the pizza.
Although the front of the package said personal pan pizza, it's not so personal because how
likely is it that you're only going to eat a fourth of that tiny little pizza and call
it a meal?
Well the whole personal pan pizza will have 840 calories, 280 coming from fat, 32 grams
of total fat and 14 are saturated.
Almost an entire day's allowance for sodium at 2,080 milligrams.
Keep in mind the USDA recommends sodium being no more than 2,300 milligrams per day.
So you've now almost reached your maximum in one item at one meal.
Next, check the number of calories and the calories from fat.
The FDA gives a general guideline to calories per serving that states if it's less than
40 calories it can be considered or labeled low, 100 calories is moderate and 400 calories
are more or high.
Now I want you to think about how many times you've gone to the grocery store and actually
seen something that's labeled a high calorie source.
That probably wouldn't be a big seller at the grocery store.
Not as many people are trying to gain weight as lose weight.
So I think again, even though there are requirements in terms of how you can say something, it
doesn't mandate that all this information is on the package.
Also look to make sure that the calories that are you consuming are not mostly from fat.
Keep in mind the more processed the food becomes, the more likely it is to have trans fat, the
more shelf stable of food becomes, the more likely it is to have saturated fat, that's
a little bit more shelf stable than a polyunsaturated fat would be.
So keep in mind that you want to make sure that you're not getting all your calories
in that product from fat.
Okay.
You also want to make sure that you're limiting your fat, sodium and cholesterol intake.
Now again, keep in mind not everybody's going to have the same health concerns.
So if cholesterol is up at the top of your list, you might want to quickly flip that
over and say, okay, I want to choose a food based on its cholesterol content.
Limiting your intake of these nutrients as a prevention model lowers your risk of obesity,
heart disease and other disease states that we'll get into a little bit more detail later.
Be aware when you're reading that label that foods that have a higher sodium content may
not always taste salty.
So oftentimes people will think, well, I can't have that bag of chips because I can taste
the salt that must be absolutely unbelievably high in sodium.
You flip over the back of the package, it's got 150 milligrams of sodium.
Now you look at your breakfast cereal, it doesn't taste salty, but it's got 590 milligrams
of sodium.
So don't be confused by the taste alone.
Bake goods, cereals, cheeses, prepared foods and even candy can contain more salt or sodium
than you might expect.
So again, that's the beauty of that nutrition facts panel.
Our guideline is get enough fiber, vitamin A, vitamin C, calcium and iron.
Eating enough of these nutrients can lower your risk of certain disease states.
But also if your iron in your blood is elevated and it's usually men that have elevated levels
of iron, you can avoid iron fortified foods by looking at the back of that package label.
So again, you don't want to choose a breakfast cereal that says 100% of the daily value for
iron if you know that you've got too much iron in your blood.
Be familiar on the back of that package with what's called percent daily values.
Keep in mind this is based on a 2000 calorie diet.
So it might be more or less for you depending on how many calories you require in a day.
Roughly 5% of the daily value of a particular nutrient is low and 20% of the daily value
is considered high.
Aim for less than 5% of the daily value for fat, saturated fat, cholesterol and sodium.
Aim for more of the good stuff.
Aim for more than 20% for fiber, calcium, iron, vitamin A and vitamin C.
So what you're trying to do is use that nutrition facts panel to stay away from the stuff you
want to get rid of and maximize those that you want a little bit more of.
Make also sure to account for these numbers when you're counting for the number of servings
in the package or your individual serving size.
One of my favorite things to look for on a label is sugars and how do you recognize a
sugar on a label?
If you're concerned with the amount of sugar you're consuming, be sure to look on the ingredient
list to verify there are no added sugars and that's a key take home point, added sugars.
Some commonly added sugars include, so again you're now looking at the ingredient list,
you're looking at corn syrup, high fructose corn syrup and then words maybe you're not
familiar with, maltose, dextrose, honey, maple syrup and fruit juice concentrate.
All of those are going to be sources of added sugar from the manufacturer.
Keep in mind if you're looking at an ingredient list, sugar ends in the word OSE.
Now again certainly maple syrup, fruit juice concentrate are not going to have OSE in them
but maltose, dextrose, sucrose will all have OSE.
That is the tip for looking for sugar on the label.
However, it gets a little muddy here because in an 8 ounce glass of milk there are 12 grams
of sugar on that nutrition facts panel.
So you're looking at a glass of milk and you think okay the manufacturer must have added
sugar to this product.
No, this is something that Mother Nature put in that product.
The carbohydrate that is in milk is lactose and so lactose is a disaccharide, a disaccharide
two sugar units stuck together.
So the 12 grams of sugar in milk are coming from lactose but yes it is a sugar not added
by the manufacturer.
So again you go to your ingredient list and you might see on the ingredient list for milk,
you might see milk, vitamin A and vitamin D but you don't see any high fructose corn
syrup, you don't see any maltose or dextrose.
So you know that the sugar that was in there was natural.
Same thing if you're getting unsweetened applesauce.
It's going to tell you it might have 15 grams of sugar but you look at the ingredient list
and there's no added sugar.
So again keep in mind that the nutrition facts panel is not necessarily going to identify
where the sugar came from on the label but it's going to be in the ingredient list.
To limit nutrients that have no more than a percent daily value like trans, fats and
sugars.
In other words there's no value needed, there's no amount of this that's required.
Look at the labels and choose the food with the lowest amount to minimize your intake.
Remember that the list of all ingredients of the food are listed from the most to the
least and this is done by weight.
So again if you're trying to look at okay I'm wondering if there's a lot of trans fat
in this food and you look at the ingredient list and lo and behold your first ingredient
is hydrogenated vegetable oil.
Hydrogenated means essentially a trans fat, partially hydrogenated means a trans fat.
If that's first on your ingredient list that would be a product that you'd want to avoid.
Another tip when you're looking at this ingredient list is the more ingredients in the food product
in general the more processed the food, particularly if you don't understand the ingredients.
So if you have to have a degree in biochemistry to understand what is that that's in my food,
I've never heard that word before.
You can generally assume that the more ingredients or the less you understand that label the
more processed the food becomes and again keep in mind we're trying to stay away from processed
foods and eat more whole foods.
But don't be fooled there are FDA approved exceptions to every rule including nutrients
on a food label.
Total calories from fat can be deleted from the food label it doesn't have to be there
if the food item has less than a half a gram of fat per serving.
Again be really careful about the portion size because a way that a manufacturer can
get around this is they just take that keep keep in mind that diet candy bar what they've
done is take a candy bar that most of us would consider a single serving and they've
now dissected it into seven.
So they don't have to put that on the label because the portion size is so small each
portion is going to have less than a half a gram of fat per serving.
Likewise a company may still be able to claim zero trans fat if there's less than a half
a gram of trans fat per serving in their product.
The key here is serving.
So again if they're trying to minimize the negative publicity of trans fats on their
label they just make the portion sizes smaller and then again they are in compliance with
the legislation.
So keep in mind even though there may be a law associated with it the manufacturer is
in charge of the portion sizes.
Additionally and to be in compliance with this rule manufacturers can reduce their portion
size to have zero grams of trans fat so that's the key take home message.
As consumers focus on trans fats manufacturers have switched from trans fat back to saturated
fat to meet the consumers perception of heart healthy.
Keep in mind that a lot of this is the difference between the front of the package and the back
of the package.
The front of the package is going to be designed to market to you.
The back of the package where the fax label is the fax label on the back has to be in
compliance with the law although there are ways of skirting that a little bit.
Company total cholesterol per serving may also be deleted from the food label if the
food has less than two milligrams of cholesterol per serving and if that product makes no claims
about fat cholesterol or fatty acids.
Companies may also delete total fiber per serving from their label if indeed their product
contains less than a gram of fiber per serving so it's kind of like don't ask don't tell.
Currently they're not giving you the information that their product is a poor source of fiber
they're just giving you no information.
Company may also delete total sugars per serving from the product label if the food item contains
less than a gram of sugar per serving and makes no claims about sugars, sweeteners or
sugar alcohol content.
Sugar alcohols are in foods to reduce the sugar but again you can look at that word
and say if it ends in an OL, sorbitol, mannitol, xylitol, lactolol, any of these OL words is
going to be a sugar alcohol so make sure you look at that ingredient list.
A company must always list the grams of protein that the product contains but the percent
daily value may be deleted from the label.
It can be deleted if the protein claim is not made or if the food item is for infants
or children less than four years old.
The reason is they require less protein and again protein is a little bit difficult to
navigate because it depends on how much protein for growth and development, your ideal body
weight, etc.
Terminology found in labeling and packaging.
Well have you seen food related items like light, low fat, high fiber on packaging and
labels but do you know what they really mean?
The FDA has established specific definitions for these terms.
You can't review all of them but I'm going to give you a few and the rest are going to
be listed in your guidebook.
So it's almost like you have to have a degree in law often times to make sure that you can
navigate a food label.
So if indeed it is called a good source and that's a front of the packaging word, if it's
a good source it means this food item must provide between 10 and 19 percent of the daily
value for a given substance per serving.
Light, that word light, means that the food item contains 50 percent or less of the fat
than another brand or of the regular version of a food item if it's made by the same manufacturer.
Now an exception to that would be say for example olive oil.
Olive oil that's labeled light often times means light in color, not light in calories.
So we get so used to seeing light, we think light means less calories, light beer.
We can come up with a lot of different examples but light when it comes to oil really means
light in color.
Fat free means that the food item has to have less than a half a gram of fat per serving
and has no added oil or fat in the food.
Low in sodium means that the food item has less than or equal to 140 milligrams of sodium
per serving.
So I want you to think about this the next time you go to the grocery store and you're
buying a sports drink.
Most of the sports drinks on the shelf today have 110 milligrams of sodium per serving
and they could legitimately market themselves as low in sodium.
They don't do that because they're trying to market themselves as replacing the electrolytes
lost in sweat but actually it meets the definition of a lower sodium food.
High fiber means that the food item contains at least five grams of fiber per serving and
again you might want to take your guidebook along the next time you go grocery shopping
to be able to navigate the legislative words that are going to be on your packaging.
So does this stuff actually work?
What does the research say about the American diet and food labels?
So are we actually taking all this government sponsored legislation and translating this
into making better food choices?
Well a study by Horovot and colleagues at the University of Cincinnati asked 200 men
and women to choose between two fabricated cookie packages.
These were not real cookies.
On the front label one said low fat and the other said no saturated fat.
84% of the participants made their product choice without looking at the nutrition label
on the back of packages.
So what does that mean?
Keep in mind that when you're buying something off the grocery store shelf you're drawn
to that product by the front of the package not necessarily the back.
So if there are key buzz words that appeal to you you're much more likely to choose a
product based on the front of the package versus the back.
Furthermore in this study 64% of participants chose the no saturated fat label over low
fat package label.
That's not a bad idea but the consumer might actually miss the total calories by not reading
the label.
So in my family a lot of bad history of heart disease and so I've actually taught my children
it's not necessarily the total fat that they want to look for but the saturated fat.
So again your family may actually have some key things that you want to look for on the
label and that may be what you focus in on.
But what is the implication of this particular study?
Americans may be making serious mistakes in food selection and consequently their overall
health by not reading and closely inspecting nutrition labels on the back of food items.
Other studies, results of other studies confirm that food labels are useful in helping people
monitor and reduce their fat intake.
But they also acknowledge that populations of persons who still need to be reached such
as seniors, men and people who have less formal education.
Also once you think about this for a second how big is that label on the back of the package?
So if I forget my glasses at home I may not actually be able to read the nutrition facts
panel but I might again be attracted to that front of the package labeling.
So what is the future of nutrition labeling?
Supermarkets may become a bigger player in labeling products on their shelves in their
grocery store and this should make sense because the supermarket, particularly the supermarket
brand, is going to be able to put whatever message they want and the unfortunate thing
is that I can go to a variety of different grocery stores and the labeling on the store
brand can be completely different and the words on that front of the label packaging
may mean something completely different.
So supermarket chains are creating their own labels to help identify products that are
healthier according to their own definitions.
So we could go to six or seven grocery store chains and ask them for the definition of
healthy and they may all give us a different definition.
These symbols and scores are being added to shelf tags beneath the food products in
addition to the claims that are already provided by the food label by the manufacturer and
it's also on the front of the packaging.
So what would attract you?
Now I'll give you a great example.
A major grocery store chain knows that people don't necessarily look at the back of the
package for 100% whole wheat bread.
So what they've done is they put caramel coloring, made the bread brown, packaged it in kind
of an orange label to make the bread even look browner and so they're looking, they
know consumers are going to pick a brown bread versus a white bread but basically what this
is is white bread with caramel coloring.
So the packaging and the messaging on the front has no true identity, no true standard.
Will this create even more confusion for consumers when they're making a purchase?
I'm going to say perhaps.
So each of these nutrient profiling systems uses different standards to evaluate food products.
So a product may receive a higher score in one store and a lower score in another.
So you're scratching your head and say okay if I shop at grocery store A and I buy this
product how can it not be as good for me if I'm shopping at grocery store B?
So there's been almost a national movement to try and get grocery stores and other organizations
to standardize that front of packaging labeling and to this point to no avail.
The graphic or the symbol is usually placed on the front of the food package but research
has yet to indicate that these symbols are registering with consumers so do consumers
know what that means and the answer is at this point no.
So why are supermarkets doing this?
People for many reasons but they want to drive their consumers to a store brand.
Now interestingly, according to the ADA, the American Dietetic Association's Nutrition
and You Trends 2008 public opinion survey, 35% of consumers listed food package labels
as credible sources of information.
Now we can look at that one or two ways.
At least over a third of Americans are looking at the label.
The bad news is that means 65% don't look at food label packaging as credible sources
of nutrition information despite the fact that the nutrition facts panel has legal definitions
for labeling.
Again, fewer than 10% identified food manufacturers as credible sources.
So if I'm going to interpret this for you what this means is that at least consumers
are thinking well maybe manufacturers have an ulterior motive.
Maybe that front of label packaging may not be the most credible source because it's coming
from a manufacturer.
According to nutrition today, consumers have also been found to trust a specific nutrition
related statement versus a general statement.
So for example, a statement such as calcium rich foods such as skim milk may reduce the
risk of osteoporosis.
They may believe that more than a general statement on the carton saying for example,
good source of calcium.
So the American consumer is looking for a little bit more information.
Why is a good source of calcium important for me?
Why must I look for a good source of calcium?
Well now what they're doing is making a link.
The legal wording associated with this is really pretty critical though.
They can't say skim milk is a good source of calcium and it will prevent osteoporosis.
They can't make a prevention claim but they may say reduce the risk of developing osteoporosis.
There is much controversy over whether or not the current label of products really are
giving a benefit to consumers or is the benefit really to the manufacturer.
Not only are there numerous labels in nutrition information overwhelming for consumers but
what about consumers who really have a unique special dietary need?
This labeling system can actually be detrimental for those who have a lactose intolerance because
remember the label is going to identify milk as having 12 grams of sugar but not necessarily
the source of that sugar.
The labeling may be detrimental to individuals say for example with type 2 diabetes whose
primary goal is to control calories but they're only looking for sugars on the label.
What if you have celiac disease?
Individuals who have celiac disease need to eliminate wheat and probably more importantly
eliminate sources of gluten.
So where wheat might be listed on the ingredient list gluten is not and so the challenge is
if you have celiac disease the nutrition facts panel as it's currently formulated may not
give you enough information.
Certainly high blood pressure, renal disease, all of those again individuals with unique
nutritional concerns really are going to struggle.
So our person with celiac goes to the grocery store they have celiac disease they know they
have to avoid wheat and gluten but they see a label with a heart healthy symbol and now
what they think okay if this is a healthy food maybe it's healthy for me and that's
not going to be true.
It could be a whole wheat bread or another food that's got gluten in it and just because
it has a healthy symbol on it doesn't mean it's specifically designed for people who
have a gluten sensitivity.
So again some of the front of the package labeling now is listing gluten free wheat
bread or gluten free breakfast cereal and so it's giving the consumer a little bit more
information on the front of the packaging but also keep in mind there's no legal identity
for that front of package labeling.
So I'm Joe manufacturer I can say it's gluten free but I don't necessarily need to prove
it's gluten free okay so individuals may think the product might be healthy and they purchase
it without knowing the side effects it could produce.
Now think about this from a labeling dilemma though can the federal government actually
give a warning on every single food product out there?
I don't really think that's terribly practical.
So I think the challenge is how do we provide consumers with the best information?
Certainly we can go and think about our diabetic patients who have many restrictions and guidelines
as it is with the growing population of diabetic children.
This new labeling system might be even more confusing and troublesome when trying to make
a healthier choice for children at such a young age.
Keep in mind if it's type 2 diabetes the most important thing on that label is to look for
total calories and calories per serving.
Now just because the label says it's low fat however doesn't mean that it's low in carbohydrates
and sugar.
So low fat doesn't mean it's low calorie it just means it's reduced one segment and we
can certainly all remember the low fat craze of the 1980's and 90's where everybody was
eating low fat cookies and low fat candy and we watched our American waistline grow because
we never thought about calorie control.
Will the product labels actually become cluttered and overwhelming?
Well the overall goal is to reduce confusion and make it easier for consumers to buy a
healthy product but there's not one healthy product on the market that meets all of the
criteria for everyone.
So what do we do as consumers?
We throw up our hands and say I can't navigate all the legal mumbo-jumbo on a label.
If that's you then I'm going to suggest what we do is just stick to teaching the basics
and what are the basics when you go to the grocery store?
First and foremost I always tell people shop the perimeter.
The outside aisles are where most of the best choices or the least processed foods are.
Fresh produce, lean meats, low fat dairy and we can also throw olive oil in here because
when you look at olive oil and you flip over the back of the label there's one ingredient.
So again we're looking for the perimeter of the store or single or maybe two ingredient
foods.
We're not looking for a list of ingredients that we can't understand.
Do we forget the numerous labels that have the potential to confuse many consumers in
the long run?
Well maybe we do.
Maybe that's just too overwhelming for you.
Now what about research and labeling?
Will this new trend with all of this information on the package for us, will this help American
consumers or is it just another phase in the nutrition world that's going to come and go
like a popular diet that people follow for a month or so and quit in a matter of time?
We'll see.
But keep in mind that front of packaging labeling will be trend based so whatever the nutrition
buzzword of the day is low trans fat, low sugar, low carb that's what's going to be
brought to you as a consumer because it's on the front of the package.
You're savvy enough to think okay they're marketing to me so maybe what I want to do
is flip to the back.
Okay now what is the difference when we're thinking about frequently asked questions?
What's the difference between low fat and low in calories?
First I'm going to send you back to the guidebook.
Low fat means that the food item has less than 3 grams of fat per serving.
Low calorie means that the food item has less than 40 calories per serving.
So if I'm a manufacturer wanting to use the low fat claim but I still want my product
to taste good I might add more sugar to it to make it a little bit more palatable.
Now are there labels for fresh foods such as fruits and vegetables and meats and the
answer is not necessarily.
Some of the meats that are making a claim that if I'm making a claim for a low fat
hamburger for example 96% fat free low and behold I'm going to have to provide some nutrition
information to back that up.
Another question I get all the time is that gee reading food labels Roberta will add hours
to my shopping time.
How can I avoid that?
If I've only got time to look at a couple things on a label what should they be?
Why would summarize it for you by saying portions per package, calories and then look
at things that might be individually important to you and your own personal health.
Maybe in your family at sodium, in my family at saturated fat and even trans fat I'm going
to look at those things particularly when I'm looking at a new product that I want to
introduce to my family.
So maybe you have irritable bowel and you're looking for higher fiber foods choose the
labels and look at the back of the package to pick out things that are personally important
to you.
And that way you can navigate the wonderful and often times confusing world of food labels.
And thank you.
