Greetings and welcome back. In this lecture, we're going to explore the intricacies of
herbal medicine and come to a conclusion, or maybe not, is it a healer or a hoax? In
my clinical practice, I had a young adolescent who was really interested in weight loss and
she came to the clinic and told us she was using a popular herbal therapy at the time
called Metabolife. And we warned her about some of the potential side effects, but she
was going to use this product. Came in one morning not feeling very great and we'd been
monitoring blood pressure and things like that for her, but she came in one morning
and didn't feel well. So the nurse practitioner took her blood pressure and it was 240 over
120. Heart rate was 170 beats a minute and we ended up transporting her to a local hospital
to have her stomach pumped. And what was the problem? She'd been on this product with
really no adversity and now all of a sudden was having an adverse reaction. Well the amount
of active ingredient in the product that she had switched to, she had opened a new bottle
that day, was 200% of what was declared on the label. So it wasn't necessarily the ephedra
in that product, it was the amount of ephedra. So we've got a little bit of a conundrum here
on how do we help to navigate this world of herbal therapies. I want to start out by just
mentioning that optimum nutrition, disease prevention and wellness, which is sometimes
called complementary care, are all concepts that resonate with many Americans. So my young
adolescent was really trying to manage her weight issue and really wanted to manage it
on her own and not rely on her physician. Because these concepts resonate with Americans,
herbal therapies and integrative medicine, which is medicine that treats the whole person
and his or her lifestyle, that encompasses the physical, psychological and spiritual
self are increasing in popularity. And herbal therapy is often times considered part of
the complementary care movement. Interestingly in the United States we call herbal therapy
often times alternative medicine where the rest of the world where nuts and berries have
been used as drugs for centuries is considered actually traditional medicine. In my experience
individuals who are interested in complementary medicine are motivated and focused on the
prevention and optimum management of disease. They are interested in protecting their health.
But when we explore reasons for the use of herbal therapies here in the United States
they're varied and they include some dissatisfaction with traditional medicine might be a reason.
The need for a patient to take charge of their own health care and how many of us do that
on a regular basis? We want to be more involved. We want to know why a particular medication
would be used. Is there a different medication with fewer side effects? There's also a belief
that natural medicine is somehow safer than traditional medicines. And so that might drive
someone to try an herbal therapy. Well this lecture will explore the myths and realities
of herbal medicine in the United States with an emphasis on some of the few most popular
supplements. Well let's take a look at the prevalence of use in the United States. This
was revealed in a study where David Eisenberg of Harvard and others compared the use of
various types of complementary and alternative medicine in 1997 to their use in 2002. And
what did this study show? It showed an increase in this time period of herbal therapy from
about 12% to 18.6%. This represents actually around 38 million Americans who are using
some form of herbal therapy. And who are those 38 million Americans? Well the predictors
of use include being female, an annual income of greater than $65,000 a year and greater
than a high school education. But it also includes the uninsured. Now why would an uninsured
person fall into that same predictor category? Well often times individuals who are under
or uninsured are often times first generation from a foreign country. So in my experience
in Houston many of my immigrant families are using what they consider to be traditional
medicines that they bought in Mexico or central of South America. So often times they are
using what they consider to be traditional where the other predictors of use really tend
to be individuals that might have been born and raised here in the United States. And
the popularity of herbal supplements like what is hot is often times media driven. So
the list of the most popular herbal therapies shifts frequently. I can remember when everybody
was using St. John's wort or everybody was using garlic and again it's almost the herbal
therapy du jour. What is out there and what is popular? Well what is different here? What
is different about herbal therapy in the United States? And I think we need to set the stage
by actually exploring the Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act. Well in the early
1990s the FDA decided to weigh in on a popular trend where there was an emerging interest
in herbs as medicine. We were all familiar with using garlic as a seasoning agent or
maybe oregano or rosemary. But what happened in the shift in consciousness in the United
States in the early 1990s where now we are starting to look at them as drugs? So David
Kessler who is the commissioner of the FDA said wait a minute here. We are going to have
to look at this. This is not a food use anymore. This is now a drug use. And during that period
of time he proposed a more active role for the FDA in the management of this emerging
trend of herbs as medicine. Well industry concern was growing and public campaigns began because
the American population really didn't want the FDA weighing in on what they considered
to be something that was in the food supply. Why would the FDA need to regulate that? I
think a distinction has to be made at this point in time though. What Kessler was saying
at that point in time was he was not trying to label the garlic that you buy in the grocery
store. But when the garlic was used in an amount that you would not normally get as
a food, could it potentially have drug effects and should the American consumer be informed?
Well you can imagine the flurry of legislation that was being crafted at that point in time.
And what we had proposed was something called the Dietary Supplement Health and Education
Act. And what this was designed to do was be a stop gap that we really didn't want these
herbs regulated as medications, but we didn't want no legislation at all. We wanted something
in between. The authors of the original legislation included Tom Harkin who is a Democrat from
Iowa and Orrin Hatch, a Republican from Utah. The significance of these political authors
probably needs to be highlighted. Tom Harkin actually believed that his allergies were
cured by using bee pollen and he has been an advocate for health his whole time serving
as a legislator. Orrin Hatch comes from the great state of Utah and that is where most
of the supplement companies are housed or the manufacturing plants are in Utah. So I
think they both had a vested interest on either end of the spectrum on why they wanted some
legislation to serve as that middle ground. Well what it ended up to be, it was David
Kessler then against the supplement industry. Kessler was looking for something and lo and
behold he got it. What we ended up having during this period of time is people, there
were deaths associated with a contaminated amino acid, L-tryptophan that caused deaths
from taking this tainted supplement. Really wasn't the tryptophan, it was something that
was in the tryptophan supplement. And so Kessler is saying wait a minute, this is not
an amino acid, this isn't a food anymore, we're labeling it different, we're putting
it in a pill or a capsule and lo and behold he got some ammunition.
During that period of time there were supplements on the market and I remember going into health
food stores in Houston and seeing supplements that were claiming to cure HIV. Driving individuals
away from their primary health care provider to something in the health food store that
was going to cure, which at that point in time was an incurable disease. So you can
imagine the flurry of individuals trying to buy supplements to cure their HIV. So Kessler
is weighing in on this and saying we've got a problem, there are some tainted supplements,
there are some claims being made and certainly during this period of time opposition came
from what was called the Nutritional Health Alliance and Gerald Kessler. No relation to
David Kessler, Gerald Kessler who hired celebrities to market the herbal industry and commercials.
So Whoopi Goldberg was part of this, James Colburn and Mel Gibson and I remember seeing
a commercial and maybe you saw some of these as well where Mel Gibson was standing in front
of his food pantry with locks on it and saying what the FDA wanted to do was make all vitamins
and minerals and all herbal supplements prescription only and honestly this was a fear driven campaign.
That's not what the FDA was looking to do, what they were looking to do was to again provide
some safeguards for the American public. There's actually something called Blackout Friday in
health food stores in 1993 saying sign a petition, we need to inform the FDA we don't want our
vitamins and minerals prescription only. Ultimately David Kessler lost his battle against the
industry and in 1994 the Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act actually passed.
This allowed supplements to be marketed as all natural and Americans today embrace this
concept. Now what's the alternative here? Are we going to market them as all fake? Are
we going to market them as synthetic? So almost anything that's labeled all natural on a
product, American consumers are driven to this. So I've always joked that if I was
marketing tobacco I would put waving fields of all natural tobacco on a cigarette carton
and I would call it an all natural product and I could do that. You must be aware that
there's no legal definition of all natural. There is of organic but there's not all natural.
Okay so what did we end up getting with this concept of the Dietary Supplement Health and
Education Act? What we end up with is something called a structure function claim. So a dietary
supplement can say something about this food that contains calcium may promote bone health
so it can make a link between what the compound is and bone health but it can't say calcium
cures osteoporosis. So it can make a structure function claim so another example would be
a product could say may strengthen the immune system but it cannot say will cure HIV. So
this was what the intent was but unfortunately the actuality is that we have significant
loopholes. I have on my desk back in Houston ads and trade magazines that violate this
over and over and over again. I have one ad that's in a very popular magazine on alternative
health care that talks about taking a herbal medication to cure impotence regardless of
its cause, diabetes, heart disease, whatever. It cannot legally do that but the challenge
is there's not adequate numbers of inspectors within the FDA and the FTC that handles the
false advertising to make sure that these advertisements are actually removed. So I call
this quick kill nutrition that a manufacturer can go in and violate Deshae as it's called
the Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act. They can violate it but by the time they're
caught they've already made a lot of money and pulled out of the market. So unfortunately
what that means is that we can have dangerous or adulterated or falsely advertised products
that reach the market. Concerns also exist for herbal medicines or raw ingredients that
might come from China or other foreign countries as concerns have been raised about the purity
of the raw materials and whether or not some of the raw materials can actually be adulterated
with prescription pharmaceuticals. So if I'm taking an all natural herbal product say for
example Valerian that's marketed to calm me down, if this has been adulterated with Valium
I'm going to be really calm but it's not going to be because of the Valerian, it's going
to be because of the Valium. So the United States being relatively proactive to try and
counter this has opened up a testing facility in China to test the herbal medicines before
they reach the United States market or more importantly before the raw ingredients reach
the United States market. So what was the unintended consequence of this legislation?
We know that it was allowed to make structure function, it couldn't make a disease claim
but what was the unintended consequence of this legislation? What we have now is no pre-market
approval. So in other words a company does not have to prove that it's safe before it
reaches the market. There doesn't have to be a safety study that's done. So think about
this from a pharmaceutical standpoint. Would you want to take a prescription medication
where the manufacturer didn't have to tell you the consequences, didn't have to prove
that it was safe? You probably wouldn't want that product but yet in the dietary supplement
realm you can actually buy products with no pre-market approval. The burden of safety
has shifted therefore from the manufacturer, the manufacturer doesn't have to prove that
it's safe, the FDA has to prove that it's unsafe. Now keep in mind the FDA doesn't have
any more regulators than it did before this legislation passed. So again this is another
concept of saying yes we've got legislation on the books, the FDA just needs to enforce
it. All true but if the FDA does not have any more inspectors and they can't do their
job because now they're inundated, we've got the legislation, we just lack the enforcement.
So contaminated products or products with too much of the active ingredient like my
poor girl taking metabolife or an undeclared substance can reach the market. Again metabolife
is a great case example. We can argue that low dose of Fedra is unbelievably effective
as a weight loss aid. However if products can have zero of Fedra up to 200% of what's
declared on the label, we don't have enough safety nuts there to control that. Certainly
star caps as a weight loss pill, six professional football players within the last year and
we've discussed this in an earlier lecture, six NFL players ended up taking star caps
as a weight loss aid and it had an undeclared diuretic on the label. Certainly FDA and consumer
reports have also indicated that of the 61 popular weight loss pills on the market 49
had an undeclared substance. So keep in mind that if you buy a weight loss product at the
store, at the health food store that says all natural, that you may actually be taking
a prescription pharmaceutical and if you're drug tested, you may not want to have an adverse
outcome with that. In the United States and here's a key distinction. In the United States
removal of products or herbs from the market is rare. That is not true in other countries
of the world. In other countries of the world and I'll tell you from my opinion Germany
leads the world in this effort. They have removed products that don't work or are not
safe or have adverse outcomes associated with it. So I think the challenge is other countries
of the world that look at herbal therapy more as traditional medicine realize and respect
that sometimes these medications may need to be removed from the market and lo and behold
we've currently removed one from the market and that's a Fedra. A Fedra gained national
attention when a pitcher came to training camp and I will tell you he was over fat and
not in great shape and he was taking a Fedra for weight loss and what ended up happening
is he took more and more of the product. He actually had a heat related injury and at
the time of his death his core body temperature was reported to be greater than 108 degrees.
So the way I describe it is he cooked from the inside out. So a Fedra was then removed
from the market. The challenge is was it the Fedra or was it the dose of the Fedra? Other
high profile individuals and unfortunately this is often times what it takes is when
a high profile individual is injured, hurt, killed, maimed from a dietary supplement that
tends to get our attention. Kicker Van Seal was a 24 year old swimmer from Kentucky took
a multivitamin contaminated with an anabolic steroid that was not declared on the label.
So what happened to kicker? Well he was banned from swimming. He sued the supplement manufacturer
in state court and was awarded over $578,000. But I will tell you what happens to athletes
that are caught with a ding on their record. They're looked at as cheaters and maybe they
are. They're looked at as cheaters rather than saying could this young man have possibly
known that he was going to test positive for an anabolic steroid when he was taking a multivitamin.
I can't look into his mind or into a crystal ball but I would tell you he probably wouldn't
have thought a multivitamin is going to cost me my swimming career. Another very popular
example and I still have athletes today that want to use this product called ZMA. This
is a dietary supplement with research demonstrating it could significantly increase strength.
There was one study demonstrating the effectiveness and this came from the lab of Victor Conte
of the Balco Lab scandal. Conte has been considered by some to be the mastermind in the surge
in anabolic steroid juice by slightly altering the steroid molecule. So we saw high profile
Olympians be stripped of their gold medals by being associated with the Balco scandal
and some of the anabolic steroid juice. So with ZMA it was only his research that showed
ZMA was going to significantly increase strength. Other research studies following his couldn't
prove that it had any beneficial effect at all on strength. Now what about popular supplements
and current concerns. This is where you might want to sit back in your easy chair and take
on a pad and paper and take some notes. You know how things go. When we pull one compound
off the market like we did a Fedra we're looking for something to replace it with and low and
behold enter in bitter orange. Bitter orange chemically is a Fedra's cousin. So the banding
of a Fedra increase the use of this product for weight loss. And again I'm going to suggest
to you there is science to suggest that a Fedra combined with caffeine does improve weight
loss outcomes. So you can lose a little bit more weight when you partner these. Well when
a Fedra was banned jumped in bitter orange. Now bitter orange along with a Fedra can elevate
your blood pressure, elevate your heart rate. So I think the challenge is that when one is
replaced with another you got to be a little bit careful. So in combination with caffeine
bitter orange is demonstrated to promote weight loss and certainly that's going to be
the manufacturer's claim. Drug interactions. Well there are drug interactions with a Fedra
and other prescription medications. And unfortunately because these are labeled as supplements they
don't have to declare this on the label. So there's a drug interaction if you happen
to be taking an alpha or a beta blocker there's going to be an interaction with a Fedra. MAO
inhibitors interaction with a Fedra. And again where are you as the consumer going to be
informed of these interactions unless you're going to a pharmacist or you're seeing a registered
dietitian on a regular basis. So what are the side effects? Well certainly elevated
heart rate and blood pressure and truly that's one of the reasons why a Fedra and bitter
orange help you to lose weight. They actually raise your metabolic rate and in this case
it's evidenced by an increased heart rate. But what happens if you want to go to sleep
at night? If I have an elevated heart rate, an elevated metabolic rate, elevated blood
pressure I may not be able to sleep at night. And certainly case reports exist of a stroke
and an otherwise healthy 38 year old male taking a Fedra and taking some of these weight
loss products. So again you have to be a little bit careful. Was it the herb in there? Was
it an adulterated pharmaceutical? Was this individual taking a pharmaceutical along
with a prescription medication? And again you've got to be a little bit of a nutrition
detective before you're going to venture into this world. St. John's Wort. The major
use of this herb is for the management of mild to moderate depression. The problem is
the results for major studies are inconclusive. Some say it works, some say it doesn't. Many
of these studies indicate this herb might be effective for minor or mild depression.
However, a major clinical trial for major depression concluded that St. John's Wort
is ineffective for significant depression. Now I'm going to mention this more than once
because I think it's a key point. In the countries of the world that get this right, if you
have an illness or a condition that really does require a pharmaceutical, you would be
discouraged from taking a less effective herbal medication. Now the drug interactions
with St. John's Wort may be significant and this is one of these herbs that you saw splashed
all over the newspaper and then all of a sudden it started to contract and lost a little bit
of favor. It's because it interferes with many drugs. It can interfere with birth control
pills. Now that might be an unintended consequence that you weren't looking for. But if you've
had something like a kidney transplant, any kind of organ transplant and you are on lifelong
immunosuppressive therapy, it will reduce the effectiveness of those drugs. It can interfere
with warfarin which is an anticoagulant. It can interfere with the joxin which is used
to treat some heart problems. And it can also cause mania in those with an underlying mood
disorder. Now keep in mind when St. John's Wort first came out, we had no warning of
those side effects because there was no need for pre-market approval. So all of this was
discovered in individuals just like you, just like me, that went out and took these and
oops, all of a sudden had an adverse reaction. Now what about echinacea? Echinacea is one
of those herbs that is used to stimulate the immune system. Some studies suggest that
echinacea is effective for the treatment of upper respiratory infections. And again,
we're always going to find this, some studies, not all studies. Some experts recommend against
the use of echinacea for autoimmune disorders such as lupus and TB. So why might that be
the case? Well if echinacea actually stimulates the immune system and you have an autoimmune
disorder like lupus with an immune system that's auto-kilter, you may not want something
that's going to stimulate your immune system. As with most herbal therapies, it's a plant.
So it's part of the aster family. Keep in mind that if you're highly allergic to a particular
plant, if the herb you're going to take is in the same botanical family, this might be
a contraindication. Those with significant asthma or allergies outside of this plant
family should really probably avoid this preparation as well. Additionally, for those with an immunoglobulin
e-mediated hypersensitivity, there is an increased risk of anaphylaxis or the ability to move
air or you stop breathing. A study, however, evaluating the amount and the correct species
in health food stores revealed very disappointing results. Ten percent of the products tested
had absolutely no echinacea. Forty-three percent of the products tested met the standards listed
on the label. So the claims of a standardization of an extract listed on an herbal therapy
and oftentimes you find that on the front of the label are not insurance. Now I want
you to think about this. If very few or ten percent of those herbal medications had no
active ingredient, you've A, wasted your money or B, you switched brands and you increased
the dose and now you have an adverse reaction because you took too much of it. Also, within
this family, possible interactions may also occur with immunosuppressive medications.
Garlic, traditionally used to lower cholesterol and it is a common prescription in Germany.
So if your cholesterol is mildly elevated and you go to a German physician, he or she
may try garlic first and then ramp it up if your cholesterol is not well controlled. A
recent meta-analysis suggested that although garlic was more effective than placebo, the
amount of cholesterol reduction was modest. So here is another example. If your total
cholesterol is 400, garlic is not going to be effective enough for you to have significant
cholesterol reduction. Garlic was also used as an antimicrobial agent during both world
wars and it is relatively effective. However, there is a significant risk of bleeding that
exists if you use garlic with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, things like aspirin
leave, motrin and other drugs that affect blood clotting including other herbs such
as ginkgo biloba. What about aloe vera? Do you all have an aloe vera plant in your yard?
I certainly do. It has been used topically for centuries to promote healthy skin and
it is effective for its use. Aloe juice can be taken orally. The latex form, the latex
portion of the aloe plant has a very strong laxative and can cause potassium depletion
and kidney failure. So keep in mind aloe latex is not the same thing as aloe vera. Aloe
latex is often sold in foreign countries and I have seen it available via street vendors
in Mexico. In the United States, the FDA required reformulation in 2002 to remove the offending
compounds. A small study suggested that oral aloe vera may be effective for treating ulcerative
colitis that has a therapeutic effect as it is swallowed. But further research is needed
to confirm this effect. Possible interactions may occur with some medications for diabetes,
digoxin and diuretics. An additional popular herb, ginkgo biloba, has been used as part
of traditional Chinese medicine for centuries and the leaves contain flavonoids and compounds
that reduce blood clotting. Due to its anti-coagulant effect, it should be avoided prior to surgery.
Now think of the additive effect here. Ginkgo, garlic and omega 3 fatty acids that we've discussed
in the past all prevent blood clotting. They all have an effect. So you as a consumer need
to be aware that if you're taking a combination of different kinds of vitamins, supplements
and herbs, you might have to discontinue those prior to surgery. Again, the part of the plant
makes it either a benefit or a poison. Ginkgo biloba seeds can be fatal and have been associated
with seizures in children. So where the plant leaves might be appropriate, the seeds are
not. The effectiveness of ginkgo for intermittent claudication or leg pain or peripheral occlusive
artery disease has demonstrated that it actually is effective for reducing pain, probably because
it has an anti-inflammatory effect similar to aspirin. But there are possible interactions
that might occur with this plant, including interactions with antihypertensive medications,
blood sugar lowering medications, anti-convulsant and antidepressant medications. Now what about
ginseng? Actually, there is more than one species that is being used for dietary supplements.
It's been used medicinally for over 2,000 years. Ginseng may actually thin the blood
and acts synergistically with other herbs and medicines. So another one that you want
to avoid prior to surgery. It's often reported to be a tonic or aptogenic herb indicating
it's a multi-purpose herb. Siberian ginseng, that specific species, is linked with hypertension,
but not the other ginseng species. Reported benefits for exercise performance, improvement
in diabetes, again, are all going to be species specific. Controlling mood, cognitive and
sexual function, studies on those functions, I've come back with mixed results. Some of
the variability of these studies actually is because of the difference in the species.
So again, not all ginseng species are going to act the same way. Certainly, as with other
herbs, possible interactions may occur. And again, oftentimes you have those synergistic
effects with other herbs that interfere with blood clotting. So blood-thinning medications,
medications used to treat heart disease, diabetes medication. So what's the prudent
use? Tell your primary health care provider about the use of herbal therapies. Ask your
pharmacist about interaction. And don't use for those conditions that require significant
pharmacological action. So for cancer and heart disease, diabetes and hypertension,
that's not the way these drugs are used in other countries. So if you have a need for
significant pharmacotherapy, don't consider herbal therapies as your mainstay.
Now, frequently asked question. I come from a country where herbs have been used as nutritional
supplements for centuries. Why is the FDA so opposed to the use? In the United States,
we do not traditionally remove herbal medicines when there's an adverse reaction. Other countries
of the world do. They remove products such as Germany. The FDA is not opposed to their
use, but would like more information on purity, safety and efficacy to protect the American
consumer. Are there any labels you should look forward to determine if an herbal supplement
is safe? Well, certainly there's an NSF, international seal, a consumer lab seal, an informed choice.
These seals are the consumer's best assurance that a product is not contaminated. I always
suggest that those who are interested in purity, safety and efficacy, join consumer labs and
get safety alerts delivered right to their desktop. Thank you very much.
