Greetings and welcome back.
In this lecture I'm going to start out by telling you a story of a little girl that
I was working with who had diabetes but came to see me for something that was unrelated
to her diabetes.
She came in and her mom was doing a really great job of managing her diet and her insulin.
The problem was, little girl had lots of gas and a lot of diarrhea.
So we were exploring all kinds of different dietary strategies and I will admit to you
I tried a lot of things until one day she came in and she was chewing gum.
And I asked her, I said, can I take a look at the kind of gum that you're chewing?
And she showed it to me and it was a sugar-free gum made with sorbitol.
Sorbitol is an example of a sugar alcohol and one of the side effects of too much sorbitol
is gas and diarrhea.
So although we were looking in a lot of the wrong directions, it was as simple as the
gum she was chewing.
She just happened to be one of those individuals who was unbelievably sensitive to the effects
of sorbitol.
Sorbitol up to 9 out of 10 American consumers buy or consume products that are low in calories.
These products include things such as products that are sugar-free and reduced fat.
They can be beverages or foods.
There are numerous products on the market that are made with artificial sweeteners,
fat replacers and other additives.
Sometimes it's difficult to determine if what we are eating is real or is it fake.
This lecture will explore the different types of sweeteners and fat replacers used in products
from a nutrition perspective in how they're produced, how are they manufactured, are they
safe, which oftentimes is a real concern for American consumers.
If you look on the internet, you can find that sugar replacers are linked with multiple
chronic diseases, but is that true or is that false?
And what's the proper use of these nutritional replacers?
Well let's start out by taking a look at sweeteners.
Why are sweeteners a logical place to start?
Well, if we're all being honest, we all love sweet foods.
Sweetness offers a pleasurable addition to meals and snacks.
I always joke that my favorite food in the world is chocolate and I'll tease my graduate
students that when I'm 90, please do not give me any more broccoli, just give me dark chocolate.
Sensitivity to preference levels for sweetness differs from individuals to individuals, so
you may have someone in your family who really doesn't like very sweet foods, it's distasteful
to them, but they really prefer things that are salty or crisp.
The preference for sweetness varies by genetics, exposure during early childhood, and whether
you are fed or fasted.
Now the way of thinking about this are you full or hungry, and certainly there are some
people believe that if you have an addictive type of personality that you can actually
have a semi-addiction to sugar.
Now I want you to think about this for a second.
If you're chronically hungry, you skip breakfast, you skip lunch, most people are going to choose
something sweet because it physically makes them feel better.
That's not an addiction, that's physiology.
During adolescence, the average intake of sugar is the highest, and for most of us as
we age, this declines.
Men in the range of 19 to 50 are in the top category of additional sugar intake, and
this refers to sugars added to the foods, not the sugars that are naturally in foods
like milk and fruit.
Nearly a third of the extra sugars we consume are from sugar, sweet, and soft drinks.
Pause and think about this for a second.
Think about previous lectures when we talked about what's happened with portion sizes.
So when Americans are scratching their head on why am I becoming overweight, keep in mind
this number.
Nearly a third of the extra sugars that you consume or family members consume come from
sugar, sweet, and soft drinks.
Additionally, if you're trying to make a dietary change to promote body fat loss, this would
be a good place to start.
In the United States, most of these sugar-sweetened beverages are actually sweetened with the
sugar high fructose corn syrup.
Well, let's start out by taking a look at what is a nutritive sweetener, what is that
definition?
By definition, a nutritive sweetener is something that's sweet tasting, but it also has to
have energy associated with it.
These are compounds that are generally regarded as safe.
That grass means, GRAS, means that the sweetener has been in the food supply for a long period
of time and there's no additional testing needed by the FDA.
The common ones that you are familiar with is sucrose, which is table sugar, fructose,
which is again oftentimes in sugar-sweetened beverages, maple syrups, things such as that.
So again, sucrose is going to have four calories a gram and it's made from sugar cane or sugar
beets.
What about fructose as a sweetener?
Fructose as a sweetener also has four calories per gram.
Again, it's present in fruit and can be added to beverages such as high fructose corn syrup.
Again, we've talked about this in our lecture on carbohydrates.
It's being seen in more and more products on the shelf than products with sucrose for
a couple reasons.
One has a higher sweetening power, it is cheaper and so that's going to be a major consideration
and it also has what are called better functional properties, flavor, color and stability.
So if I'm a manufacturer and I want to have a product with a longer shelf life, I'm probably
going to use a high fructose corn syrup.
What about digestion and absorption?
These are usually easily digestible unless you have what is called an inborn era of metabolism
such as galactosemia or inherited fructose intolerance and you would know that.
Our metabolism cannot distinguish which sugars are found naturally in food to those which
are added to food.
The difference, however, is there's oftentimes more added to food than a natural product.
No matter what the source, we absorb, digest and metabolize fructose in the same way whether
the fructose again was in the fresh fruit or whether it was added to fruit drinks.
Now we enter the end of this world of sugar alcohols.
They actually are nutritive sweeteners meaning they are sweet and they have energy.
And you can tell the difference that because they end in that word almost all the time
they end in the word the suffix O-L.
These are generally regarded as safe food additives.
They are often found in baked goods, candy, chewing gum like my little girl, jams and
jellies.
So again a little bit of caution here.
Say for example you're really trying to buy a loved one, a great Valentine's present.
So you go into the candy store and you say I know what I'm going to do, I'm going to
buy sugar-free chocolate.
Well I'm going to tell you please don't ever buy that for me because I probably would
eat more of that than I needed to have and those sugar alcohols again can cause gas
cramping, bloating and diarrhea.
Again keep in mind you might recognize some of these names and be a sleuth when you're
looking at the label.
Multital, sorbetal, xylitol, malitol and then this word called hydrogenated starch.
That's probably the exception to our O-L rule.
Although not universally true these sugar alcohols usually again end in that suffix O-L.
People with these sweeteners can be labeled as sugar-free.
You think wait a minute though they have calories don't they?
Yeah they do.
But they are technically sugar-free.
Sugar implies in general to sucrose or fructose and again they're replacing sugar in that
food.
They provide less energies than the traditional sugars but if we're going to give them a fair
shot here they also have some other health benefits.
If I'm using a sugar alcohol it actually has a reduced glycemic response because it's
incompletely absorbed.
So what does that mean?
Means that if we're comparing it to regular table sugar it's not going to raise your blood
sugar as high as regular table sugar would.
Because it doesn't have again the same biological capabilities of table sugar it actually has
a reduced dental carries risk.
So again dentists are often times happier with sugar-free gums.
There's also some suggestion that these sugar alcohols may have a prebiotic effect.
Remember a prebiotic is food for the healthy bacteria that lives in your gut.
They haven't been thoroughly explored but think about this for a second.
If something ends up in my large intestine it can become food for the healthy bacteria
and again some of the fermentation products may actually confer some of the health benefits.
What about the absorption and digestion of these foods?
This is where they can become friendly or unfriendly.
They are absorbed by passive diffusion meaning these sugar alcohols are absorbed without
any transport mechanism so they kind of passively get into the system and they are absorbed
from the intestine incompletely and slowly.
Now depending on whose research you like to read more than 20 grams a day of mannitol
or more than 50 grams of sorbitol can result in diarrhea.
But just like my little girl that I was taking care of she was consuming around 5 grams of
sorbitol per day and had really pretty extensive GI complications from that.
So again although the research may suggest there is a dose-related response we are not
all identical twins and we may respond differently just like my little girl.
Well what about this category of non-nutritive sweeteners?
What does that mean?
Well the definition is they still provide a sweet taste but without energy that is they
don't have any calories.
Five currently have FDA approval and again this is often times a moving target sometimes
there is a sweetener on the market, it leaves, it comes back.
By the way a lot of these products are not available in every store or every region in
the country so you might not be familiar with all of them.
Sometimes you might find one in the deep south that is not sold in the northeast.
So let's go through a few of them.
A cell-famed K is sold at Sunnet, Sweet and Safe and Sweet One and this is a cell-famed
K. A spartame which is one that you might be the most familiar with is Nutrisweet and
a spartame in food is marketed as Nutrisweet.
It is the same compound as Equal, Equal is often times in the little blue pack and Equal
is the tabletop version but it is the same chemical.
And what is a spartame because this is going to become important.
What a spartame is is something called a dipeptide.
It's two amino acids, remember an amino acid is a protein.
It's two amino acids that together are sweet, apart they are not.
We also have a product called Neotame, you also might be familiar with saccharin which
is marketed as sweet and low, sweet twin, neck to sweet and often times again it's the pink
packet.
If we are talking about colors now we have sucralose or Splenda and that's often times
the yellow pack.
They all have many similar properties.
They are anywhere between 160 to many hundreds of times sweeter than sugar.
Neotame in fact is several thousand times sweeter than sugar.
So once you think about this if you are trying to substitute it in a recipe that's going
to be a difficult equation.
One of the things that sugar does in a recipe is provide bulk, it provides substance and
it holds water so it makes a food moisture tender.
So a cake for example that is made with saccharin is not going to have the same kind of physical
properties as a cake made with sugar.
In fact it's not going to brown, it's going to be less dense and it's going to be more
dry again.
So again it may have an increased sweetness but it's not going to provide all the same
physical properties as sugar.
They are all non-karyogenic meaning they do not cause cavities.
A spartame or neutrosweet generates a limited glycemic response but a cell-famed K, Neotame,
saccharin and sucralose generate no glycemic reaction.
So why would a spartame cause a slight rise in blood sugar in the other ones wouldn't?
Because a spartame is made from protein and protein will elicit some glycemic response.
Now in terms of using these products heating doesn't reduce the sweetening power of a cell
-famed K, Neotame, saccharin or sucralose although prolonged heat may cause a loss of
sweetness with a spartame.
So here's a little scientific experiment that you can do with your children or grandchildren
to talk about neutrosweet and a spartame and the effects of heat.
Get a packet of sugar-free hot cocoa and pour really hot water in it and let it sit for
45 minutes.
It's going to lose its sweetening power the longer it stays in contact with the heat.
What's happening is those two little amino acids together that are sweet in the presence
of heat break apart and they're not sweet independent of that.
So maybe sometime you might have bought a diet soft drink and you open it up and it
really doesn't have any flavor.
Think well what's the problem with this?
Generally what's happened is the neutrosweet has broken apart and it's lost its sweetening
power.
That probably means that diet soft drink was stored in a warehouse a little bit longer
than it should have been and it broke down due to high heat.
Now what about saccharin?
Well there's a little bit of history and an interesting story about saccharin.
At one point in time the FDA almost put it on its most wanted list because it had the
potential for carcinogens.
Now not karyogenic but carcinogens.
It had a carcinogen list on the label and the label listed this.
The use of this product might be hazardous to your health.
This product contains saccharin which has been determined to cause cancer in laboratory
animals.
But again let's back up here.
The amount of saccharin that was used in these animals to induce bladder cancer because
that's the type of cancer that was developed was significantly more.
It would require you as a consumer to consume hundreds of cans of a diet soft drink a day.
That's not realistic.
So was there science saying saccharin could cause cancer in laboratory animals?
The science said yes but the amount was impractical.
So in the year 2000 saccharin had that removed from its label.
These non-nutritive sweeteners may be beneficial in managing diabetes and weight control in
addition to other chronic diseases as well as preventing cavities.
Now what about sweetener use in health?
And here we're going to take a look at both nutritive and non-nutritive sweeteners.
We have very little evidence of detrimental long term effects on overall health of either
nutritive or non-nutritive sweeteners.
Now if I'm raising caution here I would say caution should be taken during childhood and
pregnancy to avoid excessive amounts of the non-nutritive sweeteners.
A lot of the non-nutritive sweeteners haven't been studied in these vulnerable populations
and that should make sense to you why that wouldn't happen.
We're not going to expose a pregnant woman to a thousand times the amount of normal sucralose
that she should take in.
We're not going to do that.
So laboratory animals become our models and again we have to take caution because oftentimes
interpreting laboratory animal data to human data doesn't always work.
The institutes of medicine say that no more than 25% of calories consumed should be comprised
of added sugars.
And again remember those added sugars are going to be sugars that are in soft drinks
etc.
More than that the dietary quality might be reduced.
So again we have to kind of pause here and think nutritive sweeteners sugars that are
added in our food supply can crowd out nutrition.
Non-nutritive sweeteners haven't been studied for a long enough period of time particularly
in vulnerable populations to say that they get out of jail free or pass go card.
Okay what do we know about too much sugar in the diet though?
Too much sugar in the diet may increase may cause the person to decrease consumption of
essential vitamins and minerals needed by the body to function.
Certainly excess sugar along with excess calories can contribute to obesity.
High intakes of sugar sweetened drinks and foods are associated with an increase in overweight
and obesity in children and adults.
But keep in mind if I were to consume high intakes of fat or high intake of protein anything
in excess beyond my need can contribute to obesity.
Non-nutritive sweeteners have the potential and that's a key take home message here to
reduce the calorie intake.
They can save up to 16 calories a teaspoon per sweetening power.
The average 12 ounce soft drink which is now honestly being replaced by the 20 ounce bottles.
The average 12 ounce soft drink contains about 150 calories of sugar and if two sodas are
consumed each day above your needed calorie level you can gain 30 pounds in a year.
Think about that for a second.
You think I'm not eating that much how many people ask the question gee I wonder if my
weight is related to how much I'm actually drinking and what kind of beverages I'm choosing.
So you think okay well I'm not going to drink soda I'll just drink sweet tea.
No I can't do that either because again it's the sugar in the sweet tea it's not something
pathological about the soft drink itself it's the sugar.
Now what about diabetes are there are instances where diabetics might be better off choosing
one sweetener versus the other.
Due to their incomplete absorption sugar alcohols cause a lower glycemic response than glucose
fructose and sucrose.
So what does that mean?
If a diabetic has a higher blood sugar to begin with if I can blunt some of that blood
sugar rise and still have a sweet product that might be a good thing.
Diabetics may use non-nutritive sweeteners again because they don't raise your blood
sugar they don't make your blood sugar more difficult to control.
Now the science will also say that in a diabetic population nutritive sweeteners ones with
sugar ones that have calories in them should not be completely restricted but they have
to be monitored through proper glucose monitoring.
So again if it's your birthday and you have diabetes and you want a small piece of cake
you may have to get rid of something else that's starchy on your plate to have that
small amount of cake with the sugar in it.
Again the non-nutritive sweeteners a saccharin sweetened birthday cake is probably not going
to be something that most of us would enjoy.
Additionally for those with type 2 diabetes these non-nutritive sweeteners can aid in
weight control.
Remember the lecture on diabetes, diabetes type 2 diabetes is related to obesity and
so if I can reduce the amount of weight that you carry as body fat I can reduce the likelihood
of you developing diabetes.
Now this is where it gets a little bit frightening for consumers because we have to explore a
little bit about nutritive and non-nutritive sweeteners in cancer.
According to recent studies and publications no relationship has been established between
the risk of common cancers or cancerous tumors and saccharin, neutrosweet and other sweeteners.
According to recent publications the potential of artificial sweeteners to cause cancer seems
to be insignificant.
Now I will tell you if you type in neutrosweet and cancer in an internet search or Splenda
and cancer you're going to find a lot of websites pop up that are claiming I drank
diet coke and now I have cancer.
The challenge with that is the science isn't going to support that and again I'm not saying
an individual person didn't develop cancer.
However, you can't make this quantum leap that everyone who drinks a diet soft drink
is going to develop cancer.
So again there's really not a link to non-nutritive sweeteners in cancer development.
For moving on to fat replacers we've got to take a look at a few facts here first.
Approximately 10 to 15% of all new food products are labeled reduced in fat.
It's at the top of the list of consumer nutrition concerns.
Nutrition concerns of consumers are can I lower my fat?
Many processed foods such as meats and cheeses, butter, yogurt, baked goods and muffins contain
fat replacers.
These fat replacers must be able to copy some or all of the functional properties of fat
in a fat modified food.
Well what are the type of fat replacers?
These replacers try to imitate the mouth feel of fat being kind of rich and creamy.
And most of the fat replacers are going to be classified into three different groups.
Carbohydrate based, protein based or lipid based or lipid modified.
You might have heard of some of these but most of these are used exclusively by manufacturers
so you're not going to be able to go out and buy them necessarily off the shelf.
Well let's take a look at the carbohydrate based fat replacers.
Most of the fat replacers are based on carbohydrates.
They absorb water and they can form gels that simulate a texture similar to fat.
Sometimes they're used in baked goods and are not again routinely available for sale
as is.
They are often times mixed with water so they usually provide one to two calories per gram.
And they're certainly not appropriate for fried foods.
So what are some of these examples?
Well examples might include fibers, gums and again if you're looking at say for example
a fat reduced salad dressing you are going to see one of these words xanthan, guar, locus
bean, alginates, these are all going to be found in diet or reduced fat salad dressings.
Now keep in mind for a second here if I take all the fat out of a salad dressing and I'm
putting in a thickening agent like a gum, my salad dressing really isn't going to pour.
It's not going to pour out of a bottle.
It might glump out of a bottle because what it's doing is binding all the water that's
in the salad dressing and again it reduces some of its ability to pour.
Certainly dextrins and cellulose, starches and maltodextrins are also going to be used
in many of the reduced fat products.
They can contain more than half of the calories of fat but they also might be higher in sugar.
So let's put on our manufacturer hat for a second.
I'm trying to make a product that you like and something that you're going to go buy
and enjoy and buy again.
So you buy a salad dressing and it's Italian and you're looking at the Italian salad dressing
bottle and instead of all your spices kind of floating to the bottom they're now all
suspended in this gel mixture.
It clumps on the food.
The likelihood is you might not want to buy that again but if it tastes acceptable you
might.
So what manufacturers oftentimes are going to do is they're going to add sugar back to
those foods to make it taste a little bit different because you might not like the texture
changes that you're seeing.
Now certainly as a fat replacer fruits can be used as a fat replacer because they have
natural fibers, they have pectins and sugars.
So think about when your grandmother makes jelly.
One of the things that she's going to put in there, maybe you're the one making jelly,
they're going to put in there a product called SureGel and SureGel is pectin and it holds
the juices.
It holds the juices and now makes that juice essentially spreadable.
So examples of fat replacers are things like dried fruits, plums, figs, raisins, applesauce
and bananas.
And I will tell you I modify recipes and reduce the fat by using my own natural fat replacers.
I'll use applesauce, I've even actually used pumpkin to replace fat in recipes provided
that it's a comparable taste.
Along with the fat replacers we also have protein based ones.
These are milk, oftentimes whey protein and remember whey comes from milk, remember your
nursery rhyme.
Little Miss Muffet sat on her tuffet eating her curds and her whey.
So whey protein is oftentimes going to be one of the protein based fat replacers.
Whey proteins are again can be used in the usual source.
Again they're not appropriate for use in fried foods but they're in many dairy products.
And again also in addition to soups, sauces, creamers, reduced fat butters, sour cream,
yogurt, mayonnaise, you can also see them in ice creams.
Isolated soy protein has been used in some foods as well.
A great example of a protein based fat reducer is something called Simplesse and that's an
example.
It's made from whey or from egg white and it's through a process called microparticulation.
So what they actually do is they take the whey protein or the egg white protein and they
incorporate a lot of air and they give it a mouth feel like fat.
So again it's one of these great, I guess you'd call it probably a modification of science
to take this protein, whip it with air and give it a product that has a creamy mouth feel.
Because it's made from a regular food it has a grass certification generally regarded
as safe.
But it would make sense that you can't use it when you bake or when you fry because if
I heat up that protein I'm going to change the way that it looks.
Think about a raw egg versus a cooked egg, you're not going to be able to use that in
a baking process.
Certainly there's modified whey protein concentrate and again this whey protein concentrate is
going to simulate the mouth feel.
An example would be dairy low, again you can't buy that off the shelf but it's often times
used in let's say reduced fat ice creams.
Lipid base, now again you're thinking why would I substitute a fat with a fat?
Chemical changes can be, they can modify this fat that will inhibit the absorption or shorten
the chain of the length of the fatty acid that produces this lipid base fat replacer.
A great one, a great example is a product called Benefat and that's actually what's
the commercial name of the product, the generic name is Salatrim.
Instead of the 9 calories a gram that fat has, it has 5 calories per gram.
Consists of short chain fatty acids, combined with one long chain fatty acid that's only
partially absorbed.
So it's still a fat but it's been chemically modified so the absorption is somewhat impaired.
It's used for foods with a low moisture content such as candies or chocolate chips.
The problem is no warning regarding the side effects was noted by Nabisco, primary manufacturer.
Yet some consumers experienced nausea, prompting some concerns from public interest groups.
Now why would that be?
Again, think of that partially absorbed fat.
If it's partially absorbed that means it's not all absorbed and again depending on how
fussy your gut is, your gut may not be able to tolerate that partially digested or modified
fat.
Now what about fat extenders?
Fat extenders generally have some water associated with it and a commercial product is something
called very low.
The calories can be reduced by diluting the fat with water in the form of an oil and water
emulsion.
I'm sure that you've seen this at the grocery store.
If you get a diet margarine, a lot of the diet margarines that are on the market basically
have water added to them so it gives the volume of fat.
So it spreads on your toast very nicely but it doesn't have the same amount of calories
because in part what that margarine has is water.
So if you ever mistakenly take that margarine and put it in a pan to like let's say for
example scramble an egg, all of a sudden the oil and water separates and you've got kind
of a watery mess in your pan because again what they've done is they've given the volume
of fat just not the calories of fat.
Fat extenders can reduce the amount of fat in salad dressings for example by as much
as 70% and margarines maybe up to 50%.
Lipid analogs have many characteristics of fat but have a different digestibility and
nutritional value and probably the one that got the most press in the market was a product
called Olene which essentially is the same compound as Olestra.
This gained approval from the FDA in 1996 and I remember when the press release came
out this was going to be the Wonder Fat Replacer.
It's made from sugar and vegetable oil in a process where three carbon glycerol molecule
in the oil is replaced with sugar and six to eight fatty acids attached.
I'm going to ask you this question, how delicious does that sound?
Does that sound like something that you'd want to put on your dinner table at Thanksgiving?
I'm thinking no.
This molecule is so large that when it moves through the digestive tract enzymes don't
have the time or the ability to digest the fatty acids.
So this was a product that was used in snack foods for example, frying potato chips.
So this was really one of the first examples of a fat replacer that could tolerate high
heat.
There are some problems with this though.
It reduces the absorption of vitamin A and vitamin E. Why would that be the case?
If you remember on your vitamin lecture, vitamin A and vitamin E are fat soluble vitamins.
And so if I'm malabsorbing some fat, as if fat's going in and out without being digested,
it's going to drag along those fat soluble compounds along with it.
It can also reduce the valuable keratinoids that are in carrots and cantaloupe and some
of the other wonderful foods that I always encourage you to eat.
Too much olestra can cause diarrhea, cramps and gas and probably the most popular product
that had olestra in it was wild potato chips.
And I am unbelievably sensitive to the effects of olestra and I can't have two or three chips
without my stomach trying to talk to me and saying, Roberta, that's probably not a really
good idea.
Well, what about the safety of these fat replacers?
If the substance is labeled as grass, then the FDA supplies the evidence that the fat
extender is safe to use in food.
So again, if it's going to be a whey protein, you have whey protein and milk and so no additional
testing needs to be made.
But keep in mind that concerns have been associated with the excess use of these fat extenders.
One is going to be olestra and the other one is a compound called polydextrose, which
is a derivative of glucose that provides bulk and again is oftentimes used as a fat
replacer and ice cream.
And again, both of these have the ability to cause some degree of stomach upset.
These products have been shown in individuals, sensitive individuals, to have a laxative
effect resulting in fatty and leaky stools in the subsequent loss of fat soluble vitamins.
And unfortunately, in my clinical practice, I have seen individuals that were eating wild
potato chips and really had a difficult time making it to the restroom before they really
had oily diarrhea.
Overall, however, most fat substitutes have shown no unknown health risks.
Okay?
Fat replacers in health?
What are we going to do about this?
If it's used in an overall diet plan that promotes the use of healthy fats and a variety
of low-fat products and a balanced calorie intake can be achieved, although low-fat products
seem to reduce calorie intake, if you consume too many of these products, you'll gain weight.
Keep in mind, calories in versus calories out still matter.
So I remember, again, when some of the low-fat foods came on the market, snack well cookies,
and maybe you bought them yourself, there's actually something that's been reported to
be the snack well cookie effect, that what happened was the minute we labeled it low-fat
or reduced fat, people thought, okay, well, I can eat as many as I want because it has
less calories than a regular cookie, and that's where I'm going to say they missed the boat
and didn't read the label, because depending on the type of cookie that you would buy,
you could get just as many calories in a snack well cookie as you could a regular one.
Keep in mind what a manufacturer does.
If they take out the fat, they want you to enjoy the product.
So oftentimes what they're going to do is put more sugar back in.
There is no magic fat replacer that will help to achieve a drastic weight loss, and I think
oftentimes people look at fat replacers or sugar replacers as the magic bullet, okay?
Frequently asked question.
I know I can use applesauce as a replacer in some baked goods.
Bottom line is how do I use these products?
I'm going to tell you, you can use the fruit puree, applesauce, pumpkin, prune.
You can use them to replace about 50% of the oil that is used in that product.
So my great pumpkin cake recipe, actually I use 50% oil, 50% pumpkin.
I have an unbelievably moist cake, and it's absolutely delicious.
So you can reduce the fat in your foods, but having fat-free foods is difficult to obtain.
And thank you very much.
