Greetings and welcome back. In my practice, I'm sometimes asked, what's next? What's
on the horizon in the science of nutrition? The same topic often arises at professional
conferences. Well, I don't have a crystal ball, but I do see some trends. So in this
lecture, we're going to be discussing the future of nutrition. We'll talk a little
bit more about consumer trends a bit later, but I want to tell you about some exciting,
cutting-edge scientific advances in nutrition. Well, you've heard of the Human Genome Project
completed a number of years ago. This was an effort that identified all the 20,000 to
25,000 genes in the human DNA. Thanks to this project, the information that is available
is beginning to integrate science and technology into the healthcare arena for our population.
And that brings us to a word that maybe you haven't heard of before called nutritional
genomics. Incomersing two fields, Neutrogenetics and Neutrogenomics. What are these terms?
Let's define them. Neutrogenetics is a field where the nutritional interventions are planned
around the genetic expression of a disease. So you already know you have someone who has
a genetically linked disease. And an example would be a disease called phenylketonuria,
that is a genetically transmitted disease in which a specific dietary intervention,
such as the manufacturing of a phenylalanine-free infant formula, is the treatment. So we know
what the disease is and the treatment is designed around it.
Neutrogenomics simply stated as eating for your genotype. It is the relationship between
nutrition and specific nutrients with the functioning of the human genome. Think about
it this way. Your genes can determine whether eating a low cholesterol or low sodium diet
for you as an individual will give the desired results. Your own genetic blueprint will truly
give you a one in a million diet prescription. So I want you to just think about the implications
of that for a minute. It also includes the study of the impact of environmental factors
on gene expression. This could include age, diet, smoking, alcohol, and even things like
region of the country. Think about vitamin D. You make more vitamin D in sunny climates
than you do in cold climates. The convergence of these two terms and the information they
provide are necessary to completely cover the benefits of nutritional genomics. So what
is the significance? Common dietary substances can act on the human genome either directly
or indirectly to alter gene expression or structure. Under certain circumstances and
some individuals, diet can be a serious risk factor for the number of diseases. Think of
this as your genetic crystal ball. As an example, if you have a genetic complement that increases
your risk of type 2 diabetes, staying lean, avoiding becoming over fat, and giving regular
physical activity from childhood might be your prescription. You know what's in the future
and now you have the ability to modify it. Some diet regulated genes and their normal
common variants are likely to play a role in the onset, incident, progression, and or
severity of some chronic illnesses. So we might ask the question, who's most likely to develop
cirrhosis of the liver? Not all individuals who consume the same amount of alcohol have
the same progression. Similarly, not all individuals who become obese develop fatty infiltration
of the liver. The secret code and the answer lies in your genes. The degree to which diet
influences the balance between healthy and disease states may depend on the individual's
genetic makeup. Dietary intervention based on the knowledge of a nutrition requirement,
nutritional status, and genotype, remember that individualized nutrition, can be used
to prevent, mitigate, or even possibly cure chronic diseases. And throughout this series,
you haven't heard me say cure disease, but this might be the avenue by which we're able
to do that. This will add a new and personal component to the nutrition assessment process.
In our lecture on creating your own nutrition plan, we talked about the ABC and D of assessment,
and now genes can add the G to that alphabet. Those chronic diseases just mentioned have
become the leading health concerns of public health. Most of the common disorders are diet
related and certainly examples would include cancers, cardiovascular disease, diabetes,
neurological disorders, obesity, osteoporosis, and other inflammatory disorders. All of these
disorders represent an imbalance in homeostasis, which just means the balance of the normal
functioning of the body. They are linked to not only environmental, but diet factors
as the cause. Some of us are far more sensitive to environmental changes and may increase
the inflammatory response linked with many diseases. A specific and individualized approach
to the treatment of these diseases is needed and a solution may be in the near future.
So again, you wouldn't go to a dietitian and get the same 1200 calorie diet that he or
she may prescribe for somebody else. You would get a customized program. Genetic outcomes,
however, are using modified through the interaction of genetic variations and environmental factors.
So please keep in mind the environment is always going to play a role in genetic expression.
So for example, you may have a budding marathon runner in your family who really doesn't like
running long distances. The training he enjoys may ultimately determine his genetic outcome.
So again, we've got a merry environment and genetic expression. Examples of some of the
gene-nutrient interaction discoveries include cholesterol. And we've talked a lot about
cholesterol throughout this course. A gene has been identified called ApoA1 that codes
for the main protein in HDL cholesterol. This gene has a vital role in lipid metabolism.
This data, if you have this data at your hand, this data would give you information on the
type of HDL variant that you possess and that predominates in your blood and what would
be the most beneficial, if any, intervention. So again, traditionally now individuals who
have a low HDL, we prescribe the same thing. This would change the prescription of the
modification of that HDL variant. We've also talked about lipids as well. The LIPC gene,
an enzyme that binds and uptakes lipoproteins, codes for the enzyme hepatic lipase. This
determines your liver's ability to metabolize fat. Again, that may determine who's going
to end up with fatty infiltration of the liver.
Well, let's look at a few more. Caffeine was studied as a risk factor for bone loss in
elderly women. In the results of this study, women who consume more than 300 milligrams
of caffeine, about three cups or 24 ounces of coffee a day, and had a variant of the
vitamin D receptor, small TT genotype, had considerably higher rates of bone loss than
those who had the large TT genotype. So I think, again, your genetic variation is going to
determine whether or not you're going to be the one that's vulnerable to bone loss. So
this data for an individual would give servings and amounts of caffeine that might be tolerated
before the onset of bone loss. Certainly, we have information about green tea and cancer.
Observations have shown that individuals who consume high levels of green tea have a protective
effect against many forms of cancer, and we discuss this in our lecture on nutrition
and cancer. However, this is not the case for individuals carrying the GS TT1 null genotype.
These people lack a particular enzyme involved in detoxification, so people with this null
genotype would be advised to use other food sources for any kind of detoxification process.
So that's almost a strange new world, isn't it? So what is the future of nutrigenomics?
It is predicted that the reaction to findings in nutritional genomics research, the functional
food and nutrition supplement business, will considerably grow in the next decade or so.
More research is needed on the influence of specific nutrients on metabolic pathways
and risk for chronic disease. Research focus, and I think this is a key point, research
focus might need to be refined to control for genetic variation. Right now, our closest
association is looking at ethnic groups. I live in South Texas, and in deep South Texas,
there is Star County. And Star County is unique in the fact that a good percentage of people
who are born in Star County don't ever leave, and so they have a relatively homogeneous
genetic pool. So it is one of the most common places in the United States to study, for
example, diabetes, because the gene pool has remained intact in Star County. This new approach
of nutrient-gene interactions may redefine the current practice of what we call preventive
medicine today. So what are some key points that you could think about? Dietitians armed
with all this data could specifically tailor their message to each individual based on
that individual's outcome of gene interactions and nutrient intake. This method would allow
people in turn to tailor their dietary and lifestyle decisions. Now, the success is
often times going to depend on adequate communication among health care providers and researchers,
as well as the correct dissemination of information to the community and to consumers. So you
can imagine how this information might be received. What's going to happen to the diet
book industry, for example? If indeed, we're all unique individuals, the sales of those
books may be tailored, and you might see some new things appear on your bookshelves. Another
exciting new advance in the science of nutrition is metabolomics. Again, another word that
you're probably not familiar with. Defined by researchers by the name of German Watkins
and Fay, metabolomics is a comprehensive profiling of individual metabolites. Again,
metabolites can be food metabolites, or they can certainly be metabolites in your own body
processes that are linked to an understanding of health and human metabolism. As with nutritional
genomics, this science is emerging to provide people with unique individualized health goals
based on their own metabolic profile. This means that the prevention of metabolic illness
is more than just steering people away from current health problems. It means our focus
could change, and now we would direct metabolism in an individual way towards an optimal, personal,
metabolic state. Dietary health is contingent on more than just genetics, so using genotype
alone will not be enough to assess someone's personal health status. So what's our key point
with this? In the future, comprehensive direct assessment of your health will replace what
we do now, which are looking at a single biomarker to treat disease. For example, we currently
look at your cholesterol for heart disease and your glucose for diabetes. What we might
look at in the future is to expand this a little bit larger and say, how do you as an individual
respond to inflammation? How do you as an individual respond to other things in terms
of glucose for the management of diabetes? So I always say, stay tuned for more developments.
Metabolite information, unlike genetic information, can change throughout a person's life due
to aging, diet, and other lifestyle choices. So what might be true in terms of your metabolic
profile when you're 20 may not be true when you're 50. Because of this, agreeing to have
one's health evaluated through metabolomics may be an intermediary step between current
practice and the use of nutrigenomics for assessing diet-related health concerns. Well,
what might the benefits of metabolomics be? It will be a complete personalized individual
view of your metabolism revealed through this method. Think of those individuals who struggle
to lose weight. This might be the answer to the question for that individual person. Is
my weight solely inherited or is it mostly environmental? So think about this. You may
have a genetic predisposition to becoming obese, but as you go through the life cycle,
your metabolites and your blood change and now the weight loss plan that worked for you
in your 20s needs to be modified and customized for you as you age. Metabolic changes in individuals
are oftentimes again due to environmental and lifestyle changes in aging. These can
be identified by this new process. Possible health outcomes and vulnerabilities of individuals
to metabolic stress may be predicted. Now with all of this, we have to stop and reflect
about the ethics in this emerging science. So what are some of the things to consider?
So although this sounds like, oh my goodness, this is so wonderful, we have to stop back
and think, what might the consequence be? Well, some of the things we have to consider
is how are we going to secure and safeguard confidentiality? What about ensuring privacy
rights? What about this big one facing the discrimination regarding insurance coverage
and employment? So if an insurance provider understands that you are at significantly greater
risk of heart disease or significantly greater risk of diabetes, may employment discrimination
emerge? Certainly dealing with the genetic examination of children and some of the limits
of parental authority. Deciding whether you as an individual want to share this personal
information with other family members. So that's again this strange new world of what's
coming in the future in terms of that diet and disease relationship. And now I think
we can change our focus and start to take a look at some food related trends. What are
consumers interested in in the future? Well according to the Mental Trends Study, which
is a consumer survey, about 70% of U.S. adults are attempting to consume healthier diets.
Most consumers are interested in nutrition and try and make healthy choices when purchasing
products. What about customer or consumer preferences? As we have seen, science suggests
that advanced diagnostics are on the way, but trends of American eating patterns still
drive food selection and market driven products. So again the Mental Study shows us these trends.
What was learned seems to indicate diverging trends. We as American consumers, we want
something that's quick and easy, but we also want this back to basics. We want again maybe
a little bit more holistic approach to nutrition. What are some of the things and convenience
that Americans consumers want? We want portability and we want one handed consumption. I'm always
a little concerned about this one handed consumption. So does that mean we want to have foods that
we can drive with? Does this mean we want to be able to multitask at our desks and eat
our lunch in one hand and type with another? But we certainly want things that are convenient.
It's also on the rise in many families with young children who are always on the go. I
certainly remember when my son played high school soccer. I worked full time and we ate
a lot of sandwich dinners at 10 o'clock at night because I didn't have everything convenient
that I needed to have to fix a home cooked dinner when we got home so late. We also want
ways of bringing a restaurant experience into our home and you might notice this when you
go to the grocery store right now. Some examples include things like microwavable panini sandwiches.
Some of the gourmet frozen pasta dinners for families like chicken, broccoli, fettuccine,
alfredo, things that you would normally get in a restaurant are now kind of emerging to
the American table. Customer convenience and packaging and preparation. We now have resealable
cookie and cracker packages, plastic reusable lunch meat containers, microwavable packages
of frozen vegetables that are already pre-seasoned for us. So we want convenient but we also want
this back to the basics trend. Many consumers have seemed to reverse their food consumption
patterns. Now even the Mintel study showed a focus on cooking homemade meals versus convenience
products. I will tell you, in my family, my daughter always played sports growing up
in high school and so she goes to college and she calls me and says, mom, I really need
to know how to heat up a lean cuisine dinner. And I said, well you just pop it in the microwave.
And she said, but is it microwavable safe? And it taught me that she not only didn't
really know convenience foods, she certainly didn't know how to make a home cooked meal.
So now we're seeing on television cooking channels and other things that are teaching
us to make things that are almost homemade. So I think the Mintel study survey is showing
us that we want homemade meals, but we might want to integrate homemade and convenience.
Some consumers are not using all the new and improved products. They're going back to basics
and purchasing whole food and cooking at home. We've discussed in previous lectures almost
the resurgence of the farmer's market in terms of bringing people some fresher produce to
their table. Others, again, are participating in growing their own produce through home gardens
or herb gardens or being involved in community garden projects. The challenge, however, is
to oftentimes marry the desire to have all of these more natural type products with our
hectic American lifestyle. So using whole foods instead of highly processed foods is
a trend that's becoming popular among all populations. The question is, how do we get
that done? So when we think, okay, we've got this, I need convenient, I need portable,
but I also want homemade. Doesn't this conflict? Aren't these conflicting messages? But actually,
if you think about it, these trends actually converge. For example, I will admit, I purchase
pre-cut vegetables to make a stir fry at home. So I like the convenience of pre-cut fresh,
but I also have to have something that's homemade. I like that homemade flavor. Or combining
pre-cutter frozen fruits and yogurt from making your own homemade smoothies. Again, one of
my favorite things to do is take a bag of frozen fruit, semi-defrosted, put it in a
food processor with a carton of yogurt, and now I've got a smoothie that will rival any
of the companies that are out there. So we want convenience and we want freshness at
the same time. So if I'm a marketing agent, I'm going to look at how am I going to get
these two trends to marry. According to the Nutrition and New Food Trends Survey, choosing
whole grains has also become a priority. Ninety-four percent of respondents in this
survey stated whole grains are healthier than refined carbohydrates, so that whole grain
message is out. So you'll see food manufacturers that are trying to come up with unique front-of-package
labeling to manage that consumer trend. Additionally, respondents in the study said that they have
reduced their intake of dairy, pork, and beef. It is unclear whether this is just wellness
driven to avoid saturated fat, or could it be economically driven? These are very high
cost sources of protein, and again, it could be both or one. We don't have really all the
data on that. Certainly consumers are reporting increasing consumption of fruits and vegetables.
This shift in food choice will influence the directions of sustainability, nutrition counseling,
as well as the health conditions of the population. So when we look at the future of nutrition,
what we're really looking at is what does the science say is up and coming, and what
are we doing now? What are Americans interested in now? And I think, again, that summarizes
nicely the future of nutrition. Well, on to those frequently asked questions. When do
you think nutritional genomics and metabolomics will be viable options in the tool kits of
health professionals? And again, this is really looking into the crystal ball. Clearly,
the trend exists now in examining the outcome of genetic expression with advanced lipid
analyses. There's a company in the United States, and there are many, but this is just
one called the Berkeley Heart Health Labs, and it does just this. It sub-fractionates
LDL and HDL into its individual types to learn a little bit more about the type of carrier
protein. And oftentimes, the carrier protein is very effective at getting rid of the cholesterol
or is the carrier protein ineffective, and now that LDL gets deposited into our arterial
walls. So we already have some of this advanced diagnostics available. And again, what it's
looking at is the genetic expression of the protein subtypes that are going to be responsible
for transporting LDL and HDL to its respective delivery points. We also can see genetic testing
for athletic performance, and that's already available as well, suggesting that you can
determine your muscle fiber type predisposition. This would supposedly tell parents if their
offspring could run marathons or would they be better suited to running sprints. And certainly
there are countries in the world that already use some of this testing to decide who's
going to do what in the Olympics. So again, although we might think of this as a strange
new world, there are things out there. I'm also going to remind you about the ethical
dilemmas associated with that. So I think the real challenge is, if indeed you had a
son or daughter who was genetically gifted to run sprints, but they hated that, forcing
them into an event that they didn't like or enjoy would really take away some of the pleasure
of sports. So there are some companies offering those kinds of services now, but reliable
interventions may be available on a more regular basis within the next five years. So again,
stay tuned. Another frequently asked question, do you feel that metabolomics will be used
to counter the effects of aging? Well, possibly, but it also raises some questions. So say
for example, what you could do in your 20s, your genetically, your metabolites in your
blood are saying, I can lose weight like this in my 20s, but I can't in my 50s. What if
you can't lose weight despite not being genetically behind the eight ball? I'm understanding this
and thinking, okay, wait a minute, my genetic or my metabolomics is saying I should be able
to lose this weight, but I can't. And I think oftentimes what we're missing here is the
environment is always going to play a significant role. So just because your metabolomics is
saying, yep, you can lose weight this way, the challenge is if you don't account for
the environment, you may not be able to get the desired results. So I think when we look
at this, you always have to think of, yes, this is going to give us more data, but it
isn't necessarily going to solve all the problems if indeed we also don't look at that environmental
expression. Okay, as we look at food trends, another question that I get is new foods show
up in the market shelves all the time. How can I tell if they're good for me or my family?
Well, I always suggest go back to the basics following that Mintel survey study. Go back
to the basics. Is it a whole food? Is it minimally processed? And again, I think the challenge
is trying to integrate convenience along with that. So again, the more hands that touch
it, the more items on the ingredient list, the more likely it is to be not as healthy
as a minimally processed food. Another question, you mentioned that food choices will influence
the direction of health conditions of a population. In your view, are we doing better or worse
than when you started your practice when it comes to our eating habits? And actually I
believe we're doing worse. We're always taking a look at, well, you know, I don't understand
why I'm overweight. When I first started in clinical practice, I didn't see the degree
of obesity that I see now. The largest person in my practice that I've ever taken care of
is over a thousand pounds. And when I started long time ago, when I started almost 30 years
ago, I didn't see this. And I now consider obesity the tsunami of public health diseases
because obesity is linked with heart disease and cancer. So actually I think it's worse.
So I think when we have all the answers, including both our genetic expression, metabolomics,
will have more answers to this dilemma. But again, I think in terms of a public health
strategy, when we're talking about obesity, we really have to look at both global and
individual strategies because I don't think we can look at just the genetic blueprint and
say that's going to be the magic bullet of weight loss. We're also going to have to take
a look at environmental issues as well. And thank you very much.
