These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by the teaching company.
The Great Courses covered a broad array of university-level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in just weeks.
Browse our catalog or website and imagine how much you can learn
if you spent just 30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lectures are university professors carefully selected by the teaching company and its customers
for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
These lectures are titled How Conversation Works.
Six Lessons for Better Communication.
Your lecture is Professor Ann Kersan.
Dr. Kersan is Arthur F. Thurnau, Professor of English at the University of Michigan.
She received her BA in Linguistics from Yale University
and both her MA and PhD in English Language and Literature from the University of Michigan.
Professor Kersan has published on a wide range of topics including Linguistics, Pedagogy and Lexicography
and is a member of the Usage Panel of the American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language.
She has received numerous teaching awards and shares her insights on language
on Michigan Radio's weekly segment That's What They Say.
Lecture 1 How to Become Conversationally Aware
Choose a day from the past week and think about all that you accomplished
from the moment you woke up to when you went to sleep.
Now, unless you were on a deserted island last week, all by yourself, which seems unlikely,
consider how many of those things involve talking with someone else,
either speaking in person or on the phone, or talking with someone online.
When we think about it this way, we quickly realize how many of the important things we do involve having conversations.
It's how we get things done at work, at home, over the phone, over email, in stores,
in a neighbor's front yard as we walk the dog.
It's how we create, maintain, deepen and repair relationships with other people.
I think we've all been in conversations where we realize that things are not going well,
but we may not be able to pinpoint exactly why.
We can be left wondering, is it something I'm doing?
Why is this other person proving so hard to talk to?
Why is she getting so annoyed when I'm giving her helpful advice?
Why does it feel like he doesn't mean yes when he says yes?
I'll be talking about exactly these kinds of issues in this course,
and I'll show you what you can be working on to become ever more skilled at making conversations work well.
And I'll tell you right now that one key component of doing conversations better
is becoming more conversationally aware of what you and others are doing,
both as speakers and listeners.
People can forget about this second part about how important good listening is.
As you become more aware, you will also become ever more savvy.
The great thing?
You are going to have lots of opportunities every day to practice what we'll be talking about.
And I do mean lots of opportunities.
If you're anything like the people in a study published in the journal Science in 2007,
you probably utter about 16,000 words a day.
It doesn't matter if you're a man or a woman.
There is this idea out there that women talk more.
The number remains about 16,000.
And that number does not take into account all the words that you are typing in text messages,
emails on Facebook, and so on.
You are going to be amazed by how much you can learn by stepping back from conversations
and examining how they work.
You will get an entirely new perspective on what kind of speaker you are,
the strategies you rely on, often without even realizing it,
and the ones you don't,
but strategies that other speakers may be using with you.
All of this will give you a richer repertoire
for accomplishing things with words in your daily conversations.
Once you're more cognizant of what you and others are doing in conversation
or, as importantly, not doing in conversation,
you can more consciously decide if and how you want to do things differently.
In other words, with heightened awareness,
you can be more strategic in making conversational choices.
Now, I have to be honest with you.
In the short run, this course may make you so self-conscious
you can barely function normally.
You're going to be noticing conversational happenings all the time.
When I taught this course at the University of Michigan,
students enrolled for a variety of reasons.
Some of them were in the business school
and they wanted to be smoother in their professional interactions.
Some of the students wanted to improve their game,
have better ways of asking people out.
But by week three, they came in and they said,
this course is not helping.
I'm noticing everything and I'm so self-conscious that I can barely speak.
But in the long run, as these students discovered,
this conversational noticing becomes more routine
and it allows you to be a more successful conversationalist
from rescuing a conversation gone wrong
to negotiating a tricky request to successfully apologizing.
I'm Ann Curzan and one of the many things I love about my field of English linguistics
is that it allows us to understand more fully the language that we experience every day.
This is information that we can take out there in the world
to understand things differently.
As you listen to these lectures and then go out into this world filled with talk,
you will notice things you hadn't noticed before.
For example, what work can the word um do?
Let me give you an example.
You ask me, Ann, could I borrow your laptop for 20 minutes?
And I say, um, I probably don't even need to finish that sentence
because you know I'm about to say no.
That little um is a precursor to what linguists call a disperfered response.
The preferred response here would be yes, but I'm about to say no.
And even after that um, I probably take my time.
Um, I actually have some work I need to get done,
at which point you may jump in and say, no worries.
And look, I didn't even have to say no.
I want to note here that um does other work too,
as we'll talk about in other lectures, not all ums are created equal.
As a second example, how and why do we talk about the weather?
I'm actually going to leave that as a teaser for the second lecture,
but I'll tell you now that it's more than just a conversation starter.
It can signal other things in a conversation.
How's that for a conversational strategy?
I put an interesting topic on the table and then I leave it there
so you can wait for another lecture.
We will explore all the signals we give and receive many, many times
every single day in the intricate dance of conversation.
And we'll talk about both the conversations we have in person
and the conversations we have over email or text,
as all of this is now an important part of our social lives
and of our fundamental well-being.
It may surprise you to learn that we have empirical evidence
suggesting that talk is an important part of happiness
and specifically substantive talk, substantive conversations.
This is coming from a study published in Psychological Science in 2010
by researchers at the University of Arizona and Washington University.
Their results found not just a correlation between well-being
and spending less time alone and more time talking.
It turns out that the kind of talk matters.
The happiest folks spent less time doing small talk
and more time having substantive conversations.
We'll actually talk about both.
Small talk can serve some very important purposes
and is a key social skill.
It's part of being a good conversationalist.
Then there are the valuable skills involved in engaging in substantive conversation.
Now, one of these may feel easier to you than the other.
Or maybe they both feel hard and there's a reason for that.
They both involve doing some serious work.
Perhaps you are saying right now,
but I thought we were talking about happiness and we are.
But good conversation, that ingredient to happiness, requires work.
Good conversation does not happen all by itself.
And it doesn't happen if not everyone is pulling their weight with the work.
Let's listen in to a couple of people sitting next to each other at a dinner party.
They know each other only casually and need to create conversation.
Listen to their conversation and then we'll talk.
Hi, Jane. I'm so glad to see you again.
Hi, Jane. Good to see you here, too.
So, are the kids having a good summer?
Yes, busy.
Are they both still swimming?
Because I thought I saw something in the newsletter, the community newsletter that they were.
Yes, still quite seriously.
Wow. You know, I think that's great as long as they're both enjoying it.
When I was a kid, I was seriously into tennis.
But by college, I was completely burned out.
I barely even touched your racket since then.
Oh, I didn't realize you were a tennis player.
Yeah, I was on the junior tournament circuit and everything. That was pretty good.
I had a really good serve. The whole secret of serve is for power.
You throw the racket, but don't let go. You get that snapping motion.
Like that.
So, you're oldest. She must be thinking about colleges now, yes?
Well, actually, she just finished her sophomore year.
Really? For some reason, I thought she was going to be a senior.
Well, does that mean you'll be visiting some campuses this year?
Yes, I guess so.
Look at all that work Jim is doing.
And I've been there, as you probably have, too.
Where you're sitting there thinking, is this person ever going to pull their weight in this conversation?
Jim asked four questions in this brief span and got pretty minimal responses,
which didn't give him much to work with.
Jane asked no questions in return.
In the process, Jim offered multiple topics,
but Jane neither followed up with any questions nor offered anything of her own to help.
She left Jim to try something new or simply be silent
and turn to the person on the other side to see if that would work better.
It's no wonder that Jim might find this conversation exhausting.
What is going on with Jane?
Doesn't she want to talk?
Or is she just not skilled at this?
Too much time texting and not enough time face-to-face?
People worry that electronic conversation is eroding our in-person conversational skills.
In 2012, a study by Sherry Turkle along these lines made headlines in the New York Times.
She's been studying how we are, quote, alone together, each interacting with our own device.
These devices allow us to converse in sips, not gulps, as she puts it.
Not to patiently allow a conversation to develop and over time allow that trust to grow that comes with conversation.
Turkle encourages us not to confuse connection with conversation
and urges us to find times and spaces to talk, to put down those electronic devices and talk to each other.
Now, I don't know whether or not people are worse in-person conversationalists than they used to be,
but it does sound like some people are feeling like they may not have developed those skills.
Conversation involves a skill set.
Being a good conversationalist is not something that comes naturally to anyone who can speak,
and we all know that from having met people who are not good conversationalists.
It takes focus and practice.
The good news is that it is an acquirable skill set if you work on it,
which means not fleeing from conversation, as Turkle reminds us.
Conversation is a kind of work, but it's enormously rewarding as it is how we establish deeper human connections.
An important point to consider is that for conversations to feel less like work for everyone involved,
it helps if we share responsibility for the work.
Conversational work involves all the ways that we facilitate conversations,
asking questions, providing informative answers, introducing new topics,
picking up other people's topics, telling good stories, helping good stories along.
For a conversation to work well, it's not just that two people have to talk, otherwise it would be a monologue.
For it to work well, those two people need to share the work.
They need to share the conversational burden.
It needs to be that back and forth.
So how can you facilitate that?
There are some easy steps that any of you can take to share the conversational work,
which can make conversations feel more mutual, shared, and much more fun.
As you'll notice in this advice, the work does not just involve talking, but also active listening.
Good listening is not just sitting passively, but also responding in the moment and planning future responses.
It also involves work.
So I'm going to give you three pieces of advice.
First, ask your fair share of questions, whether this is someone you know well or someone you don't know well.
If this is someone you don't know, I'd think of it this way.
Pretty much everyone is interesting.
See if you can figure out what makes this person interesting.
Not that this is an interview and asking too many rapid-fire questions can start to feel intense for that other person or even intrusive.
But ask follow-up questions about someone's job or travels or children, whatever else they put on the table.
As someone's talking, you then should be multitasking, processing what they're saying, and thinking of follow-up questions.
Follow-up questions are a great way to show how well you're listening, and that is a very cooperative move.
If this is someone you know well, you can think of questions as a way to learn what's really going on with this person.
Again, follow-up questions can be key.
This other person you're talking to that you know well says that work this week was okay.
Rather than just leave it there, ask if they had to work late, or if anything funny happened,
or whether they heard from their co-worker about the thing you talked about last week.
You're showing then that you care and that you listen, not just to that conversation but to conversations you've had in the past.
Second, help other people to be able to ask you questions.
Now, what do I mean by this?
We are helping other people, if we put on the table things they might find interesting or be able to talk more about.
And I think an example here will be helpful.
Let's think about how we introduce ourselves in terms of how easy or hard we make the conversation from there.
Let's imagine the different ways I can tell someone what I do.
We're back at the dinner party, and someone asked me, Anne, what do you do?
Here are two different options for how I respond.
First, I could respond, I teach English linguistics.
I can tell you from experience this can be a conversation stopper.
Not everyone is sure what linguistics is, and if they're not sure, this may not be the moment that they want to ask.
Even if they do know what linguistics is, they still may not have a ready follow-up question if that's all I give them.
Now, here's a second response.
I say, I teach English linguistics, often courses on the history of the English language and how conversations work.
What this really means is that I'm a fount of random linguistic information, and I vote on the word of the year.
Now, this response opens up a few things that this other person could ask me about if they want to.
What's the word of the year?
Tell me a random linguistic fact, as I have put on the table some accessible topics that might be of interest.
The flip side of this piece of advice is to pay attention to the openings that other people give you and ask follow-up questions.
Jane could have done this in the conversation that we listened in on when Jim put tennis on the table, but she chose not to.
Third, put interesting topics on the table and pick up topics other people put on the table.
Okay, if we're going to talk, we need to have things to talk about.
This can be easier when we know someone well, so let's start with someone we barely know.
Imagine this, we've introduced ourselves, we've gone through those standard questions about, say, work, where someone's lived, that kind of thing.
Small talk is out of the way.
Now what?
One good strategy is to have a couple of interesting accessible topics on hand.
You can prepare this ahead of time.
This could be, for example, something you read in the newspaper or heard on the radio, not necessarily the hot button political topics, but some of the specialized interest stories.
For example, at a dinner party I might put on the table an article I read about the effects of concussions on football players.
You don't have to be a sports fan to find that topic interesting.
Or perhaps I put on the table a movie and ask if people have seen it because I think that might generate some good conversation.
What you're doing when you do this is finding some shared ground for conversation and others will be very grateful that you have done so.
With someone we know well, we could tell a story that we think that person will be interested in or follow up on something we talked about earlier.
So you could say something like, I've been thinking about what we were talking about yesterday or say, so am I way to work this morning?
You'll notice here that I'm just putting a topic on the table.
There are times when we should not wait for a question to put a new topic on the table.
We just launch in and say, you know, I was reading this article the other day and then we hope the conversation will go from there.
Then be sure to notice when someone has done the same thing for you and pick up that topic.
It is just terrible to watch a topic die on the table.
Someone puts something out there and then nobody picks it up.
Don't let topics die.
When somebody else puts a topic on the table, pick it up and see where the conversation goes.
Now there's potentially a gender difference here.
There's a famous study by Pamela Fishman from 1978, which I know is old now, but it's still interesting and potentially telling.
The study focused on who in a heterosexual relationship does more of the grunt work in conversation.
Fishman studied three heterosexual couples in their homes.
Can you imagine these people had recorders on all day long?
And in this study, she found a couple of things.
First, women asked two and a half times more questions.
Men made twice as many statements and almost always got a response from the women.
And doing that kind of response to a statement is very cooperative.
Second, women introduced more topics, but more than half of their topics failed because the men did not pick them up.
Men introduced fewer topics, but none of their topics failed because the women picked them up.
In other words, in this study, women were doing more of the conversational work, carrying the conversational burden.
Why women?
Well, many women have been socialized into the role of being a conversational facilitator and see that as their role in a situation.
It can be part of being feminine to be a good conversationalist.
In contrast, the stereotype of a masculine man is sometimes monosyllabic, not being a good conversationalist.
It may also be about power.
If women see themselves in a situation as in a less powerful position, they may feel obliged to facilitate the conversation to pick up a topic from someone else.
Now, as soon as I say that, you may be thinking, but I know women who are bad conversationalists and men who are really chatty.
So do I, and I think we all do.
As soon as there's a stereotype and there are plenty of them about men and women, we can and should think of the exceptions.
So let's talk for a few minutes about the idea that there might be gender differences in how we talk, as this will continue to come up throughout the course.
Studies disagree about just how differently men and women talk, and most of these studies have focused on heterosexual men and women.
Some studies, like Fishmans, have found differences.
Who's asking questions versus who's making assertions?
Who's using more polite language?
And some people argue that women use more polite language.
Now, others have challenged those results, saying it depends on much more than gender.
For example, setting is so important, public settings versus private settings.
Some studies have shown that women talk more in private settings than in public settings.
Other people say the question is clearly more complicated than men and women.
Gender is part of our identities, but so is our sexual orientation, race and ethnicity, class, age.
All of these affect how we talk.
But for right now, we'll focus on gender and how it may shape the way we talk in conversation.
Let me say this first. It's not about biology.
There's nothing about being biologically male or female that makes you talk in a particular way, except pitch, how deep your voice is.
That is biological.
This is mostly about socialization.
Let me also say that all of us talk more similarly than we do differently.
But people believe pretty strongly in gender difference between men and women, and that can affect how we talk.
In other words, if we believe men and women talk differently, then we can enact that difference by talking how we think a woman talks or how we think a man talks.
There's a useful theoretical idea here about what it means to do gender.
The idea is that while we have biological sex, we do gender. We perform it.
From the time we are little, we learn how to perform it.
Let me give you some examples here about learning feminine and masculine ways to do things.
How do you check your fingernails?
The stereotype of the feminine way to do it is to hold up the back of your hand and look at your fingernails.
The masculine way to do it is to put your hand more in a fist facing you and look at your fingernails.
How do you check to see if there's something on the bottom of your shoe?
Again, the more feminine way to do it is to kick your foot up behind you and check.
The more masculine way to do it is to bring your foot up in front and check.
Where do you carry your books?
Women tend to carry them up in front of their chest. That's seen as the more feminine way.
The more masculine way is to carry them down by your side.
And then there's the question of how we sit.
Cross-legged, legs wide apart.
Sometimes when I'm talking about this, I'll stop the room, we'll freeze and see how everyone's sitting.
And we tend to see that more women are sitting with their legs crossed.
That's not biological.
The fact is that we pick up on subtle cues from the time we're young
about how we're supposed to do all these things and how we're supposed to talk.
We learn how we're supposed to talk to express gender, sexual orientation and other parts of our identity.
Really interesting studies show things like some boys lower their pitch
before there's a biological reason to do so because they've heard men with lower pitch,
and they're trying to perform that gender.
These kids are also imitating adults around them in terms of who's asking questions,
who's making listening noises, who's making assertions, who's using particular kinds of words,
and they get feedback about whether they're performing well.
But of course, we also talk differently in different situations.
I speak differently at work when I'm expressing a professional authority than I do at home
when I'm having more intimate conversations with family.
Now, of course, I'm still a woman in both of these situations,
but my speech style is varying as I'm expressing different parts of my identity in different situations.
Given all of this, you can probably understand why there isn't one set of rules
for how to have a good conversation or how to be effective as a speaker in all settings.
A good example here is that a female boss and a male boss saying the same thing can be read very differently
because people's expectations for how that woman or that man will talk are different.
This came to the fore in the 1980s when there were training programs for women
where they were trying to have women be more assertive in the workplace,
but women being assertive in the workplace actually didn't always go over well.
It doesn't mean that women in the workplace can't strategically get done what they need to get done
because, of course, they can.
But given expectations for how all of us will talk,
we each of us may have to do it slightly differently in every situation,
understanding the context and who we're talking to.
That said, there are general principles that underlie effective conversations
and fundamental lessons that we can learn from those principles,
and we'll be talking about those in this course.
And then we all benefit from conversational awareness.
Let's revisit the couple we saw earlier and see what happens
when this particular man and woman share the conversational work
and begin to forge an interesting and lively connection.
Hey, Jane. It's good to see you again.
Hey, Jim. Good to see you here.
So are the kids enjoying their summer?
Yes, but busy.
They're both still swimming for the club team every day, sometimes twice a day.
I think it's great as long as they both still enjoy it.
They really do.
You know, I have to admit, I find it a little hard to understand.
I find it incredibly boring swimming, staring at that black line for a half an hour or more,
even once a week.
I'm glad to hear that they still find it fun.
I wonder if it helps that there's a team involved.
You know, when I was a kid, I was seriously into tennis.
But by college, I was completely burned out.
Barely touched a racket since then.
Huh. I didn't know you were a tennis player.
Do you think you'll pick it up again?
Maybe.
So much more fun.
There was a lot going on here.
Good questions and answers that opened up new conversational opportunities.
Both Jane and Jim offered new subjects, both followed up with questions.
There was a little humor.
It was an even exchange.
And both of them suggest to the other that they're engaged, listening,
and interested in learning from the other person and sharing with that person.
Of course, language is only one of the ways that we present ourselves to the world
and negotiate relationships.
Conversations involve a lot of body language too.
You probably noticed the way that Jane and Jim were making more eye contact
in that second example, how they leaned in to hear each other and smiled.
They also turned toward each other as a way to show engagement.
We know how much the nonverbal aspects of conversations matter.
And I'll point these things out to you in the examples to come.
But as a linguist, as someone who makes a living writing about,
thinking about, and noticing how other people and how I myself use words,
I want to talk with you primarily about the wise and effective use of words
to forge connections and to accomplish things.
All of this talk happens on what linguists sometimes call the conversational floor.
And that is the topic of the next lecture.
Are you an interrupter?
Or perhaps you're someone who gets interrupted?
Are you concerned that perhaps you use um too much and you're not sure why?
We'll turn to these questions in the next lecture.
And I promise to return to why and how we talk about the weather.
Between now and then, I'd like to challenge you to engage someone you don't know that well
in a substantive conversation and learn something interesting.
Watch yourself doing the conversational work as you have this conversation.
And I hope sharing the conversational work.
Ask open-ended questions, listen actively, introduce topics,
pick up the other person's topics, and follow the conversation where it leads you.
I hope you have fun.
