Undergraduate Topics in Computer Science
Sandro Skansi
Introduction
to Deep
Learning
From Logical Calculus to Artificial
Intelligence

Undergraduate Topics in Computer
Science
Series editor
Ian Mackie
Advisory editors
Samson Abramsky, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Chris Hankin, Imperial College London, London, UK
Mike Hinchey, University of Limerick, Limerick, Ireland
Dexter C. Kozen, Cornell University, Ithaca, USA
Andrew Pitts, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
Hanne Riis Nielson, Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Steven S. Skiena, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, USA
Iain Stewart, University of Durham, Durham, UK

Undergraduate Topics in Computer Science (UTiCS) delivers high-quality instruc-
tional content for undergraduates studying in all areas of computing and information
science. From core foundational and theoretical material to final-year topics and
applications, UTiCS books take a fresh, concise, and modern approach and are ideal
for self-study or for a one- or two-semester course. The texts are all authored by
established experts in their fields, reviewed by an international advisory board, and
contain numerous examples and problems. Many include fully worked solutions.
More information about this series at http://www.springer.com/series/7592

Sandro Skansi
Introduction to Deep
Learning
From Logical Calculus to Artificial
Intelligence
123

Sandro Skansi
University of Zagreb
Zagreb
Croatia
ISSN 1863-7310
ISSN 2197-1781
(electronic)
Undergraduate Topics in Computer Science
ISBN 978-3-319-73003-5
ISBN 978-3-319-73004-2
(eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-73004-2
Library of Congress Control Number: 2017963994
© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part
of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations,
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and transmission
or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar
methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from
the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this
book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the
authors or the editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or
for any errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Printed on acid-free paper
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer International Publishing AG
part of Springer Nature
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

Preface
This textbook contains no new scientific results, and my only contribution was to
compile existing knowledge and explain it with my examples and intuition. I have
made a great effort to cover everything with citations while maintaining a fluent
exposition, but in the modern world of the ‘electron and the switch’ it is very hard
to properly attribute all ideas, since there is an abundance of quality material online
(and the online world became very dynamic thanks to the social media). I will do
my best to correct any mistakes and omissions for the second edition, and all
corrections and suggestions will be greatly appreciated.
This book uses the feminine pronoun to refer to the reader regardless of the
actual gender identity. Today, we have a highly imbalanced environment when it
comes to artificial intelligence, and the use of the feminine pronoun will hopefully
serve to alleviate the alienation and make the female reader feel more at home while
reading this book.
Throughout this book, I give historical notes on when a given idea was first
discovered. I do this to credit the idea, but also to give the reader an intuitive
timeline. Bear in mind that this timeline can be deceiving, since the time an idea or
technique was first invented is not necessarily the time it was adopted as a technique
for machine learning. This is often the case, but not always.
This book is intended to be a first introduction to deep learning. Deep learning is
a special kind of learning with deep artificial neural networks, although today deep
learning and artificial neural networks are considered to be the same field. Artificial
neural networks are a subfield of machine learning which is in turn a subfield of
both statistics and artificial intelligence (AI). Artificial neural networks are vastly
more popular in artificial intelligence than in statistics. Deep learning today is not
happy with just addressing a subfield of a subfield, but tries to make a run for the
whole AI. An increasing number of AI fields like reasoning and planning, which
were once the bastions of logical AI (also called the Good Old-Fashioned AI, or
GOFAI), are now being tackled successfully by deep learning. In this sense, one
might say that deep learning is an approach in AI, and not just a subfield of a
