is not an input neuron. A sentence like this is realizable in a neural network if and
only if the network can compute it, and all sentences for which there is a network
which computes them are called a temporal propositional expression (T PE). Notice
that T PEs have a logical characterization. The main result of the paper (asides from
defining artificial neural networks) is that any T PE can be computed by an artificial
neural network. This paper would be cited later by John von Neumann as a major
influence in his own work. This is just a short and incomplete glimpse into this
exciting historical paper, but let us return to the story of the second protagonist.
3This was 15 years before artificial intelligence was defined as a scientific field.

4
1
From Logic to Cognitive Science
Walter Pitts was an interesting person, and, one could argue, the father of artificial
neural networks. At the age of 12, he ran away from home and hid in a library,
where he read Principia Mathematica [7] by the famous logician Bertrand Russell.
Pitts contacted Russell, who invited him to come to study at Cambridge under his
tutorship, but Pitts was still a child. Several years later, Pitts, now a teenager, found
out that Russell was holding a lecture at the University of Chicago. He met with
Russell in person, and Russell told him to go and meet his old friend from Vienna,
the logician Rudolph Carnap, who was a professor there. Carnap gave Pitts his
seminal book Logical Syntax of Language4 [6], which would highly influence Pitts
in the following years. After his initial contact with Carnap, Pitts disappeared for a
year, and Carnap could not find him, but after he did, he used his academic influence
to get Pitts a student job at the university, so that Pitts does not have to do menial
jobs during days and ghostwrite student papers during nights just to survive.
Another person Pitts met during Russell was Jerome Lettvin, who at the time was
a pre-med student there, and who would later become neurologist and psychiatrist
by degree, but he will also write papers in philosophy and politics. Pitts and Lettvin
became close friends, and would eventually write an influential paper together (along
with McCulloch and Maturana) titled What the Frog’s Eye Tells the Frog’s Brain in
1959 [8]. Lettvin would also introduce Pitts to the mathematician Norbert Weiner
from MIT who later became known as the father of cybernetics, a field colloquially
known as ‘the science of steering’, dedicated to studying system control both in
biological and artificial systems. Weiner invited Pitts to come to work at MIT (as
a lecturer in formal logic) and the two men worked together for a decade. Neural
networks were at this time considered to be a part of cybernetics, and Pitts and
McCulloch were very active in the field, both attending the Macy conferences, with
McCulloch becoming the president of the American Society for Cybernetics in 1967–
1968. During his stay at Chicago, Pitts also met the theoretical physicist Nicolas
Rashevsky, who was a pioneer in mathematical biophysics, a field which tried to
explain biological processes with a combination of logic and physics. Physics might
seem distant to neural networks, but in fact, we will soon discuss the role physicists
played in the history of deep learning.
Pitts would remain connected with the University, but he had minor jobs there due
to his lack of formal academic credentials, and in 1944 was hired by the Kellex Cor-
poration (with the help of Weiner), which participated in the Manhattan project. He
detested the authoritarian General Groves (head of the Manhattan project), and would
play pranks to mock the strict and sometimes meaningless rules that he enacted. He
was granted an Associate of Arts degree (2-year degree) by the University of Chicago
as a token of recognition of his 1943 paper, and this would remain the only academic
degree he ever earned. He has never been fond of the usual academic procedures and
this posed a major problem in his formal education. As an illustration, Pitts attended a
4The author has a fond memory of this book, but beware: here be dragons. The book is highly
complex due to archaic notation and a system quite different from today’s logic, but it is a worthwhile
read if you manage to survive the first 20 pages.

1.1 The Beginnings of Artificial Neural Networks
5
course taught by professor Wilfrid Rall (the pioneer of computational neuroscience),
and Rall remembered Pitts as ‘an oddball who felt compelled to criticize exam ques-
tions rather than answer them’.
In 1952, Norbert Weiner broke all relations with McCulloch, which devastated
Pitts. Weiner wife accused McCulloch that his boys (Pitts and Lettvin) seduced their
daughter, Barbara Weiner. Pitts turned to alcohol to the point that he could not take
care of his dog anymore,5 and succumbed to cirrhosis complications in 1969, at the
age of 46. McCulloch died the same year at the age of 70. Both of the Pitts’ papers
we mentioned remain to this day two of the most cited papers in all of science. It is
interesting to note that even though Pitts had direct or mediated contact with most
of the pioneers of AI, Pitts himself never thought about his work as geared towards
building a machine replica of the mind, but rather as a quest to formalize and better
understand human thinking [9], and that puts him squarely in the realm of what is
known today as philosophical logic.6
The story of Walter Pitts is a story of influences of ideas and of collaboration
between scientists of different backgrounds, and in a way a neural network nicely
symbolizes this interaction. One of the main aims of this book is to (re-)introduce
neural networks and deep learning to all the disciplines7 which contributed to the
birth and formation of the field, but currently shy away from it. The majority of the
story about Walter Pitts we presented is taken from a great article named The man
who tried to redeem the world with logic by Amanda Gefter published in Nautilus
[10] and the paper Walter Pitts by Neil R. Smalheiser [9], both of which we highly
recommend.8
1.2 The XOR Problem
In the 1950s, the Dartmouth conference took place and the interest of the newly born
field of artificial intelligence in neural networks was evident from the very conference
manifest. Marvin Minsky, one of the founding fathers of AI and participant to the
Dartmouth conference was completing his dissertation at Princeton in 1954, and the
titlewasNeuralNetsandtheBrainModelProblem.Minsky’sthesisaddressedseveral
technical issues, but it became the first publication which collected all up to date
results and theorems on neural networks. In 1951, Minsky built a machine (funded
5A Newfoundland, name unknown.
6An additional point here is the great influence of Russell and Carnap on Pitts. It is a great shame
that many logicians today do not know of Pitts, and we hope the present volume will help bring the
story about this amazing man back to the community from which he arose, and that he will receive
the place he deserves.
7And any other scientific discipline which might be interested in studying or using deep neural
networks.
8Also, there is a webpage on Pitts http://www.abstractnew.com/2015/01/walter-
pitts-tribute-to-unknown-genius.html worth visiting.

