But the idea of neural networks lingered on in the minds of only a handful of believers.
But there were processes set in motion which would enable their return in style. In
the context of neural networks, the 1970s were largely uneventful. But there we
two trends present which would help the revival of the 1980s. The first one was the
advent of cognitivism in psychology and philosophy. Perhaps the most basic idea that
cognitivism brought in the mainstream is the idea that the mind, as a complex system
made from many interacting parts, should explored on its own (independent of the
brain), but with formal methods.13 While the neurological reality that determines
cognition should not be ignored, it can be helpful to build and analyse systems
that try to recreate portions of the neurological reality, and at the same time they
should be able to recreate some of the behaviour. This is a response to both Skinner’s
behaviourism [18] in psychology of the 1950s, which aimed to focus a scientific
study of the mind as a black box processor (everything else is purely speculation14)
and to the dualism of the mind and brain which was strongly implied by a strict
formal study of knowledge in philosophy (particularly as a response to Gettier [19]).
Perhaps one of the key ideas in the whole scientific community at that time was
the idea of a paradigm shift in science, proposed by Thomas Kuhn in 1962 [20], and
this was undoubtedly helpful to the birth of cognitive science. By understanding the
idea of the paradigm shift, for the first time in history, it felt legitimate to abandon
a state-of-the-art method for an older, underdeveloped idea and then dig deep into
that idea and bring it to a whole new level. In many ways, the shift proposed by
cognitivism as opposed to the older behavioural and causal explanations was a shift
fromstudyinganimmutablestructuretowardsthestudyofamutablechange.Thefirst
truly cognitive turn in the so-called cognitive sciences is probably the turn made in
linguistics by Chomsky’s universal grammar [21] and his earlier and ingenious attack
on Skinner [22]. Among other early contributions to the cognitive revolution, we
find the most interesting one the paper from our old friends [23]. This paradigm shift
happened across six disciplines (the cognitive sciences), which would become the
foundingdisciplinesofcognitivescience:anthropology,computerscience,linguistic,
neuroscience, philosophy and psychology.
The second was another setback in funding caused by a government report. It was
the paper Artificial Intelligence: A General Survey by James Lighthill [24], which
was presented to the British Science Research Council in 1973, and became widely
known as the Lighthill report. Following the Lighthill report, the British government
would close all but three AI departments in the UK, which forced many scientists
to abandon their research projects. One of the three AI departments that survived
was Edinburgh. The Lighthill report enticed one Edinburgh professor to issue a
statement, and in this statement, cognitive science was referenced for the first time
13A great exposition of the cognitive revolution can be found in [17].
14It must be acknowledged that Skinner, by insisting on focusing only on the objective and measur-
able parts of the behaviour, brought scientific rigor into the study of behaviour, which was previously
mainly a speculative area of research.

1.3
From Cognitive Science to Deep Learning
9
in history, and its scope was roughly defined. It was Christopher Longuet-Higgins,
Fellow of the Royal Society, a chemist by formal education, who began work in
AI in 1967 when he took a job at the University of Edinburgh, where he joined the
Theoretical Psychology Unit. In his reply,15 Longuet-Higgins asked a number of
important questions. He understood that Lighthill wanted the AI community to give
a proper justification of AI research. The logic was simple, if AI does not work, why
do we want to keep it? Longuet-Higgins provided an answer, which was completely
in the spirit of McCulloch and Pitts: we need AI not to build machines (although that
would be nice), but to understand humans. But Lighthill was aware of this line of
thought, and he has acknowledged in his report that some aspects, in particular neural
networks, are scientifically promising. He thought that the study of neural networks
can be understood and reclassified as Computer-based studies of the central nervous
system, but it had to abide by the latest findings of neuroscience, and model neurons
as they are, and not weird variations of their simplifications. This is where Longuet-
Higgins diverged from Lighthill. He used an interesting metaphor: just like hardware
in computers is only a part of the whole system, so is actual neural brain activity,
and to study what a computer does, one needs to look at the software, and so to see
what a human does, one need to look at mental processes, and how they interact.
Their interaction is the basis of cognition, all processes taking parts are cognitive
processes, and AI needs to address the question of their interaction in a precise and
formal way. This is the true knowledge gained from AI research: understanding,
modelling and formalizing the interactions of cognitive processes. An this is why
we need AI as a field and all of its simplified and sometimes inaccurate and weird
models. This is the true scientific gain from AI, and not the technological, martial
and economic gain that was initially promised to obtain funding.
Before the turn of the decade, another thing happened, but it went unnoticed.
Up until now, the community knew how to train a single-layer neural network, and
that having a hidden layer would greatly increase the power of neural networks. The
problem was, nobody knew how to train a neural network with more than one layer. In
1975, Paul Werbos [25], an economist by degree, discovered backpropagation, a way
to propagate the error back through the hidden (middle) layer. His discovery went
unnoticed, and was rediscovered by David Parker [26], who published the result
in 1985. Yann LeCun also discovered backpropagation in 1985 and published in
[27]. Backpropagation was discovered for the last time in San Diego, by Rumelhart,
Hinton and Williams [28], which takes us to the next part of our story, the 1980s, in
sunny San Diego, to the cognitive era of deep learning.
The San Diego circle was composed of several researchers. Geoffrey Hinton, a
psychologist, was a PhD student of Christopher Longuet-Higgins back in the Edin-
burgh AI department, and there he was looked down upon by the other faculty,
because he wanted to research neural networks, so he called them optimal networks
15The full text of the reply is available from http://www.chilton-computing.org.uk/
inf/literature/reports/lighthill_report/p004.htm.

10
1
From Logic to Cognitive Science
to avoid problems.16 After graduating (1978), he came to San Diego as a visiting
scholar to the Cognitive Science program at UCSD. There the academic climate was
different, and the research in neural networks was welcome. David Rumelhart was
one of the leading figures in UCSD. A mathematical psychologist, he is one of the
founding fathers of cognitive science, and the person who introduced artificial neural
networks as a major topic in cognitive science, under the name of connectionism,
which had wide philosophical appeal, and is still one of the major theories in the
philosophy of mind. Terry Sejnowski, a physicist by degree and later professor of
