computational biology, was another prominent figure in UCSD at the time, and he
co-authored a number of seminal papers with Rumelhart and Hinton. His doctoral
advisor, John Hopfield was another physicist who became interested in neural net-
works, and improved an popularized a recurrent neural network model called the
Hopfield Network [29]. Jeffrey Elman, a linguist and cognitive science professor at
UCSD, who would introduce Elman networks a couple of years later, and Michael
I. Jordan, a psychologist, mathematician and cognitive scientist who would intro-
duce Jordan networks (both of these networks are commonly called simple recurrent
networks in today’s literature), also belonged to the San Diego circle.
This leads us to the 1990s and beyond. The early 1990s were largely uneventful,
as the general support of the AI community shifted towards support vector machines
(SVM). These machine learning algorithms are mathematically well founded, as
opposed to neural networks which were interesting from a philosophical standpoint,
and mainly developed by psychologists and cognitive scientists. To the larger AI
community, which still had a lot of the GOFAI drive for mathematical precision,
they were uninteresting, and SVMs seemed to produce better results as well. A good
reference book for SVMs is [30]. In the late 1990s, two major events occurred,
which produced neural networks which are even today the hallmark of deep learn-
ing. The long short-term memory was invented by Hochreiter and Schmidhuber [31]
in 1997, which continue to be one of the most widely used recurrent neural net-
work architectures and in 1998 LeCun, Bottou, Bengio and Haffner produced the
first convolutional neural network called LeNet-5 which achieved significant results
on the MNIST dataset [32]. Both convolutional neural networks and LSTMs went
unnoticed by the larger AI community, but the events were set in motion for neural
networks to come back one more time. The final event in the return of neural net-
works was the 2006 paper by Hinton, Osindero and Teh [33] which introduced deep
belief networks (DMB) which produces significantly better results on the MNIST
dataset. After this paper, the rebranding of deep neural networks to deep learning
was complete, and a new period in AI history would begin. Many new architectures
followed, and some of them we will be exploring in this book, while some we leave to
the reader to explore by herself. We prefer not to write to much about recent history,
since it is still actual and there is a lot of factors at stake which hinder objectivity.
16The full story about Hinton and his struggles can be found at http://www.chronicle.
com/article/The-Believers/190147.

1.3
From Cognitive Science to Deep Learning
11
For an exhaustive treatment of the history of neural networks, we point the reader to
the paper by Jürgen Schmidhuber [34].
1.4 Neural Networks in the General AI Landscape
We have explored the birth of neural networks from philosophical logic, the role
psychology and cognitive science played in their development and their grand return
to mainstream computer science and AI. One question that is particularly interest-
ing is where do artificial neural networks live in the general AI landscape. There
are two major societies that provide a formal classification of AI, which is used in
their publications to classify a research paper, the American Mathematical Society
(AMS) and the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM). The AMS maintains
the so-called Mathematics Subject Classification 2010 which divides AI into the
following subfields17: General, Learning and adaptive systems, Pattern recognition
and speech recognition, Theorem proving, Problem solving, Logic in artificial intel-
ligence, Knowledge representation, Languages and software systems, Reasoning
under uncertainty, Robotics, Agent technology, Machine vision and scene under-
standing and Natural language processing. The ACM classification18 for AI pro-
vides, in addition to subclasses of AI, their subclasses as well. The subclasses of AI
are: Natural language processing, knowledge representation and reasoning, planning
and scheduling, search methodologies, control methods, philosophical/theoretical
foundations of AI, distributed artificial intelligence and computer vision. Machine
learning is a parallel category to AI, not subordinated to it.
What can be concluded from these two classifications is that there are a few broad
fields of AI, inside which all other fields can be subsumed:
• Knowledge representation and reasoning,
• Natural language processing,
• Machine Learning,
• Planning,
• Multi-agent systems,
• Computer vision,
• Robotics,
• Philosophical aspects.
Inthesimplestpossibleview,deeplearningisanameforaspecificclassofartificial
neural networks, which in turn are a special class of machine learning algorithms,
applicable to natural language processing, computer vision and robotics. This is a
very simplistic view, and we think it is wrong, not because it is not true (it is true), but
17See http://www.ams.org/msc/.
18See http://www.acm.org/about/class/class/2012.

12
1
From Logic to Cognitive Science
Fig.1.1 Vertical and horizontal components of AI
because it misses an important aspect. Recall the Good Old-Fashioned AI (GOFAI),
and consider what it is. Is it a subdiscipline of AI? The best answer it to think of
subdivisions of AI as vertical components, and of GOFAI as a horizontal component
that spans considerably more work in knowledge representation and reasoning than
in computer vision (see Fig.1.1). Deep learning, in our thinking, constitutes a second
horizontal component, trying to unify across disciplines just as GOFAI did. Deep
learning and GOFAI are in a way contenders to the whole AI, wanting to address all
questions of AI with their respective methods: they both have their ‘strongholds’,19
but they both try to encompass as much of AI as they can. The idea of deep learning
being a separate influence is explored in detail in [35], where the deep learning
movement is called ‘connectionist tribe’.
1.5 Philosophical and Cognitive Aspects
So far, we have explored neural networks from a historical perspective, but there are
two important things we have not explained. First, what the word ‘cognitive’ means.
The term itself comes from neuroscience [36], where it has been used to characterize
outward manifestations of mental behaviour which originates in the cortex. The what
exactly comprises these abilities is non-debatable, since neuroscience grounds this
division upon neural activity. A cognitive process in the context of AI is then an
19Knowledge representation and reasoning for GOFAI, machine learning for deep learning.

