How do you do?
How do you do, Lord Russell?
Won't you sit down?
Thank you.
Now, what are we going to talk about?
Well, Lord Russell, as you approach your 80th birthday, I think we'd like you to tell us
what you think you have learned and what you think you will never learn in your career
as a philosopher.
Well, there are some things that I don't think I shall ever learn, and indeed I hope I shall
never learn.
I don't wish to learn to change my hopes for the world.
I'm prepared to change my beliefs about the state of the world, about what happens, but
not about what I hope.
About that I hope to remain constant.
I think we might call the subject of our talk 80 years of changing beliefs and unchanging
hopes.
It's very difficult for anybody born since 1914 to realize how profoundly different the
world is now from what it was when I was a child.
The change has been almost unbelievable.
I try as best I can in spite of my years to get used to living in a world of atom bombs,
a world where ancient empires vanished like morning mist, where we have to accustom ourselves
to Asiatic self-assertion to communist menace.
The world is altogether so different from what it was when I was young that it's an
extraordinarily difficult thing for an old man to live in such a world.
I was born in 1872.
My parents died when I was still an infant, and so I was brought up by my grandparent.
Can you tell us something about your grandfather?
Yes, I can tell you something about my grandfather.
He was born in the early years of the French Revolution.
He was a member of parliament while Napoleon was still on the throne.
In common with all the Whig followers of fucks, he thought English hostility to Napoleon
was excessive, and he visited Napoleon in Helba.
It was he who introduced the reform bill in 1832, which started England on the road
towards democracy.
He was prime minister during our Mexican War, during the revolutions of 1848.
I remember him quite well, but as you can see he belonged to an age that now seems rather
removed.
And the world where I was young was a solid world, a world where all kinds of things that
have now disappeared were thought to be going to last forever.
It didn't dawn on people the things.
English people certainly regarded English naval supremacy as a sort of law of nature.
Britannia ruled the way it didn't occur to us that that might stop.
Even with Bismarck?
Bismarck was regarded as a rascal and was thought of as an uneducated farmer.
But it was assumed that the influence of Goethe and Schiller would gradually bring Germany
back to a more civilized point of view.
And moreover, we thought of Germany as only a land power.
Germany had at that time no navy.
We went all afraid of Germany.
In fact, liberal opinion was more favorable to Germany than to France at that time.
Bismarck himself compared Germany and England to an elephant and a whale, each formidable
in its own element, but no danger to each other.
And that was how we felt.
We were not afraid of Bismarck at all.
It was thought that there was going to be ordered progress throughout the world.
Gradually every country was going to take to parliaments.
There was going to be a bicameral legislature and two parties and it was all going to be
exactly like England everywhere, all over the world.
My grandmother used to laugh because one time she said to the Russian ambassador, perhaps
someday you will have a parliament in Russia, and he said, God forbid, my dear Lady Russell.
Except for the first word, the Russian ambassador at the present day might give the same answer.
But that was the assumption.
It was all going to be orderly, all quite nice.
The atmosphere, apart from politics, was one of a puritan piety, very great piety, very
great austerity.
We always had family prayers at eight, and before family prayers I had to do half an
hour's practice at the piano, which I hated.
Although there were eight servants in the house, the food was always at most simplicity,
and even if there was anything at all nice, I wasn't allowed to have it because it wasn't
good for children to eat nice things.
For instance, there would be rice pudding and apple tart.
Lornapp said the apple tart, and I had the rice pudding, and there was extreme austerity
in all those ways.
My grandmother, until she was over 70, would never sit in an armchair until after dinner,
ever.
It's almost gone out that sort of austere living by well-to-do people, which in those
days was fairly common.
When did you get to Cambridge?
Oh, I got to Cambridge when I was 18, and that, of course, was a new world to me completely.
For the first time I met people who, when I said anything that I really thought, I didn't
think it absurd, I'd learnt at home to say almost nothing about what I really thought.
People had a horror of philosophy which interested me, and they would say every time philosophy
was mentioned.
Everybody is summed up completely in these two questions.
What is matter?
Never mind.
What is mind?
No matter.
And at about the sixtieth repetition of this remark, I ceased to be amused by it.
When I got to Cambridge, it was a great comfort to me to find people who didn't regard philosophy
as absurd.
So that I was very, very happy when I first got to Cambridge.
I quickly got to know a great many people who became my lifelong friends.
Most of them, I'm sorry to say, are dead now, but those who are still alive are still my
friends.
You started with mathematics, didn't you, and then moved to philosophy?
That is so, yes.
I did three years of mathematics and one year of philosophy at Cambridge.
I had done only mathematics before going to Cambridge.
What caused your interest in philosophy?
Well, two things, two very different things, it caused my interest in philosophy.
On the one hand, I wanted to understand the principles of mathematics.
I observed that all the proofs of mathematical propositions that were taught me were obviously
fallacious.
They didn't really prove what they said they did.
And I wanted to know whether there is any truth in the world that is known, and I thought
if there is any, it's probably in mathematics, but it's not in mathematics as I was taught
it.
And so I tried to find out some truth there.
The other thing that made me interested in philosophy was the hope that I might find
some basis for religious belief.
Did you find it?
No, in the mathematical part of my hopes I was fairly satisfied, but in the other part
no, not at all.
For a time I found a certain satisfaction in the Platonic, eternal world of ideas, which
has a sort of religious favour and gave me a certain satisfaction.
But then I came to the conclusion that there was nonsense, and I was left without any
satisfaction to it, to say to my desires, and to remain so.
So as far as that goes, philosophy proved to wash out to me, but not on the side of
the technical basis of mathematics.
Wasn't it about here that you entered into what you called a life of disagreements?
Yes.
I disagreed first with my people about both about mathematics and about philosophy.
They cared only about virtue.
They thought virtue was the only thing of importance in the world.
Mathematics therefore was unimportant because it has no ethical content, and philosophy
was positively pernicious because they thought it undermined virtue.
So on that point I had a strong disagreement with my people, but as regards that, of course,
that disagreement was, as far as my personal life was concerned, resolved by my living
among academic people who didn't take that view, so that I got again into a circle of
people whom I was quite at home.
But that was brought to an end by the First War, where I took a pacifist line, I was
against the First War.
I was not against the Second.
Some people think that this is an inconsistency, but it isn't.
I never, during the First War, said that I was against all war.
I said I was against that war, and I still hold that view, I think, that the First
War was a mistake, and I think England's participation in it was a mistake.
I think if that hadn't happened, you would not have had the Communists, you would not
have had the Nazis, you would have not had the Second World War, you would not have had
the threat of a Third.
The world would have been a very much better place, I think.
Germany, in the time of the Kaiser, was not uncivilized.
There was a certain amount of suppression of opinion, but less than there now is everywhere
except in England and Scandinavia.
So it really wasn't really bad.
If you propaganda purposes, the Kaiser's government was represented as truthful, but
they presented talk.
It wasn't really true.
Your opinions today in regard to Russia are not altogether friendly.
Did you always feel that way about the Bolsheviks?
Yes, and that caused another violent disagreement.
Going to my pacifism during the First War, I'd become estranged from what you might call
conventional people, and then I went to Russia in 1920, and found that I dominated the Soviet
government.
They were dreadful people, dreadful people already, and becoming more so, sure to go
on becoming more so.
And so then I had to break with all the people who endured my pacifism, who all liked Russia
or thought they did, so that I was left in a very great isolation at that time.
However, I escaped some of the pain of it by going to China, where I spent a very happy
year.
I liked the Chinese very much, and there I found people that I could agree with that
I could like.
Any conclusions about China?
Oh, I don't know about conclusions.
I don't think I came to any particular conclusions.
I continued to think as I had thought before that democracy is the best form of government
where it will work.
It didn't work very well in China.
It wasn't working at all, and I could see that it wouldn't work there.
They hadn't the political experience, but I thought it would work there in time, and
I'd say it would have done if circumstances had been a little more propitious.
On your return, the focus of your interests changed, didn't it?
Yes, going to the birth of my two elder children, I became very much interested in education,
and at first, especially in education in the very early years, I didn't like the old-fashioned
schools for a number of reasons.
I didn't altogether like the progressive schools, though in some respects I thought
much better than the older ones, but there were some things about progressive schools,
at least about most progressive schools, that I didn't feel right.
I thought they didn't pay enough attention to instruction.
It seems to me that in our technically complex world, you can't play any important part unless
you have a very considerable amount of actual knowledge, and I don't think that most children
will acquire much knowledge unless there is a certain amount of discipline in school.
I think the degree of discipline required for acquiring knowledge ought to be insisted
upon and isn't sufficiently insisted upon in the good many modern schools that I know.
Did you change any of your opinions in that regard?
Well, I suppose to some degree I tried running a school of my own because I wasn't satisfied
with other schools.
I haven't the talents of an administrator, and I wasn't satisfied with the school that
I tried to run.
Fortunately, at just about that time, a certain modern school that I was interested in became,
I thought, quite good enough, and I was satisfied with that.
I have, I suppose, changed my opinions not only about education, but about a good many
things.
As a result of seeing the kind of nefarious things that people do, I think that freedom
is not a panacea for all things.
I think there are good many matters in which freedom should be restrained, some of them
things in which it's not sufficiently restrained at present.
In the relations between nations there ought to be less freedom than there is, I think.
And to some degree this applies in modern education too.
I think that some progressive schools certainly have more freedom than you ought to have.
There are some freedoms that I think are desirable in education.
Now, in the old-fashioned school, if a child uses a swear word, it's thought worse than
if he commits an unkind action, and that seems to be observed, and clearly the unkind action
matters more, and in that sort of way I don't like the old-fashioned way.
I also think that children should be free to explore the facts of life to a degree that
they are not brought up in an old-fashioned way.
I think there should be free speech.
There are a number of things that I like very much about modern education, but both in education
and in other matters, I think freedom must have very definite limitations where you come
to things that are definitely harmful to other people or things that prevent you yourself
from being useful, such as lack of knowledge.
So there are those respects in which, I suppose, I should lay less stress on freedom than in
former times.
Do you still believe in the importance of abstract philosophy?
Well, now that's a very difficult question.
I have myself a passion for clarity and exactness and sharp outlines for some reason that I've
never understood, which makes people think that I have no passions, that I'm a cold
fish.
I don't know why, but it does cause people to think that.
I don't myself think that's altogether just, so that's neither here nor there.
But I do like clarity and exact thinking, and I believe that very important to mankind,
because when you allow yourself to think inexactly, your prejudices, your bias, your self-interest,
comes in in ways you don't notice, and you do bad things without knowing that you're
doing them.
Self-reception is very easy, so that I do think clear thinking, immensely important.
But I don't think philosophy, in the old-fashioned sense, is quite the thing the world needs
nowadays.
I think it needs the world a different from there.
Well, just what you feel today's needs are.
Well, of course, the needs depend on what a person's capacities are.
But if I were now, at this moment, a young man, whether in England or in America, I
should not take to philosophy, I should think there were other things better to take to.
If I had the necessary capacity, I think I would be a physicist.
If my capacities didn't run in that direction, I should think that history, psychology, mass
psychology especially, theory of politics, things of that sort are much better worth
working at than pure philosophy.
And it's that sort of thing that I should take to if I were now young.
Lord Russell, what do you think the world needs to reach a happier state?
Well, I think there are three things that are needed.
If the world is to adapt itself to the industrial revolution, the troubles we are suffering now
are essentially troubles due to adapting ourselves to a new phase of human life, namely the industrial
phase.
And I think three things are necessary if people are to live happily in the industrial phase.
One of these is world government.
The second is an approximate economic equality between different parts of the world.
And the third is a nearly stationary population.
And I'd say a little about each of those.
As to world government, the world government should be, of course, a federal government
leaving a very great deal of freedom to the individual national governments.
And only those things controlled by the world government, which are absolutely necessary
for the avoidance of war.
The most important and the most difficult of these is armed forces.
All the important weapons of war will have to be in the hands of the international government
and the way to load them.
When that happens, war will become practically impossible.
And if war were impossible, mankind could go ahead.
If war is not impossible, every advance in scientific technique means an advance in
mass murder and is therefore undesirable.
But if one's world peace were achieved, it would be just the opposite.
That's the first point.
Now I come on to the question of approximate economic equality.
As things stand present, Western Europe and still more the United States of America have
a high standard of life.
On the whole, the great majority of mankind live fairly comfortably from a material point
of view.
Asia, on the other hand, lives in very, very great poverty, so does most of Africa.
And the moment people are sufficiently educated to be aware of these facts, the inevitable
result is a great development of envy in the poorer parts of the world.
That envy is a cause of unrest and inevitably makes world peace precarious.
There's only one way of dealing with it, which is to produce approximate economic equality,
which of course is a long story, but it can be done.
The third point about population is very vital indeed.
The food supply of the world tends at present to diminish through the denuration of the
soil.
It tends of course also to increase through various technical advances, but those two
are about balance, so that on the whole food produce of the world does not increase appreciably.
Now that means that unless everybody is to be very poor, especially if you have economic
equality, unless everybody is to be very poor, there must be not more people to be fed, not
many more than there are now, and therefore you've got to get approximate economic equality
of population and approximately stationary population, otherwise those parts of the world
where the population increases fast, we want to go to war with those where it increases
slowly.
That brings us precisely to the problem of Asia and what part Asia will play in the immediate
future.
Well, Asia first of all has risen to the point of education, some nations have, where it is
not prepared any longer to be subservient to the white man.
It hasn't noticed the Russians are white.
If it had, it would take a different line, but it seems to think the Russians are yellow
or black or some other color.
And I think our propaganda ought to be mainly devoted to saying only Russians also are white.
I believe that would be the effective propaganda to use in Asia, but I pass that point by.
Asia clearly is going to claim equality with the white man, and it's perfectly futile,
absolutely futile, for the white man to resist that claim.
It will infallibly win, infallibly, and we ought therefore to concede it graciously once
before we're driven to it.
You can see complete equality to Asia, but if Asia is not to overwhelm the rest of the
world with a vast land population and poverty, Asia must live up to its responsibilities
and must learn the sort of things we have learned in the West, which is how to maintain
a roughly stationary population.
And if they can't learn that, which I fully believe they can learn and learn quickly,
much more quickly than most people think, if they can't learn that, they will not have
won their claim to equality.
Lord Russell, speaking as of today, can you see the influence of any one philosopher more
than any other one?
Well, I suppose in recent years the most important influence has been Marx.
If you can dignify him with the name of philosopher, I should hardly like to dignify himself myself,
but I suppose he must count in the list, and he certainly has had more influence than anybody
else.
For those of us who reject Marx, can you offer any positive philosophy to help us toward
a more hopeful future?
Well, as to that, you see, I think one of the troubles of the world has been the habit
of dogmatically believing something or other.
And I think all these methods are full of doubt, and the rational man will not be too
sure that he's right.
I think that we ought always to entertain our opinions with some measure of doubt.
I shouldn't wish people dogmatically to believe any philosophy, not even mine.
Not even mine.
No, I think we should accept our philosophies as a measure of doubt.
What I do think is this, that if a philosophy is to bring happiness, it should be inspired
by kindly feeling.
Now Marx is not inspired by kindly feeling.
Marx pretended that he wanted the happiness of the proletariat, but he really wanted
the unhappiness of the bourgeoisie.
And it was because of that negative element, because of that hate element that his philosophy
produced disaster.
A philosophy which is to do good must be one inspired by kindly feeling, not by unkindly
feeling.
Coming up, Lord Russell, do you feel that there is hope for the world today?
Well, I do.
I feel it very strongly, but how far that is really a rational conviction, how far
it's temperamental, I can't say.
But I do most strongly feel that there is hope.
There may be very dreadful times ahead of us, I dare say there are, but I still believe,
I believe most firmly that through whatever pain, suffering, mankind will emerge from these
dreadful things and will emerge into some world that will be happier than any world
that has existed in the past.
I'm firmly persuaded of that.
What I don't know is how long it will take.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
