Music
Welcome back to meteorology.
We are unweaving the wonders of the weather.
In this lecture we will see three important concepts,
temperature, pressure, and density.
We'll see what temperature really measures,
why pressure decreases with height,
and why density is often the overlooked crucial factor.
We'll see how they're interrelated,
the simple, powerful ideal gas law.
We'll see how to make a barometer
and situations where you would rather not have made one.
We'll see implications of nature's desire to move mass
from higher to lower pressure
and the important concept of hydrostatic balance.
Some opening questions to think about
while I'm talking in this lecture.
Why do cold and warm fronts even exist?
Can you dig a well so deep you cannot pump water from it?
How do soda straws really work?
How high is the sky?
And why do we still have an atmosphere?
I'll start off mainly using familiar old English units,
inches, miles per hour, and Fahrenheit.
But I'll provide modern metric equivalents as well.
In my classes at UCLA,
I often use old-fashioned units such as Fahrenheit and Yards,
and a colleague once criticized me for that.
He asked me why am I not using the language of science
I should force my students to speak my language.
But I want you to understand what I'm talking about.
So I'm willing to speak your language,
and in return, you learn mine if you don't know it already.
So as time goes on,
you'll notice that I'll emphasize metric measures more and more.
The tools we're going to use in this course
very frequently are temperature, pressure, and density.
So let's look at temperature.
Temperature is one of those concepts we may understand better
before looking at it too closely.
Temperature is the microscopic kinetic energy of atoms and molecules,
which vibrate and translate even in solids
so long as the temperature is above absolute zero.
At absolute zero, all microscopic motion ceases.
And absolute zero is minus 273 Celsius,
minus 459 Fahrenheit,
and zero, zero on the Kelvin absolute temperature scale.
Most of the world, as you know,
uses the Celsius or centigrade scale,
and states from the mid-1700s.
Like many scales, including the meter in the second,
the Celsius scale has been redefined over the years.
The 1744 version utilized two fixed points,
zero-degree C, the freezing point of impure water,
and 100-degree C, water's boiling point,
both of those at sea level.
Actually, Celsius's original version was inverted.
He used 100-degree C for the freezing point,
but that proved unpopular.
In the United States, we persist in using
Daniel Gabriel Fahrenheit's temperature scale,
invented in 1724.
In Fahrenheit's day, the challenge was to create instruments
capable of making repeatable measurements,
calibrated, using common materials.
So as a zero-point,
Fahrenheit used the temperature attained by a mixture of ice,
water, and ammonium chloride,
which, no matter what temperatures they start with,
always reached the same temperature, and he called that zero.
Some sources say that he then chose
32 Fahrenheit to be freezing,
and 96 Fahrenheit to be human-body temperature.
They may seem very weird at first,
but why did he use 32-degree intervals?
The reason is because he made his scale through bisection,
and using 32 and 64, which are powers of two,
allowed him to make his scales accurately.
Later on, the scale was adjusted to force
180 degrees to exist between freezing and boiling points,
and this shifted human-body temperature upward slightly
to the more familiar 98.6 Fahrenheit.
Fahrenheit lacks Celsius's clean and simple rationale,
but you know what, it's curiously well suited to meteorology.
If only accidentally,
the temperatures of zero and 100 Fahrenheit
bracket the range of temperatures
commonly encountered in temperate climates.
As an example, at this time,
Seattle, Washington's all-time record high
is 100 degrees Fahrenheit,
and its all-time record low is zero Fahrenheit, respectively.
Of course, we need to keep in mind
that records are made to be broken.
As a result of their rarity,
100 and zero Fahrenheit have become psychologically
significant numbers as we interpret
weather extremes on the Fahrenheit scale.
A temperature below zero isn't just cold,
it's sub-zero cold,
and a temperature exceeding 99 F isn't just hot,
it's triple-digit heat.
Somehow, 38 degrees Celsius
doesn't seem quite so exceptional.
In this course, I'll try to provide temperatures in both
Celsius and Fahrenheit,
and big numbers will manipulate in Kelvin as well.
I admit that I still think in Fahrenheit,
so here are some benchmark temperatures
for quick conversions.
A warm day is 30 degrees Celsius.
That's 86 Fahrenheit.
A typical indoor temperature might be 20 C.
That's 68 F.
Note the transposition there.
30 C, 86 F, 20 C, 68 F.
10 degrees C is 50 Fahrenheit.
Freezing at zero Celsius and 32 Fahrenheit
and minus 40, minus 40 is the same on both scales.
That's a special number, as we'll soon see.
Converting between Celsius and Kelvin is more straightforward.
Just add 273 to Celsius.
Okay, it's 273.15.
Now, I mentioned that 40 degrees minus 40 degrees
is a special temperature,
and it's not because the Fahrenheit and Celsius
scales cross at that point.
Previously, I emphasized that zero C, or 32 F,
was the temperature at which impure water freezes.
Impurities can provide surfaces
on which the freezing process can start.
And pure water, pure water can remain liquid
to a much lower temperature,
very close to minus 40 on other scale.
And this is called supercooling.
We will see the meteorological implications
of supercool liquid water later.
The first example, it's involved in aircraft icing.
The Celsius scale is pegged to the boiling point
of water, 100 C.
But that's the boiling point at sea level.
As you ascend above sea level, boiling point decreases.
And eventually, we'll see why.
But the reason involves our next tool, which is pressure.
Pressure is the force per unit area.
I'm going to take my hand.
I want to exert a pressure on my hand.
Well, I'm going to take my other hand and push it down.
And I'm going to start pressing.
I'm applying a force over the area of my hand.
I have created a pressure.
Suppose I want to increase the pressure
pushing down my hand at the bottom.
How can I do that?
There are two ways.
I can either push down harder, applying a greater force,
or I can take the same force or an even smaller force
and concentrate it in a smaller area,
such as the area of my finger.
So now I'm pressing down with a force in a much smaller area.
And I'm certainly feeling the pressure.
In the atmosphere, force is largely gravity due to air's weight.
We often say, light is air.
But you know what? Air isn't light.
Sea level pressure is 15 pounds per square inch.
It's applying 15 pounds for every square inch of the earth's surface.
That's about half of the pressure you probably have
in your automobile tire.
Does that sound like a lot?
Well, if so, you're used to it.
And if it seems insignificant,
if I applied an extra 15 psi on your shoulder,
I think you would notice.
Gravity force is proportional to mass.
So if we doubled the amount of mass in the atmosphere,
the surface pressure would also double.
Our sister planet, Venus,
has more than 90 times more atmosphere than we have on the earth,
so we would find surface pressure in Venus
a bone crushing experience.
Average sea level pressure is also 30 inches of mercury.
The inch of mercury is a measure with a rich history
that we'll discover soon.
It's 100,000 pascals.
That's the official metric system unit, the Pascal.
It's 1,000 hectopascals,
which is that unit that sounds like a disease.
And it's 1,000 millibars,
the traditional unit used in meteorology,
and the unit I'll use through this course.
To a very large degree,
pressure represents the weight of downline air, as we said,
and it's pressing downward due to gravity.
Therefore, pressure decreases with height.
As we ascend in the atmosphere,
more of the mass of the atmosphere is below us
and less is above,
so the pressure pushing down on us decreases.
This means for a surface pressure of about 1,000 millibars,
somewhere above our heads,
pressure is only 750 millibars, 500 millibars,
above that 250 millibars
and ultimately zero millibars at the top of the atmosphere.
Additionally, since we know that pressure is proportional to mass,
this means that half of the mass of the atmosphere
resides between the 1,000 and 500 millibar levels,
and 80% of the mass resides between 1,000 and 200 millibars.
Here's a question. How high is the sky?
Let me ask it more prosaically. How thick is the atmosphere?
Well, it's rather difficult to precisely identify the top of the atmosphere,
like the proverbial old soldier, the atmosphere just fades away.
So, suppose we use the 10 millibar level as an example.
99% of the mass of the atmosphere is beneath the 10 millibar level
and more than 99% of the weather.
It may surprise you that the average level of the 10 millibar surface
above our heads is 30 kilometers or 18 miles above sea level.
Consider that as a horizontal distance.
That's about half of the commute between my office and my home.
And relative to the Earth's radius of 6,400 kilometers or 4,000 miles,
the 10 millibar level is less above our head
than the thickness of the paper on this globe.
The protective blanket that the atmosphere represents is incredibly thin.
Furthermore, air is very compressible. It's easy to squeeze,
so it's scrunched at the bottom near the surface owing to its own weight.
We may have 99% of the mass of the atmosphere below 18 miles,
but 50% is in the lowest 3.5 miles or 5.5 kilometers.
The average height of the 500 millibar level is only 3.5 miles above sea level.
Pressure doesn't just decrease with height, it decreases exponentially with height.
And because of air's squeezability, something else also decreases with height.
Density, which is our next topic.
Density is mass divided by volume.
In the metric system, the mass is kilograms and the volume is cubic meters,
so it's kilograms per cubic meter.
Consider a box containing air or some other material.
How would I change the density of stuff in that box?
Well, I can cram more stuff into the box,
or I can make the box with the same mass smaller.
Either will increase the density.
For gases like air, temperature, pressure, and density are related
through a simple, powerful equation, the ideal gas law.
It's P equals rho RT.
P is pressure, measured in Pascals.
Rho, a Greek letter, we use for density.
Kilograms per cubic meter are the units.
T is temperature in the Kelvin scale.
And R, R is just a proportionality constant,
unique to each gas or combination of gases.
And how do we find this value?
We can look it up in a book.
But the important point is the ideal gas law implies
that temperature, pressure, and density are not independent.
They're not independent.
And changing one changes one or both of the others.
Let me do two examples of the ideal gas law,
one that's already intuitive to us,
and one that is crucially important for the atmosphere.
The first one is if we hold density constant,
increasing temperature causes the pressure to rise.
Let me demonstrate that with a soup can.
So, here is a soup can,
and inside is tomorrow night's dinner, minestrone.
But I know that while soup is good food,
it's not an ideal gas.
So, the first thing I got to do is open this up,
take all the soup out, and replace it with air,
and seal it back up again.
This is a sealed and rigid container.
It's mass and volume are fixed,
and therefore the density is constant.
And if I start heating this up,
what's going to happen to the pressure?
You know what's going to happen to the pressure.
This can is going to explode if I heat it up too much.
The second example is this.
If we hold pressure fixed as temperature rises,
density goes down.
This means that at the same pressure,
warm air is less dense than cold air.
Let me repeat that.
At the same pressure, warm air is less dense than cold air.
So, that means that one way of making air less dense
is to heat it up,
and we can create density differences
with temperature differences.
This is crucial because fluids with different densities
resist mixing.
Air and water have a density difference of a factor of 1,000.
Oil and vinegar in your Italian salad dressing,
that's a more subtle difference,
but you know from empirical experience
you can shake them up and they won't stay mixed.
In the atmosphere, fronts represent the meeting places
between different air masses,
which have different densities.
They push against each other,
in part because they resist mixing.
We often use terms like cold front and warm front,
but the real difference,
the real difference here is density.
And air masses will resist mixing,
even with density differences as small as 1%.
What is this strange pressure measure,
the inch of mercury?
Its story is the story of the barometer itself.
If you look this up in an encyclopedia,
it will tell you the inventor of the barometer
was Evangelista Torricelli in the 1600s.
But I think the barometer's actual first inventor,
his name has been lost to antiquity.
He was the first poor soul who had a well so deep
he couldn't pump water from it.
You make a barometer of sorts
every time you drink water through a straw.
Let's see how it works.
Picture a water well or a glass partially full of water.
An atmospheric pressure is being exerted
on the plain surface of that water
that's pushing down everywhere.
Now insert a tube or a straw
and notice the water does rise up a little bit
but that's due to surface tension.
The water doesn't keep rising farther into the straw
because there's also air in the tube pushing down.
We want to get water out of that tube
so the first thing we have to do is get the air out
by creating a vacuum.
Once the vacuum is created,
the atmosphere does the job of pushing water
up into the tube from below.
The atmosphere is doing the job of pushing the water up.
Now the difference between the top and the base
of the fluid column indicates how much force exists
pressing down on the outside of the straw
and force per unit area's pressure
we have created a barometer.
At standard sea level pressure of 1,000 millibars
the atmosphere can support a water column
33 feet or 10 meters high.
If your well water is down deeper than that
suction alone cannot extract the water
and the reason is it isn't suction that was pulling the water
up out of the well anyway.
It was atmospheric pressure pushing down on the fluid
surrounding the tube.
This is counter-intuitive.
If we apply suction to a tube and pull up water
it is logical to assume that we did it.
But when examining a phenomenon in the natural world
first we should identify all the forces acting
and then determine the most important force.
And in this case I claim the most important force
is atmospheric pressure pushing down outside the tube.
So how can we test this?
We can test this by sealing the well or cup around the tube.
Now atmospheric pressure cannot be exerted on the fluid
around the tube because it's isolated from the atmosphere.
And now when we place our lips around the tube
the system is sealed.
So try to draw on the tube but don't try too hard
you can hurt yourself.
You can't draw fluid up into that straw far enough to taste it.
Now you may be wondering what about juice boxes?
They're sealed or nearly so.
But that's not really a fair test
because the juice boxes are flexible.
So even if you don't squeeze on the box
atmospheric pressure is sufficient to do the job
atmospheric pressure is the key.
I already noted that the standard atmosphere water column
could stand 33 feet high
and that makes for a very accurate and precise instrument
but certainly a very inconvenient one
you can't exactly put it in your back pocket.
So Torricelli employed mercury, a liquid metal.
Sea level pressure can support a mercury column
about 30 inches high
hence the unit of pressure that persists to this day.
So far we've had examples of fluid barometers
but most barometers these days are of the aneroid variety
that's a Greek word meaning without water or without fluid.
Some of these use elastic membranes
that respond to pressure variations.
You're walking around with two of them, your eardrums.
Here is a key concept.
The barometer examples demonstrated the importance of pressure
in generating motion and fluid such as water and air
but in each case it wasn't the pressure itself
it was a pressure difference that was truly important.
The key concept is this.
Nature wants to move mass from high to low pressure.
Nature wants to move mass from high to low pressure
from surplus to deficit.
Nature responds to pressure differences
by trying to eliminate them.
She isn't always successful but nature is always trying.
Further, we need to note that pressure differences
can exist in all directions.
Another familiar example illustrates how and why.
I have a cup of a colored liquid
and in it I have a straw
and I'm going to do something that will be immediately very familiar to you.
I'm going to reach in here,
I'm going to cover up the top of the straw with my finger
and then I'm going to lift the straw out of the fluid
and we see that the fluid is trapped inside the straw
and it remains trapped until my finger is released
and the water returns to the glass.
Why did the fluid remain trapped before I removed my finger
and why did it flow out of the straw once I moved my finger away?
Let's take a closer look.
The straw is sealed at the top by my finger
and the straw is open at the bottom
so atmospheric pressure is pressing down on the top
and that has no effect because the straw is sealed,
sealed by my finger
and pressure is also acting on the sides of the straw as well
which also has no effect
because the straw is sufficiently rigid and inflexible
but atmospheric pressure also presses upward from below
and inside the straw between my finger and the top of the fluid
there's also a small amount of air inside trapped above the water
and it also has weight and is pressing down.
So although we may think of atmospheric pressure as always pushing down
the straw helps us see the pressure difference is upward
so the net pressure force is acting upward
nature wants to move mass from high to low pressure
this means nature wants the water to rise in the straw
but the water is not rising.
Why isn't the water rising in the straw?
We're not done identifying all the relevant forces.
The biggest missing piece is that water itself has weight
and this weight is pushing downward due to gravity.
So here's another key concept.
If a fluid is not accelerating, in this case up or down,
then the forces must be balanced.
The primary balance here is the pressure difference acting upward
and the gravity force pulling down
and this is a stalemate we call hydrostatic balance.
Hydro is a Greek prefix for water
it means fluid and static means stationary.
Hydrostatic balance is the answer to the question
why do we still have an atmosphere?
And the fact that hydrostatic balance can be broken
is the answer to the question why can we have thunderstorms?
So let's break this stalemate.
The straw is sealed and we have hydrostatic balance
two powerful opposing forces but no net motion.
But now I remove my finger
and the forces are now in balance and the water flows out.
Why?
Before I removed my finger I had a large vertical pressure difference.
The entire atmosphere was pushing up from below
and almost nothing was pushing back.
But after I removed my finger,
after I removed my finger the pressure difference in the vertical
became very small.
The atmosphere was pushing up
but it was also pushing down with almost as much force
and therefore effectively canceling itself out.
There was nothing left to stalemate the gravity force
and so the fluid ran out of the straw.
So why do we still have an atmosphere?
And another question is why isn't it even shallower than it is?
Gravity is a powerful force
relentless trying to bring the atmosphere to your knees
but the vertical pressure difference is also extremely large.
We saw a 500 millibar pressure drop
in just three and a half miles between the surface and mid-troposphere
and that makes a force so strong that only gravity can restrain it
and that is hydrostatic balance.
It is an epic struggle, a source of great strain.
The atmosphere is tightly strong and ready to be plucked.
I usually demonstrate hydrostatic balance with a rubber band.
I can stretch up hard at the top
and that represents the pressure force
that is trying to push the atmosphere off the planet into outer space.
And my other hand is pulling down and that represents gravity
which wants everything to go to ground
and the shallower at the ground the better.
And this is a terrific, terrific strain.
I'm straining upwards with the pressure force.
I'm straining downwards with the gravity force
and it is creating a tremendous tension.
What happens if I disturb this balance?
What happens if I let go at the top of the bottom of this rubber band?
You know what's going to happen.
Motion in the vertical, up or down at tremendous speeds.
So the hydrostatic balance represents not a gentle situation
where air molecules are just sort of floating around in the sky
but it actually represents a situation of tremendous stress, tremendous strain.
The atmosphere is under strain at every single moment
and it's always ready to break and it's ready to be plucked.
I mentioned in lecture one that we'll encounter a number of Latin
and especially Greek terms in this course.
In lecture one we encountered the word adiabatic which meant impassable.
A term we'll learn much more about in lecture six.
In this lecture we've already seen the word aneroid
which means without fluid in Greek and hydrostatic.
The prefix was the Greek word for water.
But perhaps I've been remiss
in not introducing you to the most relevant Greek term of all, meteorology.
When I tell someone a meteorologist there are two common and swift questions
that come in reaction.
Which channel are you on, I get asked.
I'm only on your TV.
And why do you study meteors?
After all, isn't meteorology the study of meteors?
Actually, meteorology is Greek for the study of things high in the sky
which is why falling rocks from space are called meteors
even though meteorologists don't study them.
Meteorology is also a title of a book written by Aristotle
around 350 BC at great advance in its day.
Sadly, from the time of Aristotle up until the late 19th century or so
very little progress in our understanding of the weather was made.
Only at the dawn of the 20th century did meteorology start becoming a serious science
like physics, like chemistry, like astronomy.
Rapid advancements took place after World War II
and because of World War II as well.
For one thing radar was invented
and then rockets were created and they launched satellites into outer space
radar and satellites becoming our eyes on the weather.
For another, the military realized we had better start getting a clue
about weather and storms and that brings us to today
where most meteorologists call themselves atmospheric scientists
because we don't like being asked which channel we're on.
Let's summarize.
Temperature, pressure and density are our tools for understanding our atmosphere and its weather.
Pressure exists because the air has weight and pressure decreases with height.
Since air is compressible pressure decreases exponentially with height
as does density.
We recognize that fluids with different densities resist mixing
oil and vinegar in your Italian salad dressing, cold air and warm air at fronts.
At sea level pressure is strong enough to stand a column of water on end 33 feet high
but we saw its pressure differences inside and outside of that column
inside and outside of your soda straw between the surface and the sky
that drives nature into action. Nature wants to move mass from high to low pressure.
If nature always got away we would not even have an atmosphere.
It would have been lost to space and those of us who breathe would miss it.
But our atmosphere is the scene of a great struggle between upward pressure differences
and the downward gravity force representing hydrostatic balance.
Even on a calm day the atmosphere is a place that is straining against itself
always this close to snapping except when it does.
Let's look ahead.
We have seen the very important role that pressure differences play in atmospheric motions.
A further step.
A further step is to recognize that while pressure differences drive winds
pressure gradients determine the velocity and the ferocity of the winds
and we'll learn much more about pressure gradients in future lectures.
First we need to appreciate what the atmosphere is made of
how it came to be and why our planet is even habitable at all.
We'll start on this in our next lecture.
