Welcome back to Meteorology, our survey of the wonders of the weather.
As we've seen in recent lectures, temperature differences can arise for many reasons.
Current locations receive varying amounts of radiation from the sun, depending on location,
time of year, and also time of day.
Surfaces vary in how they absorb the radiation they do receive.
Some are very good absorbers, like blacktop.
Others are not.
Others would be even better absorbers if they didn't reflect away the radiation that they
do receive due to brightness, like snow and light sand.
Surfaces also vary in how they respond to received energy.
The temperature of substances with higher thermal inertia, such as seawater, don't change
very much as they absorb radiation.
This energy, however, however acquired, is not shared efficiently with the overlying air.
Air is a poor conductor of heat due to its low density and lack of structure at the molecular
level.
The third mechanism of heat transport is convection.
Heat transport by the winds.
Temperature differences make pressure differences, and pressure differences drive winds.
In this lecture, we will see how local temperature differences, such as between land and sea,
can create a local circulation, the sea breeze.
The purpose of these winds are to reduce, if not eliminate, the temperature differences
that gave rise to them.
The purpose of these winds are to put themselves out of business.
So a couple of questions to think about as we go through this lecture.
We've always heard heat flows from warm to cold, but we've experienced cold winds as
well, so is that statement, in fact, always true?
In fact, which would better eliminate temperature differences if you could only accomplish one,
to blow warm air to the cold place, or to blow cold air to the warm place?
We'll see.
First, let's revisit pressure.
Pressure largely reflects the weight of overlying air owing to gravity and is proportional to
mass.
Therefore, pressure decreases with height.
Remember surface pressure is approximately 1,000 millibars, and 50% of the atmospheric
mass resides between the levels where the pressure is 1,000 and the pressure is 500
millibars.
So picture a vertical cross-section.
I've drawn here two isobars.
Isobars are lines of equal pressure.
This comes from Greek, iso meaning equal bar, you see in the word barometer.
Here are the 1,500 millibar isobars, and we know that half of the atmospheric mass is
in between.
And that the 500 millibar level is only five and a half kilometers, or three and a half
miles above our heads on average, so that the 1,000 to 500 millibar layer is only five
and a half kilometers, or three and a half miles thick.
Now use your intuition.
I have a layer of air, the 1,000 to 500 millibar layer.
It contains a certain amount of mass.
What if I warm up that air, who wants to expand, right?
So what we've now realized is temperature affects thickness.
When it's relatively warmer, the 1,500 millibar isobars are farther apart.
The 1,000 to 500 millibar layer is thicker.
And by the same token, when the temperature is relatively colder, the 1,000 to 500 millibar
thickness is thinner.
And note something that's very important about this as well.
It demonstrates that although pressure decreases with height, pressure decreases with height
faster in colder air.
Next, we're going to demonstrate that temperature differences make pressure differences.
Let's start with the same thickness everywhere.
This implies the temperature is the same.
But let's introduce a temperature difference.
Let's make it warmer to the right.
Now the 500 millibar isobar is relatively higher above the ground, because the 1,000
to 500 millibar thickness is thicker because the temperature is warmer.
Do you see a horizontal pressure difference here?
Let's pick a point along the 500 millibar level.
And let's look towards the colder and the warmer air at the same height.
If we look towards the colder air, we see that the 1,000 millibar isobar is beneath us.
And the 500 millibar isobar is beneath us as well.
The pressure where we are at this point is lower than 500 millibars.
It's lower than when we started.
But now let's look towards the warmer air.
The 500 millibar level has risen.
And if I look towards the warmer air, I see the 1,000 millibar level is below me, but
the 500 millibar level is above me.
So what I see from this is the pressure is higher than 500 millibars here.
I have relatively higher pressure at the same level.
In the warmer column, I have relatively lower pressure at the same level in the colder column.
Now I have a pressure difference.
And pressure differences want to make winds.
Nature wants to move the mass from high to low pressure.
But we're not done yet.
Where does the air blowing out of the warm column come from?
It's rising up within the warm column.
And air is diverging out of that column.
Do you see that?
So what that means is that mass is leaving this relatively warmer column.
I made this air warmer and made the air thicker, but now the wind is blowing and the air is
leaving this column.
Since there's less mass in this column now, the surface pressure is dropping.
Now where is that air going?
The air is moving towards the colder column.
It's converging into the colder column, adding mass to that column, and that causes the surface
pressure there to rise.
So now the 1,000 millibar isobar is tilted as well.
And we have relatively higher pressure, where it's colder near the surface and relatively
lower pressure, where it's warmer near the surface.
And we've made a circulation.
So let's review our circulation very quickly.
It all started with a horizontal temperature difference.
That made a pressure difference somewhere above the ground.
We looked near the 500 millibar level a few miles up.
That made a wind.
The wind caused air to move out of one column and into another.
The column losing mass had its surface pressure drop.
There's less mass pushing down, and therefore less pressure at the surface.
The column gaining mass saw its surface pressure rise.
That made a surface pressure difference that didn't exist before.
And a wind that closed the circulation loop.
Note that at least at the surface, the wind is blowing from the colder to the warmer place.
Now we're going to apply this to the sea breeze.
We start with ocean and land.
Which surface absorbs more solar radiation during the day?
Actually the answer may surprise you.
The ocean does.
The ocean absorbs more solar radiation during the day because it's darker.
The relatively light color of the sand actually reflects away a fairly large fraction of the sunlight.
When the sun is high in the sky, the ocean surface is quite dark.
What is not absorbed can't change the temperature.
You may be wondering then, why isn't the ocean hotter than the land since it is absorbing
more solar radiation?
And we've seen already two reasons for that.
First, ocean water has an internal circulation.
It's moving the warmed water around.
With the sand, you're just heating the very, very top.
And second, liquid water has a huge thermal inertia.
It resists temperature change, up or down.
So here's the sea breeze circulation.
We have warm air rising over the heated land, cool air sinking over the cooler ocean.
The surface sea breeze is blowing inland from the cooler sea to the warmer land.
And the entire circulation is about one to two kilometers deep or so.
So let's look at a typical sea breeze case and let's focus on Southern California.
This is the city, Los Angeles, California.
Well, actually, it's a topographic map where red indicates relatively higher elevation.
I've noted two places on this map where UCLA campus is, between the ocean and downtown,
a few miles from the coast, and the San Fernando Valley, SFV, which is tucked around and behind
the Santa Monica Mountains.
Now the colored field is surface temperature, but we don't really measure temperature at
the surface.
It's actually measured two meters or five and a half feet above the ground.
Green colors indicate cool temperatures, and when we see reds, they'll be very hot.
And I'm also showing you the surface winds.
We measure surface winds at 10 meters or 33 feet above the ground.
This is a plot for 12Z on August 1.
In meteorology, we use time, remark time, by London time.
12Z is noon in London, so it's 5 a.m. Pacific Daylight Time.
And at this time, it's cool everywhere, and we see the winds are pretty weak.
By 19Z, noon in LA, the land has warmed up a lot.
There's been relatively little temperature rise over the sea, a consequence of seawater's
very large thermal inertia.
And the winds have started blowing, and they're blowing from sea to land.
By 0Z August 2, it's midnight and a new day in London, but it's still August 1 in LA,
it's 5 p.m.
The lengths of these wind vectors indicate the wind speed, and you can see now the winds
are much stronger.
And they're headed inland.
It's very hot inland, particularly in the San Fernando Valley.
Meanwhile, at UCLA, we're a lot cooler because the seawater is helping to keep us cool.
After sunset, the land cools off very quickly, another consequence of the low thermal inertia
of land.
And this temperature difference disappears, so the winds die down.
It's still warmest in the San Fernando Valley, this is the hot part of town.
The reason for this is because the sea breeze reaches there last, and is the weakest by the
time it gets there.
If at night, the land surface becomes colder, we will develop a land breeze.
The circulation will reverse.
Like all winds in meteorology, winds are named by where they come from.
The land breeze blows from land to sea, just as the sea breeze blew from sea to land.
So let's recap.
Here are our sea and land breeze circulations.
Temperature differences make pressure differences, and pressure differences drove winds.
We have warm air rising over the heated land and sinking over the cool sea in the sea breeze
circulation, and it's just the opposite at night in terms of direction, but it's still
warm air rising over the relatively warmer place and sinking over the relatively cooler
place.
We call this thermally direct, the better, more natural way for circulations to develop
in response to temperature differences.
So you may be wondering, how do these breezes actually work to decrease the temperature
differences?
There are several ways, the first of which leads us to the concept of wind chill.
Wind chill is accelerated heat exchange owing to wind.
Picture a cold day.
You feel much colder when it is windy than when it's calm.
But if you take the air and you blow it around, particularly blow it at yourself harder, that
doesn't make the air's temperature change any.
So why do you feel colder?
Well, let's consider a familiar example, hot soup in a cold room.
The soup is losing heat energy to the room air by a conduction.
What this is doing is warming up the air that is in direct contact with the soup.
But air is a lousy conductor, and it doesn't carry the heat energy that it acquired from
the soup vertically away very efficiently.
As a result, the temperature difference between the soup and the air actually decreases as
a function of time.
This decreases the heat loss because the heat loss is proportional to the temperature difference.
The air is actually acting as an insulating blanket helping to keep your soup warm.
Well, you don't want warm soup.
You want to be able to eat it, and it's too hot.
So what do you do?
You blow that insulating blanket of air away, replacing the warmed air, the air that's been
warmed by the soup, with relatively cooler air.
What you've done is you have subjected the soup to wind chill.
The wind chill effect depends on air being a poor conductor and a good insulator.
In the case of the sea breeze, the cool sea air helps hasten the heat loss from the hot
land as it blows across.
There are at least two other mechanisms for helping to reduce the land-sea temperature
difference operating in this particular case.
First, mixing of land and sea air will moderate the temperatures of both and reducing the
temperature difference from land to sea.
But the second actually represents the easiest and most important of all ways of changing
the temperature of air.
First, we need to think about a few things about air.
We need to recall that air is very compressible and recall that compressed air gets warmer.
Let's also recall that pressure decreases upwards, which means it increases downwards.
This means if I take air and I force it to descend, it is encountering higher pressure.
This is mechanically compressing the air.
As a result, descending air warms, air warms on descent.
In fact, the easiest way to change the temperature of air is not to subject it to heating or
cooling, but instead change its elevation.
Descending air warms at a very rapid rate, 10 degrees C per kilometer, almost 30 Fahrenheit
per mile.
Here's an example.
Suppose a mile above my head, the temperature is 70 degrees Fahrenheit.
I grab a piece of this air and I bring it down one mile to where I am.
By the time I get it to my elevation, the temperature of that air is 100 degrees Fahrenheit.
This is temperature change due to volume change alone.
There has been no heat transfer.
We call this the dry adiabatic process.
Dry means no roll from moisture.
Adiabatic means impassable or impossible.
What is impassable here?
Is this temperature change without addition or removal of heat?
This reflects air's compressibility and three things.
First, you can change temperature of air by changing its volume.
Second, you can change volume by changing pressure.
And third, you can change pressure by changing altitude because pressure varies with height.
This is descending air warms because increasing pressure causes its volume to contract.
So too does ascending air cool at the same rapid dry adiabatic rate of 30 Fahrenheit
per mile, 10 C per kilometer.
Rising air encounters increasingly lower pressure, permitting volume expansion.
So the important point here is this.
In the absence of a heat source or sink, rising air cools and sinking air warms up.
So what we see is the vertical motions in the sea breeze circulation are actually working
to decrease the temperature difference that drove the circulation in to begin with.
Air sinking over the sea is warmed by compression.
The rising air over the warm land is cooled by expansion.
The sea air is still cool.
The land air is still warm, but the temperature difference is less than it would have been
without these dry adiabatic effects.
This is why we call the circulation thermally direct.
This is why the circulation is thermally direct.
The vertical air motions are contributing to reducing the temperature differences.
So why is it more sensible for the surface wind to blow from cool to warm than from warm
to cool?
Picture the opposite circulation.
Picture the opposite circulation where the air is sinking over the hot land, compressing
and becoming hotter still.
And picture the cool air rising over the cool sea, actually expanding and becoming cooler.
We call that thermally indirect.
Can air move in such a thermally indirect way?
Yes, if it's forced, but that's not the natural way of doing things.
The sea breeze and the land breeze are both cool winds.
But the winds don't always stay cool.
So my next subject is the Santa Ana winds.
These have been described as those hot dry winds that come down through mountain passes,
curl your hair, make your nerves jump, and your skin itch.
This quote came from a story by Raymond Chandler who wrote stories based in the 1930s, 1940s
and 1950s in Los Angeles.
Most of his stories involved his iconic private detective, Philip Marlowe.
But the Santa Ana winds were also a very common character in his stories.
In fact, one of the nicknames for the Santa Ana winds is the red wind in addition to the
double wind.
And this was from a Chandler story called Red Wind.
Santa Ana winds are the infamous winds of Southern California.
They often blow dry, hot, and fast.
They're said to cause bad hair and worse moods, I'm not sure about that.
But I do know that they dry out vegetation and they start in fan flames.
On January 22, 2007, the Santa Ana winds were blowing, luckily not too strongly, luckily
for me that is.
I was driving west towards home and there was a glow on the horizon.
It was too late to be sunset.
A glow like that on Santa Ana nights means fire.
As I got closer, I realized that the glow was from my town.
Closer still, I realized it was my neighborhood.
It was even closer than that.
The hills behind my house were on fire.
After the cars were packed up with important papers and photos, I went back to take a few
pictures of my own.
The flames were as close as 150 yards, 137 meters, from my back fence.
I could feel the spray from the water dropping helicopters being carried by those dry winds.
With a long lens, I could see the firemen who stood between the fire and our neighborhood.
In one of these pictures, you see a fireman setting a backfire to deny the advancing flames
more fuel.
Sometimes you have to fight fire with fire.
The Santa Ana winds are hot, dry winds that blow from the desert, but they blow when the
desert is cool, so how did they get hot?
Most Santa Ana events start with cold dense air spilling down across the Great Basin of
Nevada and Utah.
This cold air is trapped on its west by the Sierra Nevada mountains, which are a tall and
formidable obstacle.
The southward progress towards LA is partially stopped by a ring of mountains surrounding
the LA Basin.
Here's another way of looking at the topography of Southern California.
I'm showing you the locations of Los Angeles and the Mojave Desert to the northeast and
the Great Basin of Nevada, and we see the ring of mountains which surround our basin.
Now the colored field is the density of the air at the 850 millibar level.
The 850 level is about one and a half kilometers or one mile above sea level.
Red color means less dense, blue is more dense, and here are the 850 millibar winds.
At this time, the air over Southern California has a low density and Los Angeles has a sea
breeze, but all that changes pretty quickly.
Watch as the tide of cold dense air sweeps down from the north on the east side of the
Sierra.
The Sierra is preventing those winds from spreading westward.
This is density at 850 millibars, but you can consider that as temperature.
Recall the ideal gas law, at the same pressure, warm air is less dense than cold air.
So the blue color actually not only means more dense but also colder, and as the cold
air reaches the mountains surrounding Los Angeles, it's stopped, sort of.
Some is sneaking through the passes and canyons, making the winds fast.
Think of a garden hose, the flow is coming out of your garden hose, you can use your
finger to create a restriction and that makes the velocity actually faster, doesn't it?
This makes the flow faster, but it does not make the winds hot.
The situation is a lot of the air is actually passing over the mountain and then diving
down into the LA basin.
The air has gone down slope, it has experienced compression, and it has warmed 30 degrees
Fahrenheit per mile of descent, 10 C per kilometer.
It started off cool, but then it got hot.
So Santa Ana winds start off cool, but they don't stay that way.
This is a type of wind we call catabatic wind.
In Greek this means to flow downhill.
It flows down owing to its initially larger density, initially greater weight.
Now descending air warms up at 30 Fahrenheit per mile, that's 10 C per kilometer of descent.
On ascent, dry air cools at that same rate.
This is a huge number and it's hugely important to meteorology, but I haven't told you yet
why it's 10 C per kilometer, where it came from.
This is the ratio of two important numbers, G and Cp.
G is the acceleration of gravity.
This tells us how quickly an object in free fall gains velocity on descent.
It's 32 feet per second per second, 10 meters per second per second, or 10 meters per second
squared.
Cp is a measure of thermal inertia.
The larger it is, the slower an object will heat up or cool down.
For air in the metric system, it's a thousand four joules per kilogram, a joule is a unit
of energy.
Remember, air warms on descent because the pressure squeezing on the air increases.
Why does gravity matter?
Because without it, there would be no pressure at all and air would have no weight.
So the larger gravity is, the faster pressure changes with elevation.
How to increase gravity?
Well, make the earth more massive, more like Jupiter.
Expansion and compression can change temperature.
But Cp controls how quickly.
Cp is the specific heat of air at constant pressure, and as I said, it measures thermal
inertia.
So the 30 Fahrenheit per mile, or 10 C per kilometer rate, which is so important in meteorology,
reflects the earth's mass, that determines gravity, and the air's composition.
If we change it, we change Cp.
Let's summarize this lecture.
We started with a statement.
Temperature differences make pressure differences, and pressure differences drive winds.
The driving force, pressure, is gravity force per unit area, reflecting the fact that air
has weight.
Air pressure decreases with height because there's less air to push down as we ascend.
Pressure increases downward towards the ground for the same reason.
There's more air above us pressing down.
The not fully realized goal of winds is to remove the temperature imbalances that created
the pressure differences to begin with.
We saw a simple example where unequal heating led to a circulation, the sea breeze, owing
to the relationship between temperature and pressure.
Layers of air became thicker upon being heated.
This created horizontal pressure differences that started the air in motion.
The sea breeze and its nighttime counterpart, the land breeze, are examples of where the
surface winds blow from cold towards warm.
But it's part of a circulation where in other places the winds are blowing in the opposite
direction and some places air is rising and in other places air is sinking.
But even winds that start out cold, cold may not stay that way because air is very compressible.
Burning air to descend makes its temperature rise since the air pressure pushing on the
air is increased.
This is why the Santa Ana winds can be so hot after they are impelled downslope.
Those are hot dry winds that blow from the desert, but they do so when the desert is
cold.
So let's look ahead.
Santa Ana winds represent a fire hazard in large part because they're dry.
Why are they dry?
The air starts off in the desert where it is not only cool, but it may be relatively
moist as well.
In the next lecture we will see that temperature is a powerful control on humidity.
Bringing air downslope not only raises the temperature of air, but it also decreases
its relative humidity.
Now for the flip side, forcing air to rise increases its humidity as the air expands
and the pressure decreases.
So we can force air to become saturated on ascent.
We can force water vapor to condense.
Why does rising air lead to clouds?
Once clouds form, does this change the behavior of how air changes on ascent?
We'll start looking at moisture in the next lecture.
