Music
Welcome back to Meteorology.
In this lecture, we continue our discussion of clouds, stability, and buoyancy.
We will discover why it matters if condensed vapor remains in the parcel as cloud water or falls out as rain.
We'll see why deserts are often found in the lee of mountains, why deep powerful thunderstorms can form,
and why they don't form as often as they could.
This review will be a little longer than most because we're in the middle of a complex but fascinating topic.
But we're into the home stretch now, so let's go.
We've been making use of the air parcel, a blob of air of unspecified size but with flexible sides.
Flexibility means if I increase or decrease the pressure outside the parcel, the inside pressure adjusts to match.
It's the easiest way to change the outside pressure is to move it vertically.
We usually also assume the parcel is closed and insulated from its surroundings.
That means no heat transfer and no mixing.
This idealization is more realistic than it might seem right now.
Remember, a lapse rate tells us how temperature decreases or lapses with height.
We've had three different lapse rates so far, the ELR, DALR, and MALR.
The ELR, or environmental lapse rate, varies in space and time, but it averages 6.5C per kilometer in the troposphere.
The DALR, dry adiabatic lapse rate, is fixed at 10C per kilometer.
The MALR, or moist adiabatic lapse rate, actually varies as well because it depends on how much water vapor is actually condensing.
But we've been taking it to be 5C per kilometer, and that's a pretty reasonable average.
We've been spending a lot of time on the beach in this course, so let's head back there again, armed with our three lapse rates.
A few things to think about on our journey.
Looking up from the beach, you've probably seen clouds overhead, shallow but seemingly organized, looking like pearls on a string, especially in the early to middle afternoon.
Or you may have seen deep clouds form over your head and then pass rapidly inland.
We'll see these clouds during this lecture.
So, it was a warm day, the surface temperature was 30C, and the ELR was 6C per kilometer.
We made a parcel of dry air that started off scorchingly hot, but it didn't stay hot very long, because it cooled at the very rapid DALR of 10C per kilometer of ascent.
We saw from this that we can't lift hot dry air very far, it just won't stay hot.
But our saturated parcel took off like a rocket.
We started with a surface temperature of 30C, the same as its surroundings, but loaded with water vapor all the way up to saturation.
And as the saturated parcel ascended, it still expanded and cooled.
But its vapor capacity also decreased, and that caused the air parcel to become super saturated.
The excess vapor had to condense, and that heat was released to the air and the air parcel.
And that heat reduced the lapse rate in half, from the DALR 10C per kilometer to the moist adiabatic lapse rates 5C per kilometer, and that made all the difference.
Thus, we saw we had a situation in which a rising dry air parcel never became warmer than its surroundings, or its ascent in the atmosphere was very limited.
But a rising saturated parcel could and did become warmer than its surroundings.
This is called conditional instability, conditional instability, conditioned on the presence of moisture and the situation of saturation.
We had conditional instability because the moist adiabatic lapse rate is less than the typical environmental lapse rate in the troposphere, the MALR 5C per kilometer, the ELR averaging 6.5C per kilometer.
But if rising saturated parcels can be warmer than their environment, then why isn't the atmosphere always turning over?
And the reason is we don't encounter warm saturated parcels at the surface very often, not even on the beach.
Instead, air typically starts sub-saturated, cooling faster than the environmental lapse rate before finally becoming saturated.
This air usually starts off negatively buoyant, and that's an obstacle to overcome.
And on many days, it won't be overcome.
So let's take a closer look.
Let's raise a sub-saturated air parcel.
We know it has a temperature and a dew point, reflecting its vapor capacity and vapor supply.
If I lift the parcel, its temperature decreases at the DALR.
I also need to reveal now that the dew point of this parcel also drops.
At about 2C per kilometer, that's the dew point lapse rate.
Actually, that's our fourth lapse rate.
And if I had told you at the beginning we would have four lapse rates to contend with, you might have given up on me.
But we've made it to here, so let's keep moving upward.
So here's our sub-saturated air parcel.
Temperature is higher than the dew point, and we're going to lift it.
The parcel temperature cools at the DALR since it's sub-saturated, and it gets cold fast.
I'll call this line the dry adiabat because it's the path of the dry adiabatic process.
Its dew point is also decreasing, but at a much slower rate of 2C per kilometer.
The dew point is decreasing because our parcel is getting larger, its volume is increasing.
So the water vapor in the parcel is becoming more spread out, that makes collisions more rare.
So we actually have to cool the air farther to compensate for all that extra room that the water vapor has to roam in.
But the crucial point, the crucial point is these two slopes are very different, and they're going to cross.
And when they cross, the parcel is saturated.
The relative humidity is 100%, the temperature equals the dew point.
This is the lifting condensation level, or LCL.
That's the level at which condensation can be achieved by lifting.
So we've accomplished the dry adiabatic approach to saturation.
LCL has another name as well, cloudbase.
We've reached cloudbase.
So what happens next?
We're finally saturated.
Now we cool at the moist adiabatic lapse rate, roughly 5C per kilometer.
I will call this path the moist adiabat because it's the path of the moist adiabatic process.
Note I drew the moist adiabat as a curve rather than a line.
This is admitting that the moist adiabat lapse rate is not a constant.
I previously showed you this movie of clouds in motion over mountains.
This is an example of the dry adiabatic approach to saturation,
followed by a little moist adiabatic ascent above cloudbase.
Let's look at this process in detail.
Consider a mountain.
The wind is blowing from left to right.
Let's make a parcel of surface air and see what happens as it approaches the mountain.
The air is forced to ascend.
As it does so, it cools by expansion and its relative humidity rises.
Suppose the parcel is sufficiently moist that it reaches saturation before arriving at the top of the mountain.
That means its LCL, its cloudbase, would be somewhere along the windward side.
A cloud would form its base at the LCL and extending to the mountain top.
If you're at the top, it's a fog because the cloud base is at your ground.
What happens to the parcel once it reaches the top?
That's an interesting question. What will it do?
Before we address that question, we need to look at this process on our temperature-height diagram.
So let's start with a sub-saturated air parcel.
We have a temperature, we have a dew point, and we know now that as we lift the parcel, their paths will cross.
So let's lift it to the LCL, and we're now a cloudbase.
Temperature and dew point are both lower than when they started, but now they're the same as well.
Now let's lift it even farther, up the moist adiabat to the mountain top.
We're going up the moist adiabat because now we're saturated.
We can compare the parcel's temperature to what it would have been if it had never become saturated over that same ascent.
That parcel's temperature is indicated by the hollow yellow circle.
Condensation warming has partially offset expansion cooling, and that's why our saturated parcel is a fair bit warmer than our sub-saturated parcel would have been.
So here's our cloud.
Extending from the LCL up to the mountain top, we've now seen two different ways of looking at this cloud.
So what's next?
What happens next at this point depends on whether the parcel is more or less dense than the environment air at mountain top height.
If the parcel is positively buoyant, it continues to rise and creates a deep convective cloud.
If the parcel is negatively buoyant, colder than its surroundings, it will sink back down the lee side, leaving behind the mountain cap clouds that we saw in the movie.
So let's look at this latter situation.
I've sketched an environment with a typical ELR.
The environment's temperature at mountain top is indicated by the yellow dot.
The moist adiabatic lapse rate is indeed smaller than the environment lapse rate, at least in the lower troposphere, where there can be a lot of moisture to convert to heat.
But because our parcel started sub-saturated and cooled at the fast dry rate first, this parcel had no chance of becoming warmer than the environment in this particular case.
Our parcel is more dense than its surrounding cloud-free air, so it's going to sink down the lee side of the mountain.
But how it descends? How it descends down the other side of the mountain depends on the answer to a very important question.
Did the cloud precipitate or not? This actually makes a very big difference.
So now let's consider two extreme scenarios.
I'll call them all cloud and no rain, and all rain and no cloud.
First, all cloud and no rain.
If the parcel loses no condensation on the way up, it goes down exactly the same path on our temperature height diagram than it went up.
The reason is because as the parcel starts sliding down the other side, parcel descent causes compression warming that increases the temperature that makes the vapor capacity rise.
To keep from becoming sub-saturated, condensation will re-evaporate to vapor.
So we go down the moist adiabat, the same moist adiabat we went up on.
Until we run out of condensation, that is, that's the LCL on the other side of the mountain, cloud base on the way down.
From there on down to the surface, we warm up at the dry adiabatic lapse rate.
And if we return to the same elevation on the lee side, the same elevation as we started with on the windward side, we see we regain precisely the same temperature and dew point we started with.
It says if we never scaled the mountain at all.
But what if we lost some condensation to rain or snow? What if we lost all of it?
This scenario is all rain and no cloud on our temperature height diagram.
The air parcel has to descend dry adiabatically all the way from the mountain top.
Why? Because there's no condensation to oppose compression on the way down.
All the condensation was left behind on the mountain slope.
So note the temperature ends up warmer than it started. It could even be a lot warmer.
And the dew point increases two Celsius per kilometer of descent, but it ends up lower than its original value as well.
Since the dew point tells us the vapor supply, we know our vapor content is lower.
Of course we lost some vapor terrain on the mountain.
So the relative humidity of the air on the lee side, higher temperature, lower dew point, higher vapor capacity, lower vapor supply, the relative humidity of that air can be very low.
So why do we often find deserts on the lee side of mountains?
Because mountains can steal moisture from air by lifting air to saturation, by helping them rain.
And what clouds leave behind is not available to the air on the way back down.
Now we looked at two extreme scenarios and reality is somewhere in between.
Still, mountains play a very major role in determining the weather and climate of a particular place.
And one reason is their ability to extract moisture from air by lifting air and making it rain.
So now it's time for some instability.
It's time to look at a thunderstorm sounding.
What I mean by sounding is a vertical profile of temperature, dew point, and other properties as well.
A case in which it's possible for a surface parcel to become positively buoyant on a scent, despite starting off subsaturated and struggling.
Here's our environment.
Temperature decreasing in the troposphere, up to a tropopause at about 12 kilometers or so above sea level.
Let's take a surface parcel, a subsaturated surface parcel, temperature less than dew point.
And we're experts at this.
Now let's lift it to saturation, to its LCL, and we see that it's colder than its surrounding environment.
It's negatively buoyant.
But let's keep lifting.
We have some source of sustained ascent.
We have a mountain, a front, some other means of pushing air aloft, even against its own will.
The now saturated parcel follows the moist adiabat.
And look as its new path is catching up with the environmental temperature.
Despite its initial disadvantage, the parcel actually manages to become warmer than its surroundings.
It's reached its LFC, its level of free convection.
At this point, it's the same temperature or higher than its surrounding environment.
And it's convecting freely.
It does not need an external push anymore.
The parcel is positively buoyant.
We have free convection.
From here, the sky is the limit, or the tropopause, which usually comes first.
The rising parcel will eventually exhaust its supply of water vapor, its rocket fuel, its gas tank is going to go empty.
It also approaches the stratosphere, a region of high stability.
In any case, eventually it becomes colder than its surroundings again.
At the equilibrium level, marked on the figure as EQL,
at the equilibrium level, the parcel is the same temperature as its surroundings again.
Its positive buoyancy is gone.
Inertia may carry it upward a little farther, but this parcel isn't going to get much farther away from Earth.
Another term for EQL is cloud top.
It's our first guess at cloud top.
Actually, if you look closely, I've drawn cloud top at a level a little above the EQL since, as I just said,
rising air can overshoot it a little bit.
Let's check out temperatures in the cloud relative to the cloud surrounding environment.
The main part of the cloud is warmer than its surroundings and positively buoyant.
The lower section between the LCL and the LFC, between the lifting condensation level and the level of free convection is colder.
Air had to be pushed to get there and it has to be pushed to stay there as well.
The very top part, the overshooting top above the EQL is also colder than its surroundings.
The strongest updrafts lie beneath the highest overshoots
and the overshoots collapse as the updrafts weaken beneath them.
We made a cloud because we lifted air to saturation and beyond.
As the relative humidity reached 100% though, the excess vapor needed to condense and it needs surfaces to condense on.
Those are our condensation nuclei.
Sand, salt, soot, dirt, actually pretty common.
Lots of the stuff floating around even in so-called clean air.
But remember, even if our cloud is warmer than its surroundings, it's still getting colder with height as well.
Somewhere in the middle, usually about three to five kilometers above the sea level, the cloud is at the freezing level.
The so-called freezing level, I should say, because cloud drops there may not freeze at least right away,
owing to a lack of ice nuclei as we discussed before.
Remember, liquid water is very finicky about what it will freeze on.
Ice wants to form on something that already looks like ice.
And there's a shortage of those, especially in the cloud layer where the temperatures are between freezing down to minus 15C or minus 5F.
This is the zone of super-cooled liquid, the temperatures below freezing, but there are no suitable surfaces to freeze on.
Until maybe an airplane flies through, that's the mother of all ice nuclei.
Now, let's consider the region of positive buoyancy.
This cloud is only as deep as it is because that air had an LFC and it made it there.
Now, note all the distance that the parcel was warmer than its environment from the LFC all the way up to the EQL.
That area represents potential energy that can be used by the parcel to rise and possibly rise very quickly.
We call it CAPE, C-A-P-E, Convective Available Potential Energy.
It's another one of those self-defining terms. It's energy potentially available to convection to clouds.
We also call it positive area, but before the CAPE can be tapped, negative buoyancy has to be overcome as well.
That's the negative area on our sounding.
We call this Convective Inhibition, or C-I-N, and we pronounce it SIN.
SIN is bad. You may have heard that in a somewhat different context.
Now, our sounding has an LFC for surface air, and that air can become positively buoyant if lifted high enough.
But that doesn't mean it has the means to get there.
Just because you have an LFC doesn't mean you'll get storms.
That's a serious forecasting problem. Will there be enough lift?
Will the lift be strong enough? Will it last long enough? Will it overcome the SIN?
Imagine, Stickman is walking along the beach, and he kicks a moist but sub-saturated air parcel sending it skyward.
But let's say the kick wasn't very hard, and the parcel doesn't even reach its LCL before returning to the beach, never having made a cloud.
Well, let's consider a different scenario. Let's say this time he gives the parcel a somewhat harder kick,
and this time the parcel reaches its LCL, forming a shallow little cloud.
But this air never becomes warmer than its surroundings. It never even drizzles.
It just comes back down the same way that it went up.
But now, let's say Stickman had an extra biscuit for breakfast and gives the parcel a crushing kick.
The parcel not only clears its LCL, but also manages to snag its LFC.
At this point, the air is positively buoyant, and it will rise on its own.
Fueled by condensation warming, this parcel will rise quickly towards its EQL.
It'll probably even overshoot a little bit before settling back down.
It's found a new home, and never returns to the beach.
Unless it becomes part of the cloud's downdraft, that is, air and clouds could also rush downward at high speeds as well.
We'll look at thunderstorms in more detail in a future lecture.
But for now, let's return to our old friend the sea breeze.
The sea breeze initiates lots of thunderstorms, and we now have the tools to understand why.
It's a sunny day.
As morning wears into afternoon, the land surface is heating up, and the thickness of the layer between two isobars is increasing.
The pressure difference between land and sea is established above the surface.
Air is rising over the land, spreading towards the sea.
The movement of air out of the column over land is reducing the surface pressure.
That air is crowding into the column over the sea, increasing the surface pressure offshore.
We have now established a pressure difference at the surface between sea and land, and the cool sea air starts moving inland.
The circulation was generated by temperature differences, the ascent of the warm land, the ascent of air over the warm land, and sinking over the cool sea.
And these motions are helping to reduce that temperature difference, but the marine air remains cooler.
All of this we have previously established.
Now, let's take the next step and consider what happens to the cool sea air as it pushes inland.
As you can imagine, it will encounter the warmer air that already resides over the land.
But here's a very important point.
Fluids with different densities do not want to mix.
Fluids with different densities do not want to mix when the warmer air over the land and the cooler air from the sea collide.
They do not mix and a front is formed.
Those air masses not only have different temperatures, but also different densities.
And we have made a front that we call the sea breeze front.
So the sea air is going to burrow beneath or underrun the less dense air over land, forcing the land air to rise over the sea breeze front.
If you live near the coast, you've probably experienced sea breeze frontal passages many times.
You remember that the temperature dropped and the wind direction changed and probably also increased in speed as well.
If the land air is sufficiently moist and if the frontal lifting is strong and deep enough, we can even lift that land air to its LCL, creating a cloud above the sea breeze front.
At least at first, this cloud will probably be shallow, non-precipitating and not positively buoyant.
However, if the land air has an LFC and that LFC can be reached, this sea breeze lifting can provoke deep convection, leading to strong winds and heavy rain.
These storms may also be thunderstorms, which are storms that produce lightning and thunder.
Not all storms are thunderstorms.
Here is a map of mean maximum daily precipitation for the lower 48 U.S. states averaged throughout the year.
It shows where the largest or most persistent rainfall is.
We see the largest values at the Gulf Coast stretching up the eastern seaboard.
There are local maxima on the west coast as well, north of San Francisco and in the mountains of California and the Pacific Northwest.
We can compare that to this map, which shows the average number of days per year of thunderstorm activity.
We see that thunderstorms are very rare along the west coast, but by far the region of highest frequency is along the Gulf Coast, including Florida.
Many of these thunderstorms were initiated by the sea breeze front.
You're looking at visible satellite imagery from NOAA for a day in May during 2003.
This is Florida, we see southern Florida, and sea breezes are developing all along the coast as the land heats up during the day.
Clouds and then deep clouds are appearing on each coast as the sea breeze front pushes inland.
This is the image for 9.45 a.m. eastern daylight time, but remember meteorologists use London time, and that's why the image is stamped 1345Z.
It's 1.45 p.m. London Standard Time.
At this very early time of 9.45 a.m., we see very little in the way of clouds over south Florida,
but the land surface is heating up relative to the adjacent ocean areas and the sea breeze is starting to build.
By two hours later, 1545Z, 1145 a.m., the situation is much different.
Clouds now appear over much of the land surface being best developed near the southwest shoreline.
The land is getting hot, the land air is rising, and some of that rising air has found its LCL.
Meanwhile, cooler, denser marine air is also pushing inland, lifting land air that is moist enough to reach its LCL.
That's good organized lifting, so the thickest clouds are found along the sea breeze front.
The front is best developed on the southwest coast at this time.
If we look closer at the clouds over land, you'll notice that they tend to form thin parallel lines and look like pearls on a string.
We often call these cloud streets or roll clouds. They result from strong, uneven heating of the land and usually appear by the early afternoon.
By 1745Z or 145 p.m. local time, thunderstorms have erupted over south Florida.
These storms formed as the marine air pushed inland, lifted the moist air over the land.
We not only reached the LCL now, but also the LFC.
Notice the roll clouds over central Florida are also now better developed at this time, and also the roll clouds are everywhere except over Lake Okeechobee.
The lake is not as strongly heated as the land services are.
So we saw roll clouds over Florida form as the sun heated over the land surface.
As the land heats up, the relative humidity decreases because typically the vapor supply is not changing.
That would make it seem harder to create a cloud by lifting.
The air is actually getting relatively drier, and you have to lift it farther to bring it to saturation.
Despite that, it's actually easier to make clouds in the afternoon, and here's why.
Say this is our environmental temperature profile at some time in the morning.
Notice we're only looking at the lowest one and a half kilometers or one mile above the surface.
Let's make an air parcel of surface air, sub-saturated so we see the temperature is higher than the dew point.
And by lifting this parcel dry adiabatically, I see I can bring it to saturation with the vertical push of about 600 meters or so.
That's about 2,000 feet.
I may not even be able to get this parcel this far because I may not have a source of lifting.
But suppose I do.
Further lifting of my now-saturated parcel will follow the moist adiabat.
But this parcel is never able to become warmer than its surroundings.
It's always negatively buoyant, so chances are our morning weather is clear sky and no clouds.
But as we move into afternoon, solar heating is making the land surface a whole lot hotter.
The land surface probably has small thermal inertia and it can't stop itself from warming.
Air is a lousy conductor, so upward transport of this energy is pretty slow.
As a result, the environmental lapse rate is getting larger near the surface.
Meanwhile, the surface dew point probably didn't change all that much because nothing has changed the vapor supply.
The temperature and the vapor capacity have gone up.
The dew point in the vapor supply has not, so the air now has an even lower relative humidity than it had earlier in the morning.
If we want to make a cloud out of this surface air, we have to lift it even farther now.
Note the LCL is now located about 400 meters farther above the ground.
But also note there's much less resistance to lifting now.
In fact, note that the environmental lapse rate has actually gotten larger than the dry adiabatic rate over the lowest 800 meters.
This atmospheric layer near the ground has become absolutely unstable.
Even a little push of this parcel upwards will permit it to continue rising even though it's not saturated.
Even stickman could lift this parcel.
But the parcel doesn't remain positively buoyant very long.
And actually, it will probably not get too much above its LCL.
So what we'll end up with is these tiny little clouds, which we see in the afternoon from the beach as our pearls on a string.
So let's summarize.
Temperature in the standard atmosphere decreases with height in the troposphere.
That's the environmental lapse rate, one of our four lapse rates.
Let's make an air parcel and lift it.
As long as it has moisture, it will saturate on a scent because the air's temperature drops faster than its dew point.
Once saturated, it will cool more slowly at the moist adiabatic lapse rate and it might become positively buoyant given sufficient lift.
But what goes up must come down if only somewhere else and some other time.
How air comes down, say, on the backside of a mountain depends on how it went up.
Did it keep its condensation? Did it lose some or all of it to rain or snow?
The answer to that question may determine whether a desert exists on the lee side or not.
Some days, there's no way to get a storm.
You lack lift, you don't have the moisture, you don't have an LFC.
Other days, you do have an LFC but not enough lift to get air there.
On those days, you won't be able to get to the CAPE, the convective available potential energy, and that's a big forecast problem.
CAPE is fuel for storms, positive buoyancy that drives air upward.
We'll see how it is used in organized storms like the squall line and the fearsome supercell in future lectures.
But now, we need to turn our attention to horizontal winds, what drives them, what determines their direction and intensity.
We put our back to the winds in the next lecture.
