Welcome back to Meteorology.
We're exploring the wonders of the weather.
As we've seen, the pressure gradient force is the driving force of the horizontal wind.
And what I've defined as the large-scale wind is that which, owing to distance and time
traveled, is profoundly influenced by the Earth's rotation, and we've been using the
Coriolis force as a proxy for that.
Friction slows the wind near the Earth's surface, and centripetal and centrifugal forces appear
whenever there is curving or circular motion.
Those are our four fundamental forces.
We also looked at several combinations of those four forces.
Pressure gradient force and Coriolis combine to produce straight-line flow, parallel to
isobars, the geostrophic wind, the wind that blows because the Earth rotates.
Adding centripetal to the mix produce curving flow, counterclockwise around low-pressure
systems called cyclones, and clockwise around high-pressure systems called anticyclones.
That was gradient wind balance.
Notice that for the geostropic and gradient winds, winds are flowing past or around areas
of large-scale low and high pressure and not into them or out of them.
But friction helped that happen.
Acting near the Earth's surface, friction helped air cross isobars towards lower pressure
and away from higher pressure, so the geostrophic wind could blow a little towards the low.
And the gradient wind could spiral counterclockwise into lows and spiral clockwise out of highs,
giving us low-level convergence into cyclones producing ascent, giving us low-level divergence
out of anticyclones driving descent or subsidence.
Let's apply the concepts of geostrophic and gradient wind balance, with and without friction,
to the hemispheric circulation driven by heating contrast owing to Earth's ferricity.
Specifically, it's time to consider why the simple sea breeze model doesn't work for the
entire hemisphere spanning pole to equator.
So let's get started.
If the basic sea and land breeze ideas were applied to the entire hemisphere, the circulation
would look like this.
We would have sinking air at the colder north pole above surface high pressure, and rising
air at the warmer equator above surface low pressure, so the surface wind would be directed
from the polar high to the equatorial low.
In meteorology, remember we define winds by the direction from which they have come,
so this surface wind, which blows from north to south, would be called a northerly wind.
And we call this the one-cell model.
It would represent one cell per hemisphere, and this single cell is also thermally direct.
The cold air at the pole is sinking, which helps increase its temperature through compression.
The warm equatorial air is rising and cooling, even if only slowly owing to latent heat release.
The vertical motions that we've just described are working to reduce the horizontal temperature
difference.
They don't eliminate that temperature difference, but at least they're working in the right
direction.
The one-cell model works well for a sea or land breeze circulation because of its relatively
local nature involving short length and time scales.
The scales associated with the hemispheric circulation, however, are so long that the
Coriolis effect cannot be neglected.
Coriolis does two things to this simple one-cell model.
First, the single thermally direct cell is broken into three cells.
So in addition to sinking motion and surface high pressure at the pole, there's also
sinking and surface high pressure at roughly 30 degrees north latitude.
And there's additional ascent and surface low pressure at 60 north.
These latitudes are not fixed.
This is a general tendency.
And from north to south, these three cells are called the polar, the ferrule, and the
Hadley cells.
Let's focus on the middle cell, the ferrule cell, for a moment.
Notice that it's colder at 60 degrees north than 30 north, but in this case it's the cooler
air that is rising and the warmer air that is sinking.
Expansion, cooling, and compression warming are acting to increase the horizontal temperature
gradient in the latitudes, so this is thermally indirect.
But the reason why the ferrule cell is thermally indirect is because it is forced to operate
in this fashion by the polar and the Hadley cells.
You can think of the ferrule cell as like the middle gear in a set of three interlocking
gears it's forced to go into the opposite direction of the other two.
On the basis of our knowledge of the role that ascent and descent play in relative humidity,
we can anticipate the weather associated with our new circulation components.
We expect storms and precipitation at 60 north as well as the equator and sinking air
is clear and potentially hot, so deserts would be expected there.
NASA painstakingly created this image of a cloud-free earth from satellite pictures,
making in my opinion one of the most spectacular images ever produced despite the lack of clouds.
This image represents northern hemisphere summer conditions, specifically the month of July.
Remember the three cell model predicts deserts at roughly 30 degrees north latitude and 30
south as well, where precipitation is suppressed by subsidence.
The deserts appear bright in this picture owing to the absence of green vegetation.
The barren desert soil is actually reflecting a fairly large fraction of sunlight reaching
it back to space.
If the desert had dark land instead, it would be even hotter.
Zooming in on Africa now, we can see the Sahara and the Arabian deserts at about 30 north
and also evidence of dry conditions near 30 south as well.
The prevailing ascent near the equator makes for lush green conditions there, but the three
cell picture is far from perfect.
Heavy contrast, warm and cool seas, elevation and topography also influence where, when
and how much precipitation falls.
Now let's examine the surface pressure gradients.
Between the pole and 60 north and between 30 north and the equator, we see the pressure
gradient is directed southward towards lower pressure just as in the one cell model.
However, the pressure gradient in mid-latitudes between 30 and 60 degrees north is directed
from south to north.
Now of course, these are just the pressure gradients and not the winds because we know
other forces are acting notably and notoriously the Coriolis force.
So now let's consider those surface winds, neglecting friction for the moment.
We're looking down on the earth from above now and I've drawn latitude lines for the
equator for 30 and 60 north and I've marked the north pole as well.
The three cell model predicts surface lows at 60 north in the equator and surface highs
at the pole and 30 north.
So what would our geostrophic winds be?
Let's keep weevilose law in mind.
We're in the northern hemisphere.
So with the wind at our backs, lower pressure would be to the left.
Therefore in mid-latitudes between 30 and 60 north, the geostrophic wind representing
pressure gradient force and Coriolis force and stalemate is a westerly wind.
A westerly wind directed from west to east and we call these winds the prevailing mid-latitude
westerlies.
Closer to the pole, the winds are easterly, the polar easterlies.
These are geostrophic winds neglecting friction and friction would allow these winds to turn
a little bit towards lower pressure.
Note I have drawn the tropical surface winds with a component towards lower pressure at
the equator.
This isn't due to friction, it's due to sphericity.
We showed earlier that because the earth is spherical, the Coriolis force vanishes at
the equator and thus the winds there cannot be in geostrophic balance.
So pressure gradient force can gain the upper hand in the tropics and help direct air towards
the equatorial low even without friction.
Now let's be clear about something.
Although weakened, Coriolis still has an important role to play and the tropics are where hurricanes
and typhoons develop and these tropical cyclones cannot form without what we interpret as the
Coriolis force.
Now let's expand our view into the southern hemisphere tropics.
Coriolis acts to the left following the motion there.
Remember we showed that the earth spins in the opposite direction when viewed from above
the south pole.
So the large scale wind in the southern hemisphere blows with lower pressure to the right and
with the weaker Coriolis force in action near the equator, we get southeast trade winds
between the equator and 30 south also with the component directed towards the equator.
And as a result, there is convergence of surface air at the equator from both hemispheres.
This force has sustained rising motion at what we call the ITCZ, the Intertropical Convergence
Zone.
This is a ring of deep convective storms that rounds the planet where northern and southern
hemisphere air meets.
The ITCZ is not a continuous band of storms and it isn't usually located exactly on the
equator either.
Take a look at this beautiful view from space also courtesy of NASA.
Of course, the equator is located where our ball shaped planet is widest.
So we see that the ITCZ is pushed a few degrees of latitude north of the equator.
Its precise location actually varies with the seasons.
Finally, let's look at both hemispheres simultaneously.
We see we have westerly winds in mid-latitudes and easterlies near the poles in both hemispheres.
The only real difference is in the tropics, where the atmosphere is pushing air towards
the equator from both sides.
So let's quickly recap our northern hemisphere surface winds.
We have westerly winds between 30 and 60 north, easterlies closer to the pole, north easterlies
in the tropics.
This is a very idealized model, presuming no complications from land surfaces and topography.
And we might wonder how well does this hold up in reality.
So let's check it out.
Let's check out sea level pressure first.
This is a map of long term annual average sea level pressure made using tools and data
provided by NOAA.
The plot is centered on the Pacific Ocean.
Europe and Africa are at the edges of the plot, left and right, and north and south America
are to the right of center.
Warmer colors in this image, from the green to red, indicate areas of progressively higher
pressure, and cooler colors from white to purple indicate progressively lower pressure.
We expect to see low sea level pressure at the equator and 60 north and south.
And note this shows up very well in the southern hemisphere, where there's a lot less land
to complicate the picture, especially at 60 south, which lies over the southern ocean
ringing the Antarctic continent.
The equatorial low belt, that white swath around the middle, is less prominent.
And at 60 north the lows are crowded into the relatively narrow ocean areas at that latitude.
We also expect high pressure at 30 north and south, and also at the poles.
And the pressure is indeed higher at 30 degrees, but it's also complicated by land sea arrangements
as well.
Over the eastern Pacific and Atlantic oceans, these are our subtropical highs, which we'll
be calling the Pacific High and the Bermuda High.
And note there's also high pressure over Asia, but it's shifted well northward from
the 30th parallel.
While local high pressure at the north pole is hard to see, the south polar high is very,
very prominent.
That's aided by the extreme cold of the Antarctic continent.
Now this map is very revealing, but it also represents averaging across two extreme seasons,
winter and summer.
So let's look at the seasons separately, focusing on the northern hemisphere.
In the northern hemisphere winter, we see that our low pressure areas at 60 north over
the north Pacific and Atlantic oceans are now very prominent.
These are our Aleutian and Icelandic lows.
These semi-permanent features of the winter season are the weather makers, creating storms
and sending them off into the mid-latitude west release on collision courses with the
North American and European continents.
In winter, we see the subtropical highs at 30 north are weaker, and the highest pressure
by far is over the Asian interior, which is very cold.
In northern hemisphere summer, the Aleutian and Icelandic lows are absent, and our subtropical
Pacific and Bermuda highs are prominent and dominant.
And notice the lowest pressures are over the land areas.
This reflects warm season heating as in the land in the Seabree circulation.
Don't zoom in on southern Asia, where the sea level pressure is particularly low over
a wide area.
We'll discover later that we're seeing an important element of the monsoon here.
Despite the complications of Coriolis, this deep low pressure over land is pulling extremely
moist air from the Indian Ocean on shore, leading to terrific rains, especially when
and where aided by topographic lifting.
Now let's turn eastward to the Pacific.
According to the 3-cell model, the primary sea level pressure gradient is north-south
from the 30 degrees north-high to the equatorial low.
And we see there is a north-south gradient like this in the East Pacific anyway, but
the west-east gradient, the west-east gradient between the Asian low and the Pacific high
looks so much more substantial.
And it's important, in part because it exists and in part because it varies in time, but
I'll tell you more about that later.
Let's keep turning our heads eastward and consider our two powerful subtropical highs.
These are northern hemisphere anticyclones, so they have clockwise flow.
The strong summertime clockwise flow around the Bermuda high carried Columbus' ships
from Spain to the Caribbean.
Columbus left in August and arrived in the Bahamas in October.
The Bermuda and Pacific highs carry other things across the ocean as well.
They carry hurricanes.
This is hurricane season.
More about that in lecture 21.
Overall, we're seeing that the three-cell model is a simplification that is distorted
by seasonality and continents, but still represents an important step towards understanding the
atmospheric circulation, so let's keep going.
These vectors depict summer surface winds.
Recall the gradient wind balance is a result of three forces, pressure gradient, Coriolis,
and centripetal force.
We expected to see clockwise flow around the Pacific and Bermuda highs, and we do.
Let's zoom in on the East Pacific.
Since these are surface winds, we should also expect to see diverging winds out of these
highs, and we do see this, although maybe not quite as much as we might have expected.
Let's keep in mind that the Pacific and Bermuda highs are over water, and the ocean surface
generally exerts less drag on the wind than a typical land surface does, so I'd expect
even more surface divergence out of land-based anticyclones.
The colored areas on this figure indicate wind speed, from nearly calm conditions, which
are colored white, to strong winds, which are green and red.
We see strong winds south of both subtropical highs, heading southwest towards the equator.
Those are our northeast trades.
We'll be looking at convergence at the equator very soon.
What else do we expect to see with high pressure?
From both the one-cell Seabreeze model or the three-cells forced by Earth rotation,
we associate high-pressure areas with descending motion.
So this plot is showing us where air is sinking in the northern hemisphere at the 500-millibar
level.
Remember, that's roughly five and a half kilometers, or three and a half miles above sea level.
Warm colors on this figure are descent, the redder the stronger, and that's easy for us
to remember because with descent comes compression, and we associate red with hot.
Despite what we learned in lecture four.
And we do see that air is sinking in the mid-troposphere near both subtropical highs.
But note, note further that the ascent seems shifted eastward, close to or up against the
west coast of North America and Europe, rather than in the apparent centers of these two
highs.
You know, maybe that descent in those places is getting a little extra help.
And from our Seabreeze knowledge, we might suspect that the ocean surface is cold in
those places, even particularly cold.
And we'll see in a later lecture that we're right.
However, look towards the left side of the plot, the brightest area, the strongest descent
is over North Africa.
Let's zoom in there now.
Actually, now we see that the bull's eye of strongest descent is over the Mediterranean
Sea near the island of Crete.
That's 30 degrees north, so our latitude's right, but something extra has to be going
on.
And note the purple regions of ascent to the west over the Straits of Gibraltar and also
to the east.
That's ascending air, despite being at the latitude of general subsidence.
Something is complicating our picture.
We'll see what it is pretty soon.
While we're here, we can compare Africa's vegetation with our regions of ascent and
descent.
The regions of purple ascent and green land and also red descent and bright dry land match
up very well.
We see the widespread downward motion over South Africa and also over Somalia.
Subsidence has robbed the horn of Africa of the equatorial lushness we see far the west
on the continent at the very same latitude.
Note that the largest ascent in greenest land is actually displaced north of the equator.
The ITCZ may be where air from the two hemispheres collide, but its meeting place and its ascent
tend to reside on the northern hemisphere side.
Let's now center our view on the equator so we can see into the southern hemisphere as
well.
Again, purples indicate places where on average mid-tropospheric air is ascending, and we're
still focusing on the northern hemisphere summer, so it's wintertime south of the equator.
I have highlighted on this figure a globe-straddling band of ascent, nearly continuous across the
entire earth.
It's thick in some places and very thin in others.
This is the ITCZ, at least how it looks during northern hemisphere summer.
And note that it resides up to 10 degrees north of the equator.
Now there are some places with regional ascent in the southern hemisphere as well.
Let's focus on the East Pacific north of the equator now.
Notice how thin the line of ascent is there.
This is air managing to rise despite being squeezed in between two powerful large subtropical
highs.
Boy, the ITCZ might not look like much in this region, but it's still very important,
because we'll see later that a lot of tropical cyclones get their start along the ITCZ and
the East Pacific gets its share, thanks in part to that thin purple line.
And by adding surface vector winds now, we can confirm that the ITCZ represents the convergence
between the northern hemisphere's northeast trades and the southern hemisphere's southeast
trades.
The ITCZ tends to follow the sun, moving into whatever hemisphere has summer, but however,
as I said, its mean position is north of the equator, and part of that is the lack of complicating
land in the southern hemisphere.
Let's now set our sights on the United States, and we see a few interesting things.
Note we're not seeing much in the way of mid-latitude westerlies at the surface here, are we?
And that's thanks in large part to the Rocky Mountains, a formidable barrier.
That purple ascent in the west, of course, is what the Rockies are doing to the air.
And remember, subsidence often occurs in the Lee of Mountains, and we'll explain that in
lecture 17, and we see that in this plot as well.
And later, we'll also see what subsidence means for winter storms as well, but let's
stay focused on the summer season for now.
So what we're seeing is we have mid-tropospheric air descending.
It's descending over Texas, Oklahoma, Kansas, and points farther north.
It's subsiding over Tornado Alley.
That's making the mid-level air over these states hotter and drier.
Meanwhile, note the surface winds are bringing warm moist gulf air far into the Great Plains,
thanks to the Rockies blocking the winds from the west, and thanks to the clockwise motion
around the Muta Haya.
So we're getting subsidence above rich moist gulf air.
That's what helped create and maintain the capping inversion that I mentioned in lecture
9.
This inversion is keeping the lid on the surface air, preventing it from rising and becoming
positively buoyant.
But in many ways, it's like a pressure cooker, and it's heating up during the day, and as
the day wears on and the ground gets hotter and hotter, it becomes easier and more possible
for parcels to rise, and they'll finally get their LFCs, and all they're waiting for
is a good push.
It's like leaving a loaded gun lying around, ready to be fired, and in fact, we call this
the loaded gun sounding.
More about thunderstorms in lectures 18 and 19.
Remember our hotspot of Mediterranean descent near Crete?
Let's zoom in there now and see what the winds are doing in that area.
Ah, we see westerly winds across Europe, but turning south towards the equator.
And along the way, those winds will have to cross the Alps, giving us some of that subsidence
on the lee side of that mountain range as well.
So the clear dry weather of the eastern Mediterranean has a distinctly alpine flavor, and both land
and topography conspire again to complicate our simple three-cell view of the world.
Where there is convergence in ascent, there can be rain, so we're not surprised to see
a good correlation between the purples of ascent and the regions of heavy precipitation,
which are colored orange and yellow and green on this figure.
But the agreement's not great everywhere.
Look in the southern hemisphere polar latitudes.
There's ascent there, but very little precip.
And that reminds us that cold air holds much less water vapor than warm air, and we just
can't get much precip out of air that's too cold.
We can also compare precipitation for the northern hemisphere summer and northern hemisphere
winter, which is summer in the southern hemisphere.
And the largest differences in the northern hemisphere are in the northern Pacific and
Atlantic Oceans, where now we see the winter storm tracks associated with the Aleutian
and Icelandic lows that are so much more prominent at this time of year.
The precipitation is not confined to the latitude of 16 North.
It's more complex than that.
In Brazil, it's summer, and rising motion over heated land helps create rain in central
South America.
Meanwhile, let's look over in Africa.
The rain has followed the sun's south of the equator.
There's still an ITCZ in the equatorial North Pacific, but a southern branch is also now
more apparent, and this is helping to stretch rainfall in the central South Pacific, an
area that might otherwise be barren of precipitation if the simple three-cell model were strictly
correct.
One of my favorite sayings is, in theory, there's no difference between theory and practice,
but in practice there is.
The three-cell model in this case is the theory, and we've been looking at the practice.
But I think you'll agree with me that at this point that the three-cell model was indeed
a good way to start thinking about the atmospheric circulation, even though it is certainly not
perfect.
The bottom line is this.
Earth's ferricity has made a temperature difference that Earth's rotation seems bent on preserving
by preventing the ready and efficient flow of warm and cold air between places having
different temperatures.
Let's think about that.
The Earth is a big place, and even if nature were better at pushing cold service winds
to warmer places on the larger scale and maybe warm winds to colder places as well, the fact
is, the fact is there would still be cold and warm air and plenty of it.
And given that fluids with different densities do not want to mix, the cold and warm winds
would still collide rather than collude and combine.
It is in the far reaches of our planet where air masses are made.
An air mass is just a large body of air that forms over a particular region, acquiring
particular characteristics, temperature, humidity, stability, what have you.
And where air masses meet, we have fronts and convergence, but we need to be a little
careful.
Fronts are associated with convergence, but not all convergence zones are fronts.
Good example of this is the ITCZ, which is certainly a convergence zone leading to copious
precipitation, but it's not a front.
Since although Northern Hemisphere Tropical, Northeast Trades, and Southern Hemisphere
Tropical Southeast Trades are on a collision course, there's no density difference between
those winds, and it's the density difference that defines a front.
It's hot and miserable on one side of that air mass, and it's hot and miserable on the
other, so actually it's the same air mass.
There are two primary types of air masses, continental and maritime, and two primary
source regions, polar and tropical.
So our four major air mass categories are just combinations of these.
Continental polar, which we call CP, continental tropical, CT, maritime polar, MP, and maritime
tropical, MT.
In winter, a continental Arctic air mass might also be identified.
In North America, continental polar or CP air is born in Canada.
In the winter time, it's very cold and dry and produces our cold air outbreaks.
Summer CP air is warmer, but still dry, and the air mass is stable and often free of clouds.
So CP air permits strong radiation inversions at night, owing to its lack of water vapor,
a greenhouse gas, and cloudiness.
Our MT air comes from the Gulf of Mexico, western Atlantic and eastern Pacific.
It is always warm and humid wherever it comes from, but the Gulf and Atlantic air is often
unstable as well, with plenty of cape.
MT air from the tropical Pacific, on the other hand, which reaches California, is stable.
Subsidence from the Pacific High is assuring that.
MP air comes from the North Pacific and Atlantic Oceans.
It's cool and humid.
This is the air mass that keeps the Pacific Northwest mild and wet in winter.
And finally, CT air comes from the desert, the southwestern part of the U.S. and northern
Mexico.
It's only identifiable in the summer season, and then it's hot and dry, often with extremely
low relative humidities.
The American Midwest during summer is the meeting place of three air masses, CP, CT,
and MT.
This helps give this region some of the worst weather on Earth, or, I should say, the best
weather.
Because where air masses meet, weather happens.
We'll talk more about weather in front in the next lecture.
So let's summarize what we've talked about.
We've covered a lot of territory in this lecture, literally.
We started by looking at the thermally-direct one-cell model and why it doesn't work for
the entire hemispheric circulation driven largely by equator-to-pole temperature gradients.
Instead, we wound up with a three-cell per hemisphere structure, with ascent above surface
low pressure at 60 north, as well as the equator, and descent above surface highs at 30 north,
as well as over the pole.
Coriolis force combined with these newly established pressure gradients to establish
westerly and easterly geostrophic winds in the midlatitudes and polar regions of both
hemispheres.
In the tropics, the situations were a little different.
The trade winds that converged on the equator were established a consequence of the fact
that Coriolis force is relatively weaker there.
And the trade wind convergence at or near the equator produced the ITCZ, a sustained
band of lifting leading to rainfall that straddles the globe.
Like the three-cell model itself, the ITCZ is complicated by the arrangement of continents
and oceans and wanders with the seasons.
And indeed, our three-cell model predicted surface pressure features were most easily
seen over the oceans anyway.
The subtropical highs at 30 north were centered over the eastern Pacific and eastern Atlantic
oceans.
We called them the Pacific and the Bermuda highs, being most prominent in the summertime,
and influencing the tracks of tropical storms like hurricanes and typhoons.
In winter, the Aleutian and Icelandic lows near 60 north dominated the hemispheric circulation,
appearing in the northern reaches of the Pacific and Atlantic oceans, and this they create
and guide the winter storms.
The three-cell model, though simple, has given us an easily understandable picture of where
we expect surface highs and lows and what wind directions to expect, and where we anticipate
finding a scent and descent leading to rainfall and desert drought.
Since 30 north, the combined result of earth's spherical shape that made the temperature
difference driving the atmospheric circulation to begin with and earth's rotation created
the three circulation cells that have condemned the Sahara Desert to be dry and desolate.
We also discussed air masses, large regions of relatively homogeneous air created over
continents and oceans near the poles or in the tropics.
These great masses of air acquire different characteristics, temperature, moisture, but
most importantly density, and it's their density differences that prevent them from mixing
at the places where they meet, which we call fronts.
In the next lecture, we're going to see fronts in action.
We'll see what they look like on surface weather maps.
We'll see the ways in which they lift air to saturation and the kind of precipitation
that results.
We'll see how they can help large scale cyclones.
We call extra tropical cyclones develop along them and the ways that they scheme to cause
those same cyclones to become choked off and die.
So until next time.
