Music
Welcome back to meteorology.
Air masses are great piles of air that have different densities,
and these air masses meet at fronts.
One front in particular is the polar front,
which snakes around the globe separating polar air
from more moderate air born farther south.
Along such fronts, extra-tropical cyclones can be born.
They live their lives on, or very near,
the temperature and density contrast that fronts represent.
In the last lecture, we saw a simple but historically important description
of the life cycle of these extra-tropical cyclones.
It consisted of formation along a stationary front
leading to spin and a deepening of the already low ambient pressure
followed by the creation of cold and warm frontal motions
culminating in occlusion and finally in death.
That was almost entirely a surface description.
In this lecture, we lift up our gaze to see what's happening
in the middle troposphere.
We'll see new features, troughs and ridges,
and we'll acquire new concepts with the formidable sounding names
of warm advection and positive vorticity advection.
It's not easy, but hopefully like everything I've covered so far,
it's easier than it sounds.
So, let's get started.
In past lectures, we've learned that pressure largely represents
the weight of overlying air owing to gravity.
Therefore, pressure decreases with height
from an average sea level value of about 1,000 millibars,
and between any two given pressure levels in the vertical,
say 1,500 millibars, there is a fixed amount of mass.
The thickness of that layer, the thickness of the 1,500 millibar layer,
reflects the layer's average temperature.
So, let's consider again the north-south temperature difference
between the pole and the equator,
and let's keep in mind that pressure changes with height
much more quickly than in the horizontal.
So, let's say that the surface pressure is the same across the hemisphere,
but the 1,500 millibar layer is thinner at the pole than farther south,
owing to the polar atmosphere's colder tropospheric average temperature,
and we saw this meant that at a given height,
the pressure is lower to the north.
This means that the pressure gradient force is pointing north,
and the geostrophic wind was westerly into the page
so that low pressure would be put to the left.
Now, let's focus instead on the 500 millibar level.
Notice that it slopes downward towards the cold pole.
We can also think of how far above sea level the 500 millibar level is,
and plot this as a function of space.
So, instead of plotting pressure variations on a constant height chart,
such as sea level,
we're going to start focusing on height variations on a constant pressure chart.
This is the 500 millibar isobaric chart averaged between December and February,
the winter season, when the pole to equator temperature difference is the largest.
Everywhere on this chart, the pressure is 500 millibars.
We're looking down on the northern hemisphere.
The north pole is in the middle,
and contoured is the height of the 500 millibar level above sea level.
We see near the pole the 500 millibar height is only 5,000 geopotential meters.
In the warmer tropics, it's over 5,800 geopotential meters, or GPM.
So, what is this geopotential meter I'm talking about?
I want you to know what it is so that you're not impressed by it.
It's a vertical distance adjusted for small variations of Earth's gravity with height.
Gravity obeys an inverse square law.
We know this thanks to Newton.
So, as you move away from the Earth, gravity decreases with the square at that distance.
But the atmosphere is very thin, so gravity doesn't change very much
over the distance from the ground through the troposphere and into the lower stratosphere.
So, for our purposes, a geopotential meter is nearly identical to a standard meter.
In any event, we measure the height of the 500 millibar level in geopotential meters,
and we call it geopotential height.
Remember, pressure gradients drive winds and determine wind speeds.
But there are no pressure gradients on a constant pressure or isobaric chart.
So, how do we determine wind speed and direction?
Look at the picture again.
There are horizontal pressure gradients when isobaric surfaces,
such as the 500 millibar surface, are sloped.
So, the pressure gradient force on an isobaric chart is represented by height gradients.
In fact, height contours and gradients serve as direct replacements for their pressure counterparts.
And Buie-Below's law on an isobaric chart is simply this.
With the wind at your back, lower height is still a left.
Another similarity is where height contours are more packed, the winds are faster.
And, as there's essentially no friction of 500 millibars,
wind direction is even more faithful to the height contours.
On our wintertime 500 millibar chart, we can detect a belt of fast winds ringing the planet in middle attitudes,
where the height contours are very packed.
The 500 millibar winds are weak in the tropics because the height gradients are small.
So, let's focus in on the United States.
We see 500 millibar heights are generally lower over the land than over the ocean.
This partly reflects the fact that the land in this winter season is colder,
but I'll show later that the Rocky Mountains actually also have a lot to do with this.
What should this plot look like in the summertime?
Let's consider these facts.
The polar regions are much warmer in the summer,
and the reason is because the northern hemisphere is tilted towards the sun
so that sunlight makes a less acute angle with the ground.
So, I expect the 500 millibar heights to be higher in the summertime.
But the temperature at the equator isn't that much different.
There's little seasonality with respect to temperature at the equator.
So, the 500 millibar heights there will not be much different.
So, the net result is the 500 millibar surface in the summertime
should not slope down northwards as severely.
That means that height gradients will be smaller,
and weaker winds should be expected.
And in fact, here is our average 500 millibar map for the summertime.
And indeed, the heights are higher over Canada,
and the height contours are everywhere less packed, indicating weaker winds.
We looked at average winter and summer conditions,
but on any given day, the 500 millibar chart can look very different.
Let's revisit our snowstorm case from the last lecture
and see how features on sea level and 500 millibar charts relate.
Recall that an extra-tropical cyclone had formed along a stationary front in Texas
and then subsequently moved to the northeast.
This map shows surface conditions for 12Z December 15,
which was 7 a.m. Eastern Standard Time, or 6 a.m. in the Central Time Zone.
This is 500 millibar chart for the same time.
On operational charts, height contours are plotted every six decimeters,
which is 60 geopotential meters.
We see the lowest heights are at the top of the figure in northern Canada,
and the winds are generally west to east everywhere,
and we know this because all we have to do is put lower heights to the left.
The height contours reveal a high amplitude, large-scale wavy structure.
Recall these planetary waves.
There are places in the waves where the height contours dip rather farther to the south.
These features are called troughs.
A trough is an axis of locally lower heights.
A prominent trough is residing over the central U.S. just east of the Rockies at this time.
Ridges are axes of locally higher heights.
I've also sketched down the position of our developing cyclone.
And let's note, importantly, that it's located just east of the 500 millibar trough.
We'll see soon that that's a good place for a growing cyclone to be.
The cyclones subsequently move towards the northeast,
in the general direction of the winds at 500 millibars.
Not only do cyclones move, but planetary waves do as well,
usually from west to east, and along the way they'll grow or decay.
Here's the 500 millibar chart for 24 hours later.
We see the prominent trough has shifted eastward.
Our original cyclone has already occluded and has wound up in Ohio.
Two new cyclones formed along the main frontal boundary.
A new trough is digging southward towards the U.S. west coast.
Here, for December 2007, is the 500 millibar chart for 12Z each day.
And watching this animation, we see that features tend to move from west to east,
and as they do so, things are changing.
Things are very dynamic, troughs are building, ridges are building,
and both features are also decaying.
From this, we get a sense for the dynamic nature of the weather.
And a clue at why it's not perfectly predictable.
In our attempts to understand and anticipate the weather,
we'll also pay attention to other levels besides 500 millibars.
The standard levels we look at are 850 millibars, 700 millibars,
500, 300, and 200 millibars.
850 millibars is near the ground in the mountainous western United States.
It averages about one and a half kilometers or one mile above sea level.
The 300 and 200 millibar levels are near the tropopause
in the northern and southern portions of our hemisphere, respectively.
I mentioned that a surface cyclone positioned to the east of the 500 millibar trough
was a particularly favorable one for the cyclone,
and the reason for that is rising motion is established above the surface low.
Naturally, rising motion leads to saturation and storms.
But in this case, what the ascent does is to create, maintain, and increase
the surface pressure drop.
In fact, we saw this was true from the very beginning
when we started talking about the sea breeze.
Picture a column of air residing over the land,
which is heating up during the day.
The air over the land starts ascending
and diverging out of the upper part of the column.
The decreased mass in the column means the surface pressure is decreasing.
Now, in the case of the sea breeze, that induced flow into the bottom portion of the column.
But on the large scale, that induced inflow is opposed by the Coriolis force,
even though friction gives us a little bit of it anyway.
The bottom line is this.
Rising motion helps create, develop, and maintain surface lows,
and when the ascent goes away, so does the cyclone.
Now, we've seen numerous examples of how we can get ascent from below
by lifting so far in this course.
Lifting over mountains, over fronts of all kinds,
convergent zones, and the sea breeze front as well.
But now, we're interested in identifying mechanisms
for producing deep tropospheric ascent through the depth of the troposphere
and not just upward from below.
Here are two, positive vorticity advection and warm advection.
Both of these include the word advection,
which from the Latin means to carry or convey.
It means something is being transported from one place to another.
In this case, what's being transported is warm air
and something called positive vorticity.
Let's start with warm advection because it's a little easier.
Suppose we have cold air to the north and warm air to the south.
Further, suppose we have a southerly wind pushing this warm air northward.
At the location I've indicated by the white line,
warm air is displacing cold air.
The cold air is being pushed out and the warm air is coming in.
This isn't actually a front.
It's just showing what happens as the air flows from place to place.
If we look at the white line,
the temperature should be increasing there, other factors being equal.
This is warm advection.
Now let's look at a vertical plane along that white line.
And let's focus on the 1,000 to 500 millibar layer.
The symbols I'm using here indicate that warm air is coming into this plane from the south.
And what is the warm wind doing?
It's acting to increase the average temperature of that layer.
As a result of this temperature rise,
the thickness of the layer is going to increase.
We recall that thickness is proportional to layer average temperature.
Now in this case, I didn't increase the temperature by heating the air
or by causing latent heat release.
I did it by pushing out colder air and replacing it with warmer air.
I did it with warm advection.
But how does this relate to ascent?
The thickness increase implies that the air must be rising.
I have the same mass.
It's occupying a greater depth as a function of time.
That means the air has to be rising.
Now you may be thinking that as the air rises,
there will be expansion cooling,
which is working against the warm advection.
But by a far shot, the net result is that the thickness is increasing
and the temperature is rising
and the air had to rise in that layer for that to happen.
Our second mechanism for producing deep tropospheric ascent
requires a little more explanation and a concept called vorticity.
In the word vorticity, we see the word vortex to spin.
Vorticity is defined relative to the orientation of a spin axis.
So vorticity in a horizontal plane is actually called vertical vorticity
because the spin axis is vertical.
Vorticity in a vertical plane is actually horizontal vorticity
because, again, it's named by the orientation of the spin axis.
Whatever horizontal or vertical plane,
the sign of vorticity is defined by the right-hand rule.
So if we have horizontal counterclockwise spin,
I take my fingers and I curl in the direction of the spin
and then I use the orientation of my thumb to give a sign to the vorticity.
And since my thumb is pointing up if I curl counterclockwise,
I see that this is indeed positive vertical vorticity.
In meteorology, we like positive vertical vorticity.
Counterclockwise or clockwise vorticity
would give me negative vertical vorticity
and we'd give a thumbs down to that.
There are two sources for vorticity.
The spin of the Earth, which we call planetary vorticity F,
and the spin relative to the Earth, which we call relative vorticity.
We saw planetary vorticity earlier when we discussed the Coriolis force.
The Earth's northern hemisphere is seen from above spins counterclockwise.
This is positive planetary vorticity.
And we refer to this spin as F.
But we also recall that only the components of the Earth's spin
in the local vertical actually matters,
and that's why F was a function of latitude decreasing to zero at the equator.
And that was why the Coriolis force vanished at the equator as well.
Relative vertical vorticity is spin relative to the Earth.
We refer to this with the Greek lower case letter zeta.
Again, counterclockwise spin is positive.
So let's consider an extra tropical cyclone with its counterclockwise flow.
It has positive relative vorticity and due to its spin
and positive planetary vorticity as well due to the Earth's spin.
So we can combine these two sources of vorticity.
The cyclone's total or absolute vorticity is F plus zeta.
At the equator, F is zero.
But in the midlatitudes, the Earth's spin, F, is large enough that absolute vorticity
is almost always positive, even in situations where the circulation is clockwise as around highs.
So let's look at an extra tropical cyclone and anti-cyclone
and remind ourselves that we have counterclockwise flow around the low
and clockwise around the high.
So around the low pressure, we have positive relative vorticity.
And because the Earth is rotating counterclockwise,
we have positive planetary vorticity as well.
For the anti-cyclone, its relative vorticity is negative because the flow is clockwise.
But since F is positive and large, absolute vorticity is still positive,
although smaller than the absolute vorticity of the cyclone.
Relative vorticity has two main components, curvature vorticity and shear vorticity.
Of the two curvature vorticity is the more obvious one.
We see it in the circular flow around lows and highs, which is very clearly spin.
The circulation actually doesn't have to be a closed circle for curvature vorticity to be present.
A flow that bends counterclockwise along the path would have positive curvature vorticity.
And yet, we can have vorticity even when the flow is straight, as long as the flow is sheared.
By shear, I refer to the change of wind speed, direction, or both over a distance.
Here we're talking about the change of the horizontal wind in the horizontal direction.
Let me use an example.
Suppose the wind speed is decreasing towards the north and blowing from west to east.
We have a horizontal wind shear of the horizontal wind.
Now picture a solid object that we embed in this flow.
This object is going to do two things.
First, it's going to translate eastward, carried by the flow.
In other words, it will be infected.
But it also will start spinning because notice it's being given a greater push on one end than the other.
And this shear is going to give the object a positive relative vorticity.
And in this case, the positive relative vorticity exists because it's counterclockwise motion.
Curvature vorticity and shear vorticity are two contributions to relative vorticity.
In some situations, they can cancel each other out.
Let's look at an example where that happens.
The flow is clockwise, so the curvature contribution to relative vorticity, in this case, is negative.
The shear vorticity, however, is attempting to impart a counterclockwise motion on our object.
The combination of the two sees the object being infected by the flow around the bend, but with no net rotation.
We're likely to find local maxima of absolute vorticity in troughs,
in places where curvature and shear vorticity can constructively reinforce each other.
And we call this a vorticity maximum, or more colloquially, a vortmax.
Now, absolute vorticity is a property of the flow that can be transported,
advected by the winds.
Positive vorticity advection will occur downwind of a vorticity maximum, or vortmax.
We call this PVA, the positive vorticity advection.
Note, in this case, the PVA is taking place above our developing cyclone.
PVA can induce upward motion, creating the upper-level divergence
that can decrease or maintain the surface-low pressure of the cyclone.
How and why does PVA induce an ascent?
Let's take a look.
Let's take a look at a vertical cross-section across the cyclone from northwest to southeast,
in an area where PVA is taking place.
So, here is our PVA at 500 millibars.
I see my 1000 millibar isobar.
I see my 500 millibar isobar.
And I've got positive vorticity advection to 500 millibars right there.
Remember, vorticity is spin.
So, PVA means that more spin in a counterclockwise direction
is being transported or advected into the plane that we're looking at at the 500 millibar level.
Further, remember, spin creates lower pressure.
That's the cyclostrophic effect.
So, the pressure is dropping where this PVA is occurring.
And what that's doing is making the 500 millibar level move downward to an even lower altitude.
Notice this is increasing the vertical pressure gradient.
Notice it's also decreasing the thickness of the 1000 to 500 millibar layer.
How are we going to decrease the thickness?
We need to reduce the average temperature.
We need cooling.
Where does the cooling come from?
How about expansion cooling owing to ascent?
There's our rising motion.
The ascent of mass in this column is forcing outflow, causing the surface pressure to drop.
In this process, we can create a cyclone that didn't already exist
or deepen an already existing cyclone, and by deepen, I mean make stronger.
Well, that was pretty complicated, so let's review it pretty quickly.
I'm looking at a vertical plane and the 500 and 1000 millibar isobars.
And at the 500 millibar level, I'm forcing or advecting in some positive vorticity advection.
I'm increasing the spin at the 500 millibar level.
And as I increase the spin, the pressure is dropping.
And that has the effect of forcing the 500 millibar level to get lower.
But that's decreasing the thickness of the 1000 to 500 millibar layer.
That means the temperature has to be going down.
And how do I get the temperature to go down?
I need to cool it.
And what's the easiest way to cool air?
To lift it.
And so now I have ascent.
If I have ascent, I'll have upper level divergence.
And that's causing air to move out of the column that I have the upward motion in.
So now the surface pressure is dropping and I have a cyclone,
or if I already had a cyclone, I have one that's stronger than ever before.
Two important things about this mechanism we need to look at.
First, it's necessary for PVA to increase with height.
In this picture, I showed PVA only at 500 millibars, nowhere farther down.
If there had been the same amount of PVA through the entire column,
we would not have altered the vertical pressure gradient or gotten our ascent,
so the surface cyclone would not have deepened.
Second, and even more importantly, notice that the PVA produced ascent involves cooling.
Did you notice that we have two mechanisms for establishing deep tropospheric ascent?
One involving decreasing the thickness with cooling.
The other involving increasing the thickness through warming.
If those two processes took place at the same place and time,
they would cancel each other out, resulting in no ascent and no cyclone development.
And sometimes PVA and warm advection are two processes do compete,
but sometimes they cooperate and they stay out of each other's way, as in our present example.
In this case, we see PVA and warm advection are actually working cooperatively.
PVA is deepening our surface cyclone.
Cold advection into the trough is causing the heights to drop there,
and warm advection into the ridge is causing the heights to rise there,
so we're increasing the amplitude of our planetary wave.
Now, unsurprisingly, we typically find cold air and troughs and warm air and ridges anyway,
but owing to its position relative to the 500 millibar planetary wave,
the cyclone's counterclockwise flow is helping maintain the wave above it.
So, other questions. Why do troughs move eastward?
Why do extra tropical cyclones decay?
We can get insight into both of these questions by looking again at PVA.
Our cyclone system isn't just the surface low, it's also the trough.
And note that the system tilts westward with height.
The lowest pressure at the surface is located farther to the east.
The lowest height in the middle troposphere is located over to the west,
so we have a westward tilt with height.
So, PVA isn't just making low pressure at the surface.
The spin is also helping to move the trough eastward.
We're seeing that because the PVA is helping to increase the spin at the 500 millibar level
that's causing the 500 millibar heights to drop,
and that's actually shifting the trough towards the east.
However, if the trough winds up above the surface low,
if the trough catches up with the surface low, we call the system vertically stacked.
Our cyclone is a goner at this point,
because note the PVA isn't above the low anymore.
The ascent that had acted to push the air up out of the column above the cyclone is now gone.
But friction is still at work, trying to bring air into the low from the bottom.
So, we have convergence into the low from the surface,
but we don't have divergence in ascent in the cyclone,
so our divergence in the column is decreasing and our low is filling in,
and soon it will be a memory.
Let's summarize.
It was with respect to the Seabreeze circulation that we started realizing
that the pressure difference between two places at the same height
could also be interpreted as height differences between two places having the same pressure,
because temperature affects thickness, the vertical distance between two isobaric levels.
Over land, isobaric surfaces rose as the temperature increased.
That made the pressures at a given height higher
and the height of a given pressure surface higher as well.
We exploited this in this lecture when we looked at 500 millibar maps.
On these maps, the pressure is 500 millibars everywhere,
and we plotted how far above sea level that pressure could be found.
And height gradients served us just as well for determining winds
as pressure gradients did on surface pressure charts.
On the 500 millibar chart, we saw troughs and ridges,
places where the 500 millibar heights were locally low or high.
The planet is girdled with these troughs and ridges,
part of our grand system of planetary waves.
And we realized these waves play an integral role in the extra-tropical cyclone life cycle,
because they themselves move, they deepen, they decay.
And because they can push around warm and cold air,
and another property called vorticity.
We saw our extra-tropical cyclones form or further intensified
when there was a source of sustained deep tropospheric ascent.
We discovered two somewhat contradictory ways of getting deep ascent.
We could advect warm air into a place.
Advect means to carry, pushed by the winds.
Warm advection into a layer like the 1000 to 500 millibar layer
increased its temperature, made it thicker, and warm advection forced ascent.
Vorticity is spin, and spin makes low pressure.
We had two sources of spin, our Earth's rotation, and the spin relative to the Earth.
The sum of the two was absolute or total vorticity,
and this vorticity could be advected as well.
And where we found positive vorticity advection, we found the spin was increasing.
Making more spin in the middle troposphere made the 500 millibar heights drop.
That made the 1000 to 500 millibar heights shallower and the 1000 to 500 millibar layer colder.
Again, implying ascent because we were doing this mechanically and not by directly changing the temperature.
Two very different mechanisms that could compete or cooperate.
And when they cooperate, air rises over surface cyclones and they can deepen into monsters.
In the next lecture, we will keep our focus on the extra tropical cyclone
and consider other ways of making deep tropospheric ascent.
If we want to understand the weather, if we want to anticipate and predict it,
these are the concepts we need to understand and the parameters we need to forecast.
How will the winds be shifting? How much ascent might we get?
Will it be in the right place at the right time?
We may never be able to forecast these perfectly, but at least we're starting to know why.
