Music
Welcome back to meteorology.
As we've seen, extra-tropical cyclones are large-scale,
roundish areas of low pressure with counterclockwise flow
in the northern hemisphere that are born, live, and die
in or near fronts.
We've seen that convergence into these cyclones from below
leads to rising motion, clouds, and storms.
More than that, the ascent produces upper-level divergence.
And by upper level, I mean the middle to upper troposphere.
As air diverges out of a vertical air column, surface pressure can drop.
And low surface pressure is, after all, what a cyclone is all about.
After all, it's an area of low pressure at the surface,
and making the low pressure lower develops the cyclone more.
As long as the ascent and the surface pressure falls
are in the right place, that is.
In the last lecture, we saw there were two somewhat contradictory
and competitive ways of producing deep tropospheric ascent
leading to upper-level divergence
that could maintain, intensify, the surface low.
Warm advection and positive vorticity advection,
which we call PVA.
They used very different means to get the job done.
One caused ascent in an isobaric layer
by displacing cold air with warm,
which made the temperatures, the layer thickness,
and the air within rise.
The other introduced more and better spin into the layer,
which causes heights of the isobaric surfaces above the ground to drop.
That also implied a cooling that ironically implied ascent.
But both conserved to deepen a surface exotropical cyclone
by evacuating air out of a column above the low.
And as long as they're not trying to work the same territory,
as long as they're not working in the same place at the same time,
that's what will happen.
In other words, both are characterized by establishing divergence
in the middle to upper troposphere.
We can see divergence on upper-level charts.
Upper tropospheric charts are at least infer its existence.
We have to be a little careful, though,
because sometimes we think we see divergence that isn't really there.
I'll explain.
In the last lecture, we looked at 500 millibar isobaric charts.
These plotted the height of the 500 millibar level
as a function of space.
We saw lower 500 millibar heights were generally located near the pole,
where the air is colder and the thicknesses are smaller.
And the height contours and spacing told us wind speed and direction,
just like our old isobars did.
But the 500 millibar level isn't the only place to look.
In fact, it's not the best place to look for upper-level divergence by any means.
Let's look at the 200 millibar level instead,
which is near the tropopause and mid-latitudes.
I've drawn two height contours on this plot.
They indicate how far above sea level the 200 millibar pressure level is.
Lower height is to the north and higher heights are to the south.
Recall that the northern hemisphere geostrophic wind blows with lower height to the left
and the narrower the contour separation, the faster the winds are.
So I didn't really need to sketch on these winds, did I?
We had lower height to the north, so the winds are westerly.
Plus, the winds tend to follow the height contours,
so they're diverging away from each other as the height contours separate.
Ah, there's the divergence.
We're at upper level, so chances are, if the air is diverging there,
the air beneath that level is rising up to the level of divergence.
But note I marked the ascent region with a question mark.
Why am I not sure that there's ascent there?
The reason is I may be seeing divergence,
but I also may just be seeing difluence, which means to flow away.
The reason is that the winds are indeed moving away from each other,
but they're also slowing down because the height counterspacing is widening.
And if the slowing and the widening exactly balance, there is no divergence.
So we have to be a little careful in interpreting what we see.
One feature to watch for on upper level charts like 200 and 300 millibar maps are jets.
Jets are tubes of high velocity air.
In particular, we look for jet streaks or jet maxes,
which are often elliptically shaped regions where the wind speeds are largest.
We can appreciate the shape of a jet streak by understanding
that jets are like tubes that meander in space, including the vertical.
So here I'm showing you a three-dimensional jet tube
that is intersecting an isobaric surface, such as the 200 millibar level.
The cross-section of this tube, as it passes through the pressure surface,
is elliptically shaped.
The wind is blowing from left to right, increasing in speed
when entering the streak and decreasing on the other side.
We call these the jet entrance and exit regions.
The contours I'm showing here are not iso heights.
They're not isobars.
They're isotex, lines of constant wind speed.
You see the Greek word for speed in there as also used in the word tachometer.
So where's the divergence in the deep tropospheric ascent?
If you look along the jet axis,
you see divergence on the rear side of the jet streak and convergence ahead.
So you might guess that there is ascent directly behind the jet max
and descent just ahead, and you'd be wrong.
This is one of those instances where we can be fooled
by the difference between divergence and difluence.
But let's take a look at these winds.
Note that there is no curvature to these particular winds in the way that I've drawn them,
but there's something else.
There's plenty of horizontal shear,
and this shear is inducing counterclockwise positive relative vorticity
on the north side of the jet streak
and clockwise negative relative vorticity on the south side.
We remember that vorticity is spin,
and relative vorticity is the spin relative to the earth.
And we've defined positive vorticity as counterclockwise spin in a horizontal plane.
That combines with the large positive spin owing to the counterclockwise rotation
of the earth itself produces large positive absolute vorticity.
It's a local vorticity maximum, and we call it a vortmax.
So there may be a vortmax associated with this streak,
and it will be located on the left flank.
That's north in this particular picture.
And there may be a vortmin on the right flank to the south.
Also remember, the wind can push vorticity downwind.
The wind can infect vorticity.
So where is their positive vorticity advection?
Where is their PVA at this level?
It's downstream of the vortmax.
It's also likely this PVA is increasing with height,
which is a requirement to produce deep tropospheric ascent.
So instead of descent ahead of the streak,
there's actually ascent on part of its left flank.
And we call this the left exit region of the jet.
Now there's PVA increasing with height in the right entrance region as well,
and the reason for that is the same,
although it's probably a whole lot less obvious.
Look to the south of the jet in this case, and we have a vortmin.
That's a local minimum,
and that means there has to be higher values of absolute vorticity,
both downstream and upstream as well.
So it's the upstream region of larger vorticity
that is the source of the PVA and ascent in the right entrance region.
Do you remember our December 2007 snowstorm,
the one with the surface cyclone that formed just east of the 500 millibar trough?
I've added the location of the 200 millibar jet streak to this picture.
The surface low resides beneath the right entrance region of the streak,
so that's another favorable indicator for development.
So let's consider our four quadrants of the jet again.
We have established that PVA will induce ascent in the left exit and right entrance quadrants.
This pattern of rising and sinking motion will induce what we call a secondary circulation,
but this circulation is not of secondary importance.
Let's focus on the exit region.
At the jet streak level, the ascent and descent should be creating a flow heading south,
out of the updraft and over south down into the downdraft.
So the air is rising on the north side of the exit region,
it's sinking on the south side of the exit region,
and so there should be a wind at this level that is blowing from north to south.
The secondary circulation loop is closed by realizing that that has to occur
along with flow from south to north, the opposite direction in the lower troposphere,
and that's what I'm showing you on this figure.
That low-level flow, southerly in this particular example,
can play an important role in enhancing moisture advection from the Gulf into the Midwestern United States,
and that is fuel for storms.
And it may likely manifest itself as a jet at the 850 millibar level,
which is about a kilometer and a half above sea level,
and about one kilometer above the ground in the Great Plains.
That is often the top of the friction layer.
Such low-level jets are, in fact, an important ingredient in severe weather,
and we've just seen one reason why they conform.
We're starting to build a more three-dimensional view of the atmospheric circulation.
We've looked at horizontal cross sections and vertical cross sections,
and we've been struggling to put these together.
And we see that it's an atmosphere with a lot of shear,
and we've seen the importance of the horizontal shear of the horizontal wind,
but now it's time to ask a very basic question.
Why does wind speed tend to increase with height in the troposphere?
In other words, why do we have vertical wind shear?
Here is a plot of how zonal wind varies with height
at about 30 degrees north latitude during winter.
The horizontal axis is wind speed increasing to the right, the vertical axis is height.
Zonal means west to east, so this is the west to east wind,
averaged west to east around the 30-degree latitude circle.
Thus we call this the zonally-averaged zonal wind.
Boy, that's a mouthful.
Note that the wind speed increases with height
from relatively small-average values near the surface
up to about 40 meters per second at the tropopause.
This is called the subtropical jet stream.
40 meters per second is 90 miles per hour.
That's a lot of wind, and it also implies a lot of vertical wind shear.
So why does wind speed increase with height in the troposphere?
Let's consider some possible factors.
First, we recognize that friction acts to slow the winds near the ground,
so as we ascend vertically away from the surface, wind speeds can increase.
But friction is typically acting only in the lowest kilometer or so,
so this is not a major factor regarding why we can get 90 mile per hour winds at the tropopause.
So instead, let's think about density.
Early on, we realized that density also decreases very quickly with height,
and that air at the tropopause is only one quarter as dense as air at sea level.
Lower density means less mass in a given volume and less resistance to an applied force,
so a given pressure gradient force can drive the wind much faster.
Well, yes, the density decrease with height is indeed a factor here,
helping the tropopause wind get to 90 miles per hour, but it can't be the whole story.
It can't be the whole story because no wind speeds in the stratosphere are decreasing with height,
despite the fact that the air is still getting thinner.
So what is the real answer?
By a large margin, the reason the average westerly wind increases in magnitude with height
in the mid-latitude troposphere is because it's colder to the north.
So let's see why.
First of all, we've realized that temperature differences make the pressure differences that drive the winds.
Now we will realize that temperature differences cause something else.
They cause vertical wind shear.
It makes our horizontal wind change in the vertical direction,
and this is no more than a straightforward extension of our understanding of the wind.
So let's look at a vertical cross-section extending from the colder north to the warmer south.
And you can picture this as spanning pole to equator, if you wish,
or just 60 north to 30 north. It's all good.
There's likely some wind at the surface, but let's neglect that.
For now, I've drawn the 1,000-millibar length,
and I've drawn the 1,000-millibar length.
There's likely some wind at the surface, but let's neglect that.
For now, I've drawn the 1,000-millibar level as horizontal,
meaning there's no pressure-grading force in this plane.
But it's colder to the north.
It's colder to the north, so the vertical distance between the 1,750-millibar layers is going to vary with latitude.
And that makes the 750-millibar level dip down towards the north,
producing a pressure difference at a constant height
or a height difference on the 750-millibar isobaric surface.
So we may not have started with the wind, but we sure have one now at 750 millibars,
and it's due to the north-south temperature gradient.
Since the pressure-grading force is pointing north,
we have a westerly wind directed into the screen.
So let's keep going.
Let's consider the 750 to 500-millibar layer.
It's still colder to the north,
so the thickness of this layer is still smaller to the north.
We started with a 750-millibar surface.
It was tilted down to the north,
but now we get a 500-millibar surface that has to tilt even more.
That means the horizontal pressure gradient force is even larger at 500-millibars,
and even if the air weren't less dense, we'd still get a stronger wind.
The temperature difference hasn't just affected the wind at a single level.
It is causing the wind speed to change with height.
It has made vertical wind shear.
Okay? Let's keep going.
It's still colder to the north in the 500 to 250-millibar layer,
so the 250-millibar surface tilts even more, giving us an even stronger wind.
This is getting easy. Will this keep going?
Actually, it won't.
We're at the level of the subtropical jet now, the level of maximum wind.
The next layer up, the next layer up, the story finally changes.
We've finally reached a layer.
We've reached a place in which it's actually warmer at the north pole
than it is at the equator, even in the wintertime.
The 250- to 100-millibar layer is thicker to the north,
which means that the isobaric surface at the top of that layer
tilts somewhat less than it did at the bottom of the layer.
The tilt hasn't gone away,
but the wind is now getting weaker with height,
despite the fact that density is going down.
Now, you may be wondering how could it be warmer at the pole
than the equator anywhere during the winter,
given the fact the pole doesn't even receive any sunlight for six months.
But here's a hint.
Temperature decreases with height in the troposphere.
It increases with height in the stratosphere,
or at the very least, it stops decreasing quite so quickly.
And in the standard atmosphere, the tropopause is located
at about 200 millibars or so, 12 kilometers above sea level.
But it turns out that the tropopause level varies with latitude.
The tropopause level varies with latitude a lot,
and near the pole, it's only 8 kilometers or 5 miles up above sea level.
At the equator, it's 17 kilometers up that's more than twice as far.
Tropopause level at the pole is about 300 millibar level,
and it's way up at 100 millibars at the equator.
So, in the north, the 250 to 100 millibar layer is in the stratosphere,
and temperature has already stopped decreasing with height.
In the south, however, the layer is still in the troposphere
and still getting colder quickly with height.
We're looking farther and farther up,
and the pole isn't getting colder anymore, but the equator is.
So, the equator is catching up to the temperatures of the pole,
except maybe I should probably say it's catching down instead.
But the upshot is this.
The tropical troposphere is deep,
and temperature decreases with height in this layer.
So, although the surface temperature at the equator
or the pole starts off a lot colder,
and although the environmental lapse rate is nearly the same
across the hemisphere, in our weather sphere,
the tropical tropopause is routinely,
routinely the coldest place on Earth.
So, let's compare and contrast our north pole and equator.
Here's how temperature varies with height in the tropics, on average.
The tropical tropopause is located 17 kilometers above sea level.
The temperature there is minus 80C or minus 112F.
Polar temperatures do start out a lot colder at the surface,
and although it cools with height at about the same rate,
the key difference is the polar troposphere is very shallow,
in part because it's so cold.
Above the polar tropopause, temperature doesn't increase much,
but at least it has stopped dropping.
So, we see the equator-to-pole temperature gradient vanishes
at 12 kilometers or so,
and this is the height of the tropopause in mid-latitudes,
and it's the level of the subtropical jet.
Our mid-latitude westerly winds have increased with height
up until the point where the temperature gradient vanished
and the location of the jet.
The location of the jet at the height
where the north-south temperature variations disappeared
is not a coincidence.
Here's an important point.
We have seen the relationship between horizontal temperature gradients
and vertical wind shear now.
When it's colder to the north, the vertical shear is westerly.
That makes a westerly wind increase with height,
and this happened from the surface up to the level
of the subtropical jet.
So, by the same token, if it's colder to the south,
the vertical shear is westerly instead of westerly.
So, if we have a westerly wind,
that should make the westerly wind decrease with height,
and that's what happened above the subtropical jet.
But what if the surface wind is westerly
and yet it's colder to the north?
We would have westerly vertical wind shear,
just like we had before,
but this means the westerly wind that we have near the ground
should actually decrease with height
and then turn around, change direction over to westerly,
all because of this westerly shear.
This will apply in the polar regions.
So, let's take a look.
Suppose the 1,000-millibar level is tilted downward
towards the south.
Lower pressure is to the south,
so we would have an westerly geostrophic wind
directed out of the screen.
But it's colder to the north,
and so thicknesses are smaller to the north,
and as a result, the isobaric surface
tilt towards the south will decrease
and eventually work its way to tilt the other way.
So, the winds may be easterly at the surface,
but they'll become westerly with height,
owing to westerly vertical shear.
We're going to apply this to the polar easterlies
of the 3-cell model right now.
Do you remember our 3-cell model?
Surface low and high at 60 and 30 north,
mid-latitude westerlies, polar easterlies,
tropical northeast trades at the surface.
At that time, we didn't discuss how wind direction
and speed looked like above the ground,
but we had the tools to do that now.
We understand that horizontal temperature gradients
determine how wind speed and direction
change with height.
So, here's how the zonally-average zonal wind
varies with latitude during winter.
We're plotting latitude versus height,
and we're looking at the entire hemisphere now,
not just at 30 north.
The warm colors represent fast westerly winds.
There's our subtropical jet
at about the 200-millibar level above 30 degrees north,
and those wind speeds there are up to 100 miles per hour.
In mid-latitudes, between 60 and 30,
we see there is a westerly wind at all levels
from the surface clear up to the top of the figure,
which is at about the 50-millibar level,
and that's in the stratosphere everywhere on Earth.
That's about 21 kilometers or 13 miles above sea level.
The purple areas show where the average zonal wind
is easterly.
As an example, look in the tropics.
The tropical surface winds,
we know they blow from the northeast,
but they do have an easterly component.
And note that this easterly component in the tropics
is not changing very much.
I see very little in the way of contours
in the vertical there.
There's very little vertical wind shear in the tropics,
and so what does that tell us?
It means that the horizontal temperature gradients are small.
Vertical shear results from horizontal temperature gradients,
so where there's little vertical shear,
it must mean that the horizontal temperature gradients
are small, and we'll see that's true in the tropics pretty soon.
We're also supposed to have easterly surface winds
in the polar regions,
and if you're straining your eyes to find the purple there,
I can sympathize with you.
We could barely see them on the figure.
This is because the polar easterly
switch around to westerly with heights so very quickly,
and that's due to the westerly vertical wind shear.
It's because it's colder to the north in the lower troposphere.
So let's continue and look now at how temperature
varies with latitude and height,
and now I've sketched on two isotherms.
Those are lines of equal temperature,
and these isotherms represent 20C and 0C.
That's about 68 and 32F.
During the winter, or any other time of the year for that matter,
the tropical average surface temperature is about 25 Celsius
or 77 Fahrenheit.
In mid-latitudes, the average surface temperature is closer to freezing.
At the equator, you'd have to ascend to 550 millibars
or so, about five kilometers above sea level,
to find temperatures quite that cold.
The more vertical these isotherms are,
the larger the horizontal temperature gradient is.
So look at the verticality of the isotherm in this case.
The reason is because the larger the vertical orientation
of the isotherm, it means the temperature variation
in the horizontal is larger.
But note that the 0 and 20C isotherms are nearly horizontal
when you look in the tropics.
So there's little horizontal temperature gradients there.
Temperature varies little from place to place in the tropics.
That's why the tropical Easterly winds aren't changing so much with height.
We don't have much in the way of temperature gradients,
so we don't have shear.
But here are two more isotherms, representing minus 25 and minus 50C.
These isotherms are at a lower level over the pole than over the equator,
so it's still colder to the north.
But note the slope of these isotherms is gradually becoming more horizontal.
The north-south temperature gradient is diminishing with height,
and if we look at the minus 60C isotherm, we see it is nearly horizontal.
And this is the height where the pole to equator temperature difference vanishes,
and as the temperature difference vanishes there,
so does the vertical wind shear, so that's the level of the subtropical jet.
Now for the switch.
Look at the minus 70C isotherm.
You have to look over the equator,
and it shows that it's colder to the south than it is to the north
at the very top of the figure.
The tropical tropopause is very cold.
And since it's colder to the south, we have easterly vertical shear now,
and that's why the mid-latitude westerlies start weakening with height.
Okay, so how does this look in the summertime?
In the summertime, we have more uniform heating across the hemisphere.
That means weaker horizontal temperature gradients,
and therefore we should expect less vertical wind shear.
So we would anticipate that the subtropical jet is a shadow of its winter self.
So, let's summarize.
We covered a lot in this lecture,
and we used a lot of the concepts we've acquired during this course thus far,
but it all had a theme,
even if that was only apparent in hindsight and that theme was shear.
It was all about shear,
shear in the horizontal that causes spin we call vertical vorticity,
and shear in the vertical that results from horizontal temperature gradients.
More than that, we have put some of the final touches on the masterful portrait
that is our atmospheric circulation.
We've seen that our atmosphere circulation now is a functional latitude,
a function of height, and a function of time.
The ingredients?
Solar radiation, sphericity, finicky atmospheric absorbers,
a low thermal inertia surface that acts as a black body, and planetary rotation.
Many of the consequences boil down to that one word, that one concept, shear.
Horizontal wind shear that fed extra tropical cyclones,
providing them with vorticity, advection,
and other means of promoting deep tropospheric ascent.
And vertical wind shear that we will soon see has consequences for storms,
for good and for ill, no matter which side,
bed, weather, or good you're rooting for.
Shear makes low pressure, and shear is important,
and we will see more examples of just how important it truly is.
We're moving into the last part of this course,
hopefully it's been a smooth ride so far,
but let's now take a bumpy ride over some mountains.
