Music
Welcome back to Meteorology.
In the last lecture, we learned a little bit about weather radar,
one of our main tools for detecting and tracking severe weather.
We also examined squall lines, a form of organized precipitating system.
Squall lines are a type of mesoscale convective system, or MCS.
These are precipitating storms that are responsible
for a large fraction of warm season precipitation in the American Midwest.
In this lecture, we will see new uses for radar
and another type of MCS, the supercell thunderstorm.
Let's start, however, by continuing to explore how MCS's get started.
We've seen that squall lines can form on or near cold fronts
associated with extra-tropical cyclones.
Squall lines and other kinds of storms, such as supercells,
can form along other barriers or boundaries as well,
such as the front range of the Rocky Mountains,
or a pseudo-cold front called the dry line.
The dry line is a boundary characterized by substantial difference
in moisture content as revealed by the dew point.
Oftentimes, there's not a lot of temperature contrast across the dry line,
especially during the day.
Dry lines often form in Texas, Oklahoma, Kansas, and Nebraska,
particularly the western portions of those states in the spring and summer seasons.
Generally, they're the meeting place between hot, moist, and tear from the gulf
and hot, dry, sea-tea air from the desert southwest.
This map shows a dry line that formed in Texas during April 2000.
The dry line is indicated by the unfilled half-circles in orange,
pointing at the more moist air.
If we look closely, we see little temperature contrast,
but a very large dew point change.
Dew points drop from 68 Fahrenheit on one side to 29 Fahrenheit on the other,
a huge decrease in absolute and relative humidity.
Typically, there's a larger temperature contrast across dry lines at night.
Let's keep in mind that water vapor is a greenhouse gas,
and its presence, along with clouds,
helps keep temperatures from dropping quite as much at night.
There's little of both on the dry side of the dry line,
so it tends to get colder there.
Hours earlier, that dry line was located farther to the west,
and it caused a line of storms to be initiated all along its length.
These storms fired up along the dry line and then moved away.
Some of these storms were supercell storms that produced large hail,
high winds, and tornadoes.
Supercells are another form of organized convection.
They're rotating storms that form in environments with substantial vertical shear.
They're most commonly associated with tornadoes, but let's be careful.
Not all supercells are tornadic, and in fact, most aren't.
And not all tornadoes are produced by supercells.
That said, supercell storms have the greatest likelihood of producing tornadoes,
especially intense ones.
The secret ingredient for supercells is large amounts of vertical wind shear,
Cape is also necessary, but sufficient shear is absolutely essential.
It is this shear that makes the difference between the ordinary multicellular thunderstorm
that we saw comprising the squall line and the rotating supercell.
And the reason? The reason, again, is spin makes low pressure.
But in this case, the spin is in a vertical plane, which is useless to the supercell,
unless it's tilted, that is.
So please take a look carefully at this figure, and notice that we have westerly winds shear.
And if we put an object into this wind flow, we would expect it to start rotating in a clockwise direction.
The next thing I want you to think about is, pretend that's a solid object, and it's rotating,
but how about a less substantial object, which we call a vortex tube?
Air also wants to rotate.
So I'm going to use this red tube in order to try to mimic what the vortex tube might look like.
And I'm going to turn this way, because that's the way the wind shear is pointing.
I'm going to say this is east.
And this tube is rotating.
And my fingers are going to indicate the sense of that rotation.
It's rotating in this fashion.
Now I'm going to turn towards you.
Notice that my fingers are pointing this way.
That's still rotation in a vertical plane.
But suppose this vortex tube is tilted, not all along the path, but just part of the tube.
How? How about by a thunderstorm?
And as a result of the thunderstorm updraft, pushing the tube up, we are going to take this rotation,
which is rotation in a vertical plane, and we're going to tilt it to rotation in a horizontal plane.
So notice that now I have created two counter-rotating vortices.
Look at my fingers.
This one is rotating clockwise.
The other one is rotating counterclockwise.
And both spins are in a horizontal plane.
Let's look at this from the top down.
Here's the original cloud's updraft, the one that is not lifted.
The one that is lifted and tilted the vortex tube.
But this storm is not rotating.
So I'm looking at this updraft and the air is rising.
And this is the updraft that is lifting the vortex tube.
The vortices that are lifted create low pressure on the flanks of the original updraft.
Since the shear is westerly, the vortices are on the north and south flanks.
But I hasten to emphasize this is not a supercell.
There is no net sense of rotation.
The low pressure is in the mid-troposphere that is created by this sense of spin.
And the upward-directed pressure gradient force draws air up on the flanks of this original updraft.
So new storms are created on the flanks of this original.
And these are the rotating supercell storms.
Notice the one on the north side is clockwise rotating, a scene from above.
And the one on the south side is counterclockwise rotating.
Finally, the original ordinary cell updraft is going to die as ordinary cells are wont to do.
But the rotating supercells survive.
And as a result, the storm appears to split, although we have just realized that's an illusion.
But still, you can think of it as we just got two storms for the price of one.
On May 9, 2006, several supercells developed over the Texas Panhandle.
Several splitting events can be seen along with cell collisions and mergers
as the storms move to the east and the northeast.
Watch carefully, and watch as the storms appear to split, their motions also appear to change.
Here's a sounding taken to the east of where those storms were formed.
And what we see in this sounding is an incredible amount of cape, 6,200 joules,
and almost no convective inhibition.
If we took a surface parcel and lifted it to 300 millibars undiluted,
it would have an 18 Celsius or 32 Fahrenheit temperature advantage over its environment.
That is an extreme amount of positive buoyancy.
If this looks unfamiliar to you, I'm presenting this to you in a slightly different format.
This is a SKU-T, which I introduced in the last lecture.
Temperature is still the horizontal axis, but now lines of constant temperature or isotherms
aren't straight up anymore. They're tilted from the lower left to the upper right.
The red curve is the temperature and the dew point on this one is plotted in green.
The gray shaded area shows all of that cape, convective available potential energy, available to this storm.
Did you notice on the radar loop that not only did some cells split more than once,
also once the cells split, they did tend to move away from each other?
Ordinary convective cells tend to move with the mean wind,
but split supercells tend to move either to the left or to the right of the mean winds,
and we call them left movers and right movers, respectively.
Here's a numerical simulation of a splitting supercell storm.
The red blobs indicate zones of large rainwater content,
and the arrows reveal a sense of rotation in the mid-tropospheric winds.
Note the split. Careful examination shows it was actually a development of two new storms
on the flank of the original rain area, followed by that original rain areas decay.
Note the new storms are rotating, and they move quickly away from each other.
In reality, the storms were also moving eastward with the winds,
but I've subtracted the eastward part of this motion out.
The original ordinary cell moved with the mean winds,
so why do the two new supercells move to the left or the right of the mean winds?
Let's focus on the right mover, the one with counterclockwise rotation.
Here's our right mover's updraft.
It's a rotating updraft, spinning counterclockwise.
The air is rising in the center of the circulation.
The spin is creating low pressure that's helping to keep the air rising.
The updraft is also still lifting vortex tubes,
and so counterclockwise and clockwise rotations are still being induced on its flanks,
just as it was for the ordinary cell.
But at this time, the updraft is part of a rotating supercell instead,
and the storm tends to move towards the flank that is producing the same sense of rotation.
Here, that's to the south, for the left mover that would be to the north.
Well, there's another ingredient. We also have westerly vertical wind shear,
and I've drawn that on the picture now.
And shear also creates pressure perturbations.
Low pressure on the down shear side, which is to the right in this case,
and high pressure on the up shear side.
This also makes the storm want to move to the east
because the pressure is dropping in that direction.
So the combination of these two effects is to make the storm move to the southeast
of the shear and the winds.
So here is our right-moving storm,
and a mirror image of this is happening on the other side with the left mover.
Many times, you don't see actual split pairs on radar
because the left mover fails to form or dies very quickly.
Instead, you would see a sudden change in direction of the convection and the radar echo.
If it suddenly starts moving to the right of its original path,
the ordinary cell precursor has evolved into a right-moving supercell.
Why do the left movers tend to die quickly?
Actually, the reason for that also has to do with shear.
Suppose I made a plot where I drew wind vectors at various heights
for some stations like in the Great Plains, including the surface,
the one-kilometer wind, the two-kilometer wind, etc.
I will have created a hodograph, which is a Greek word for path graph.
It's just showing how the winds change as a function of height.
So take a look at my surface winds.
I've drawn them going from the southeast towards the northwest.
It's very likely this is maritime tropical air coming up from the Gulf.
There are two kinds of shear being demonstrated on this plot.
Speed shear, as we've considered before,
but now also directional shear because the wind direction is changing with height.
And note also the wind direction is shifting clockwise with height.
We call this veering.
If it were the other direction, we'd say the wind had backed with height.
There are a lot of reasons why wind direction can change with height,
especially veering and particularly in the Great Plains.
We have friction near the surface that's slowing the wind down,
allowing it to move more directly towards low pressure.
The Rockies are a formidable topographic barrier,
and ultimately we have prevailing mid-latitude westerlies if we go far enough aloft.
The bottom line is this.
The clockwise directional shear turns out to enhance the right mover
and suppress the left mover to the point where the left mover may never form following the split.
This is a numerical simulation of a splitting supercell storm,
but this time we have winds curving clockwise with height.
Again, the eastward part of the motion has been removed.
Note the splitting still occurs, but is very different now,
and the difference between the left and right movers is obvious very early on.
In this case, the left mover does survive and actually splits again if you look at the top of the figure.
We also saw that behavior in the radar loop I showed earlier.
So here's our clockwise turning hodograph again.
And note now I've drawn on a couple of shear vectors,
and I'm drawing them extending from the head of the vector representing the bottom of the layer
to the head of the vector representing the wind at the layer top.
And at the surface, I'm drawing a wind vector,
a shear vector that's going from the southwest to the northeast.
But between three and four kilometers,
I've drawn a shear vector that is going from the northwest towards the southeast.
So this shear vector is turning with height,
and in the mid-troposphere, it's pointing more northwesterly rather than westerly.
Originally, the shear vector was westerly,
and it did not favor either of the new split storms.
We had a shear, and it was also inducing pressure perturbations high on the one side
and low on the down shear direction.
But now, because of directional shear,
the mid-tropospheric shear is now pointing more towards the right mover,
and that's putting the low pressure on the down shear side
in a position where it can help the updraft of the right mover.
Meanwhile, the high is on the up shear side
that's suppressing the ascent in the left mover,
and that's one reason why the left mover may not last very long.
Sometimes, the right mover radar echo takes on a distinctive hook shape
with the hook pointing to the right of the storm motion.
This is evidence of strong horizontal rotation,
such as might be concentrated into a tornado.
This image is from Laughlin Air Force Base radar on April 24, 2007,
at 2351Z, just before 7 p.m. local time.
There's a small area of purple color embedded in the echo,
representing a 65 dBZ echo.
That usually indicates hail.
Only wet hail is reflective enough to produce echoes of this magnitude
on the logarithmic scale that we use for radar reflectivity,
and the point is the supercell's powerful updrafts
help it to be an efficient producer of hail.
And here's the hook at the echo's south end.
A tornado touched ground in Eagle Pass, Texas,
just a few minutes later, killing five and injuring 41.
Let's examine the structure of the hook echo
and see what it reveals about the supercell.
Let's start with the basic hook echo shape.
To me, it kind of looks a little bit like a kidney.
Now I've sketched on frontal boundaries,
which represent where evaporatively cool air is colliding
with the warm, moist environmental air that's feeding the supercell.
This is very reminiscent of an occluded extra-tropical cyclone,
but on a much smaller scale.
Our cyclone in this case is called a mesocyclone,
for sort of middle or medium size low.
The mesocyclone is where the tornado might be found.
Nearby is the main storm updraft.
The true principal regions of descent we're now seeing
are called the forward flank downdraft and the rear flank downdraft.
They're marked FFD and RFD.
And let's look at the storm airflow,
the surface airflow around the storm.
The updraft is being fed by unstable air
from the mesocyclone's warm sector.
And the downdraft air is spreading
and pushing the cold and warm fronts around.
Here's a numerical simulation of a supercell
looking from the southeast.
Air chilled by evaporation is colored blue,
and the warm inflow is colored green.
The cloud outline is in white.
Notice it's writhing.
It seems like it's alive.
In fact, it seems downright angry.
Now I'm showing just the updraft,
where the air is rising faster than 20 meters per second
or 45 miles per hour.
This is the beating heart of the supercell.
And look closely.
It is rotating.
The updraft has used shear in a vertical plane
and tilted it to create horizontal spin.
Let's now zoom in beneath the cloud.
I've sketched on cold and warm fronts,
and the deep blue area is the rain shaft
or the rain curtain that's coming down
from the anvil cloud above.
The orange tube, the orange tube indicates
where large concentrated rotation is.
Large vertical vorticity.
Large spin in a horizontal plane.
Is this a tornado?
You be the judge.
So we're seeing a sequence of short-lived tornado-like vortices
appear and disappear in this animation.
Note the horizontal shear
and the horizontal spin along the gust front.
The superposition of this counterclockwise spin
with the counterclockwise spin
of the mesocyclone itself above it
may be very important.
Also note, a lot of the precipitation
is not reaching the ground.
It's evaporating first,
and that's what's maintaining the cold pool
that's beneath the supercell.
Next-rad radars can also see winds
in addition to radar echoes.
Well, they can sort of see winds.
They can see winds as long as they're directed
at or away from the radar's line of sight.
This utilizes the Doppler effect,
which is familiar to us from the changing pitch
of a train whistle or a car horn
as it approaches or recedes away from us.
In that situation, the wavelength
of the frequency of the sound wave is shifted.
In the case of radar, it's a bit more complicated,
but ultimately, it's based on the same physics.
Let's see if we can see the mesocyclone
or tornado circulation in the Eagle Rock tornado case.
So here is the radar image from Laughlin, Texas,
at the time the tornado was reported on the ground.
But this isn't reflectivity, it's velocity,
directed either towards or away from the radar.
The National Weather Service also makes velocity displays
routinely available, but they're messier
and they're a lot harder to interpret.
But let's see if we can take a look at them.
The colors indicate speed as deduced by the Doppler effect.
Cool colors are towards the radar, warm colors are away.
So our very first step is to identify where the radar is.
The radar is located at the white circle.
Note there are cool colors to the radar's right
and warm colors to the radar's left.
The cool colors indicate wind blowing towards the radar,
so that's easterly flow blowing from east to west
towards the radar.
And the warm colors to the radar's left,
that flow is away from the radar,
so actually it's still easterly flow.
So we have a wind blowing from the east to the west
across the radar.
Let's now focus in on the circled area.
Look closely, there are warm and cool colors
in very close proximity.
The warm colors are indicating to me 64 knot winds
that's 74 miles per hour directed away from the radar,
and almost right alongside flow almost as strong
directed towards the radar.
We've got strong flow away from the radar.
We've got strong flow towards the radar.
This is the only part that we can see
because the rest is parallel to the radar's line of sight.
But we can fill in the gap,
and we can see strong counterclockwise rotation.
Now I've sketched on the hook echo
from the reflectivity display,
and so we realize now we are seeing
the intense circulation of the mesocyclone,
and perhaps we're even seeing the tornado itself.
This is a map of all tornado reports
over a seven-year period ending in 2008,
made using tools from the Storm Prediction Center,
which is part of the National Weather Service.
There are over 11,000 reports on this particular map.
These cases, these 11,000 tornadoes,
resulted in 491 deaths and over 6,500 injuries.
If you look closely, many of the tracks
show out southwest to a northeast motion.
That's the motion of the parent storms of the tornado,
most commonly right-moving supercells
moving to the right of north or northeast-bound
MT flow coming up from the Gulf.
Look farther to the west.
We see that tornadoes are relatively rare
in mountainous regions.
But now look in California, particularly the Central Valley.
Tornadoes are actually more frequent
than you might have guessed in this part of the world,
and they tend to be aligned along California Route 99,
which follows along the foothills
of the Sierra Nevada Mountains.
This actually brings up a conundrum.
That's where most of the cities in the Central Valley are.
We only know the tornadoes have formed
if we have someone to see them and spot them.
Tornadoes are classified using the Fujita Scale,
which is invented by Ted Fujita,
a scientist from the University of Chicago.
It consists of six categories, F-0 through F-5.
F-0 are weak tornadoes with winds
between 40 and 72 miles per hour.
They account for close to half of all tornadoes.
F-3, F-4, and F-5,
those represent maybe only 6% of cases.
F-3 starts at 158 miles per hour,
and F-5 starts at 261 miles per hour.
But we'll soon see that they cause most of the deaths.
Scale assignments are usually based on wind damage.
Someone goes out and looks to see what's left
after the tornado has gone by.
An enhanced Fujita or EF Scale is also now in use,
utilizing more damage parameters.
Now I'm showing you tornado frequency for the same period,
but now just limited to F-3, F-4, and F-5 tornadoes.
There are a lot fewer points on this plot now.
Less than 3% of the total for this particular period,
but these storms, this 3%,
accounted for almost 3 quarters of all the fatalities.
Here's a few quick tornado facts.
Tornadoes can last from seconds to roughly an hour,
and they can occur in sequence, as suggested in my animation.
How do tornadoes get their color that comes from condensation
and the debris picked up by the vortex?
The fastest winds ever recorded were over 300 miles per hour
well into the EF-5 category.
That vortex probably had a pressure drop of 100 millibars.
Strong tornado winds can push and lift anything not nailed down,
and more than a few things that are.
In the movie Twister, a tornado was shown
sucking a grown man up and out of an underground tornado shelter.
Actually, that's unlikely to happen.
The tornado really gets its strength
by being able to get underneath objects
and pick them up and throw them.
That's why cars are death traps,
owing to the aerodynamic lip that strong tornado winds can produce.
And they don't really seek out mobile homes.
Those structures are just particularly easily damaged.
The wall cloud is a very distinctive feature of the supercell
and also a possible precursor of the tornado.
It's a place where the supercell's cloud base
has been lowered very ominously.
This one's actually pretty easy to understand.
The wall cloud resides near the updraft
in a region of large horizontal rotation.
Remember, spin makes low pressure,
and the mesocyclone represents spin.
Air drawn into the mesocyclone may or may not be rising,
but it's expanding anyway because the pressure is dropping.
So the cloud base is lower because the air there is spinning.
That air has been brought to saturation,
dry adiabatically.
Another severe weather hazard is large hail,
which we define as larger than three-quarters of an inch
or about the size of a penny.
There are about 12,000 reports of large hail on this map,
but this actually only represents eight months' worth of reports
during the year of 2007.
This is what we saw colored purple
on the National Weather Service radar displays.
Let me also talk a few words about the supercell's environment.
Supercells need CAPE and vertical wind shear,
particularly the latter, as we've demonstrated.
The ratio of these two, CAPE divided by the amount of shear,
has proven skillful at differentiating between
supercell and multi-cell type environments.
We call this the bulk Richardson number.
In honor of a man who actually we will mention later on in this course,
and it's often an abbreviated BRI or BRN,
there's no single way of defining the bulk Richardson number,
which is a little bit of an issue,
but the most common way of formulating it
would have values of 50 or lower
to indicate the supercell threat becoming larger.
So you will encounter this measure
if you look at soundings and severe weather pages on the web.
Let's summarize what we discussed in this lecture.
The intense rotating supercell results from taking large vertical wind shear
and tilting it into horizontal spin,
with the ultimate spin being the tornado.
So supercells need CAPE,
but they also need copious amounts of shear.
Tilting vertical shear into horizontal spin
creates two counter-rotating vortices.
One clockwise, the other counter-clockwise.
This spin leads to the creation of new upward motion
through the cyclostrophic effect,
and the new storms that form in that upward motion
acquire this new sense of rotation.
On radar, it looks like a split,
getting two storms for the price of one.
The left mover spins clockwise,
the right mover counterclockwise,
and their tornadoes, if any,
may acquire this sense of rotation.
But the vast majority of tornadoes
are observed to be counter-clockwise rotating,
and this is likely because we also tend to have directional shear
in the vertical direction as well.
The turning of winds in the clockwise direction with height
favors the counter-clockwise rotation of the right mover
and suppresses the clockwise rotation of the left mover,
and we showed why.
On radar, supercells often events hooks,
which are a consequence of the rotation of their mesocyclones.
Sometimes we can even see the rotation itself on radar,
which provides limited wind information.
We've had a few lessons on the wild weather now.
The next topic is a little more Pacific,
as Pacific as the ocean that is.
We need to know more about the ocean and its circulation
before moving on to our next kind of wild weather,
the hurricane.
Thank you.
