Welcome back to meteorology.
Oceans are very important to both weather and climate.
They represent a huge volume of water and thus serve as the atmosphere's principal
reservoir.
Recall also liquid water's very high thermal inertia as well as its very large density.
It's almost a thousand times more dense than air near sea level.
Thus, oceans can store and retain a lot of energy in a comparatively small space.
It's a vast reservoir of heat energy as well.
In addition, the ocean is always in motion.
By that I'm not just talking about waves but also currents.
It's probably not surprising that the ocean's surface currents are strongly influenced by
the winds that are impinging on the ocean's surface, the winds that are pushing it and
dragging it.
The resulting air-influenced water movements will determine whether a current is cold or
warm, swift or slow.
And we'll see that the deep ocean has a circulation as well that is no less important.
In our examination of the atmospheric circulation, we saw the sweeping clockwise turning winds
centered at about 30 degrees north latitude over the Pacific and Atlantic basins dominated
the flow in mid-latitudes and subtropics, especially in the summer.
Those were our Pacific and Bermuda subtropical highs.
And from this we might guess that the ocean's surface currents are also largely clockwise
and we'd be right.
And we might further guess that they had pretty much in the same direction as we delved deeper
into the top layer of the ocean.
Well, we'll just have to see about that.
Let's begin.
In the atmosphere, pressure decreases with height and the vertical variation of temperature
is complex.
In the ocean, pressure increases with depth very, very quickly, owing to liquid water's
great density.
In fact, you'll experience a thousand millibars of pressure just due to the liquid water mass
by going down only 33 feet or 10 meters into the ocean.
Does that sound familiar?
In lecture two, we discussed the workings of the barometer and we saw that atmospheric
pressure could support a column of water 33 feet tall at sea level.
By the same token, you could say that an atmospheric column that extends to outer space and a liquid
water column only 33 feet tall exert the same pressure on the ground.
The total pressure being exerted at a point 33 feet down underneath the sea surface is
2,000 millibars, what we call two atmospheres.
That's the air's 1,000 millibars and the ocean's contribution of 1,000 millibars as well.
If you continue plumbing into the ocean's depths, you gain one additional atmosphere
of pressure for every 33 feet or 10 meters down, so you get to bone-crushing pressures
pretty quickly.
The vertical variation of temperature in the ocean often looks like this.
I'm plotting temperature for what we might call the standard ocean.
We start with a roughly constant temperature layer immediately below the surface.
Wave activity is helping to keep this layer vertically well mixed.
Then there's a zone of rapid temperature decrease we call the thermocline.
And finally, farther beneath that, we have a deep layer with relatively small temperature
variation with depth representing the deep ocean.
Great slayer and thermocline depths vary markedly with latitude, longitude and season,
as well as on inter-annual timescales for reasons that we'll see soon.
Here's a plot of annual average sea surface temperature, which I'll be abbreviating often
as SST.
The warm colors represent the warm temperatures.
And unsurprisingly, the sea surface is warm in the tropics and cold near the poles, so
latitude is a fairly good proxy for temperature.
And yet, there are very interesting departures from that simple picture.
Let's zoom in on the northern hemisphere parts of the Pacific and the Atlantic Oceans.
And I've drawn a line across at about 25 degrees north latitude.
This guide helps us see that at this particular latitude, the oceans are cooler on their east
sides and warmer on the west sides.
Notice that the colors are cooler off of Baja California at the east side of the Pacific
than they are off the Asian coast.
These isotherms also slant strongly southeastward across the Atlantic as well.
Now two more lines are marking two rather more northerly latitudes.
Notice now that it's warmer on the east sides of the two oceans.
All of this, combined, reflects the ocean circulation.
These in the atmosphere represent nature's attempt to move energy around in the form
of heat, and ocean currents also accomplish substantial heat transport as well.
So here's a rough look at the principal surface ocean currents of the North Pacific.
The color coding I'm using indicates whether it's a warm or a cold current.
Let's start with the red arrow heading westward at about 15 degrees north.
This is the north equatorial current, carrying warm water across the tropical Pacific.
It turns north northeast along Asia's east coast to form the carotio current.
Carotio means black tide in Japanese.
The carotio carries warm water far into the North Pacific.
The circulation then continues south as the cold California current, which flows along
the west coast of North America.
This current transports cooler waters into the tropical east Pacific, accounting for
our sea surface temperature gradient across the ocean.
Closer to the equator, notice that the flow is actually west to east.
This is called a countercurrent.
The story is similar in the Atlantic.
The north equatorial current flows westward and feeds warm water into the Gulf Stream.
The Gulf Stream is part of a current system that carries warmer water far into the North
Pacific.
If you look closely, there are cold southbound currents near Greenland, including the Labrador
current that rounds Newfoundland.
And in middle latitudes, we can see that the west coasts of our continents tend to have
cooler waters than the east coasts.
The east coasts have warmer currents instead.
This is a reason why the climates of the two coasts west and east of each continent are
so different, even when considering locations sharing the same latitude.
But the main thing, the main thing that oceans do whether warm or cold, is to moderate temperatures,
making the swing between high and low for a day or between summer and winter smaller
than they otherwise would have been.
Here is a map of average surface air temperature for the winter season, December, January,
February, for North America and the adjacent ocean regions.
The first thing we see is that colder temperatures extend farther south over land than over the
ocean.
Over the oceans themselves, we see a little bit of the influence of the cold and warm
currents, but even the cold currents tend to be a lot warmer than the land, a lot warmer
in the mid-latitude and polar regions.
In summer, however, we can see a much larger difference between the west and east coasts
in the land temperatures, and that's due in large part to pronounced ocean temperature
differences.
Look at the California current.
The California current is cool, much cooler than the land, and the mid-latitude westerlies
are pushing that cool air ashore, helping to keep the coastal regions more pleasant.
The Gulf Stream and the Caribbean, however, are quite warm, and the bright red region
extends well into the Midwestern and Eastern U.S.
So there's little ocean-born relief for those parts of the country.
In fact, this is our moist, unstable, maritime tropical air that fuels squall lines and
supercells.
To demonstrate ocean influence, I've selected two locations on this map, located at 40 degrees
north, very near Springfield, Illinois, and one in the East Pacific.
These locations share the same incoming solar radiation, at least at the top of the atmosphere.
The amplitude of the seasonal cycle of surface temperature, however, is very different.
It's 50 degrees Fahrenheit over the land, and only 14 Fahrenheit over the ocean.
This reflects the much lower thermal inertia of land and the moderating influence of oceans
among other things.
But note also something else.
Note that the location, the ocean location, is coolest and warmest months are delayed
relative to the continental location.
The land area is coldest in January and warmest in July, and that's not too long after they
experience their shortest and their longest days.
The ocean, however, is coolest in March and it's warmest in September.
This is also consistent with the large thermal inertia of liquid water.
It takes time to heat up or cool down liquid water.
Let's see how sea surface temperature varies with time through the year, focusing on the
Atlantic Basin.
We see warmer temperatures pushing northward and then retreating to the south.
Soon, we'll see that the heating up of the Gulf marks the beginning of the hurricane
season in the Atlantic.
The variation of coastal sea surface temperatures off of North Africa, Spain, and locations
farther north are pretty large as well.
And in most places, we can note that the warmest sea surface temperatures are indeed reached
in September and the coolest in March.
We saw that the North Pacific and North Atlantic circulations both consisted of clockwise gyres,
reminiscent of the surface wind patterns that we have seen.
And at the first order, the surface ocean currents are going to flow where the surface
wind is pushing.
As we look deeper into this, though, it gets more complicated.
So let's take a look.
We start with the surface wind, such as the northeast trade winds of the tropical North
Pacific.
And while the wind is pushing the water southwestward, the ocean surface layer current is moving
both more slowly and to the right of the wind.
Why is that?
Recall that our surface wind represents a balance of forces, including pressure gradient
force, friction, and coriolis, one that made the wind blow northeast to southwest across
the northern hemisphere tropical ocean.
The primary forcing for the wind is pressure gradient force, PGF, but the surface wind
has deviated to the right of that forcing due to the coriolis effect.
And it is this wind in turn that exerts a force on the ocean directed towards the southwest.
But that's now our primary forcing.
The surface ocean current is also influenced by coriolis, which is trying to make a turn
to the right.
As a result, the current deviates to the right of this new primary forcing, which puts it
even farther to the right of the surface wind direction.
And it flows more slowly, in part because water is denser and it's harder to push.
Now, let's look a little deeper.
The surface layer current is dragging along the water underneath, representing the primary
forcing for the next layer down.
But coriolis force is also trying to make that water turn to the right of this forcing.
So at this depth, the current is weaker, yes, but even more turned rightward relative to
the surface wind.
This keeps going with the current slowing and turning clockwise with increasing depth
and by about 100 meters down, that's about 100 yards, note that the water is flowing
in the opposite direction to the surface wind.
It's flowing slowly, but it's flowing in the opposite direction, and we call this an
ekman spiral.
The ekman spiral has an important consequence.
The layers I've drawn here don't represent an equal amount of water, but if we were to
average the currents and mass transports in the vertical over this 100 meters, we would
see that the mean wind direction, the mean current direction, is about 90 degrees to
the right of the surface wind direction.
In the mean, that means, the ocean water is flowing to the right of the surface wind.
We'll call this mass motion the ekman transport.
That means if the surface wind is blowing towards the south, the mass in the upper part
of the ocean is moving to the west.
Now let's be careful, there's ocean water moving in a variety of directions, but the
average transport, the average transport is perpendicular to the surface wind.
This is very relevant to the temperature off the California coast, particularly in the
summertime.
There is indeed a cold current there, as we've seen, carrying cold polar water south along
the coast, but that's not the only reason why sea surface temperatures are so low there.
Here's a map of average surface wind directions and speeds during the summertime.
And there's our Pacific High, offshore with its clockwise flow, the dominant circulation
system in this part of the globe.
And note that the winds are tending to blow southward, parallel to the California coastline.
If the flow is southward along the coast, the average movement of the upper ocean water
is westward, away from shore.
As the surface layer ecumen transport pushes cool water away from the shoreline, even colder
water from farther below is dragged up along the coast.
This upwelling, this upwelling of bottom water transports nutrients to the sea surface, not
just colder temperatures, and that's why the sea surface temperature is lower there than
it otherwise would have been.
We've already seen that the ocean, because of its huge thermal inertia, plays a crucial
role in the development of the local sea and land breeze circulation, a system in which
the surface wind shifts direction from day to night.
Ocean land differences are also central to the monsoon circulation, which can be thought
of as the sea and land breeze on steroids.
While we associate the word monsoon with heavy spring and summer rains in South Asia,
especially India, the word itself actually refers to the seasonal reversal of winds from
cold season to warm, and less dramatic monsoons also occur in other parts of the world, including
North America.
In fact, the word monsoon means season in Arabic.
So let's consider January in Asia.
There's high pressure over that very cold interior, and clockwise flow around that high
pressure along with the northeast trades means that the winds over South Asia are generally
directed from land to sea.
The air also tends to be subsiding over India and Southeast Asia, so this is definitely
the dry season.
As the land warms up, the air starts rising above it, and the winds reverse, generally
drawn towards a wide swath of thermally produced low pressure stretching everywhere over land.
The ocean at this time is also quite warm, although cooler than the land, and it's pushing
copious amounts of water vapor inland.
This is producing especially heavy rains were lifted by mountains such as that at Cherapungi,
which residing on the upslope side of a small West East mountain range is generally considered
the wettest place on earth.
But now let's look farther east to the West Pacific.
We spoke of the Hadley circulation cell in the three cell model, and that was a north
south motion involving a scent over surface low pressure at the equator and sinking over
surface high pressure at 30 north and south.
Another important circulation in the tropics is east-west, what we call the Walker circulation.
This could be your bathtub, but instead for me, it's a model for the Pacific Ocean, from
west to east, spanning the tropics.
And unlike your bathtub, the tropical Pacific has persistent trade winds angling towards
the equator.
Between the Ekman transport, this has the effect of pushing water mass generally westward
across the Pacific.
So it piles up in the West Pacific, and sea level there is actually higher than farther
east by perhaps a half a meter.
The flow of water away from the coastlines in the East Pacific is creating upwelling,
making sea surface temperatures even colder than they otherwise would have been, and that
also brings the thermocline closer to the surface.
Meanwhile, the water being carried across the Pacific is being heated along the way by
the sun.
And this heated water, along with downwelling in the West Pacific, creates a very deep layer
of warm water in the West.
And the thermocline is located farther beneath the surface there.
In fact, the West Pacific water isn't just warm, it's downright hot, almost as hot as
if we're land.
And indeed the waters and the vicinity of Indonesia and the Philippines are often called
the maritime continent, the continent made of water.
And that deep layer of warm water provides a huge reservoir of energy that drives deep
convection and strong ascent.
This causes the surface pressure to drop, making the naturally low surface pressure
of the equatorial region even lower in the West Pacific.
The ascending air in the West Pacific spreads eastward aloft, sinking over the cold waters
of the East Pacific and closing the circulation loop.
That tends to increase the surface pressures on that side of the ocean basin.
So now there's an east-west pressure gradient force also on top of our north-south pressure
gradient force.
And this east-west pressure gradient force is normally directed towards that extra low
in South Asia.
That helps drive the trade winds harder and more towards the maritime continent.
This is called the Walker Cell, named after the British meteorologist who deduced its
existence.
This is also not the only West-East Walker-type circulation in the tropics.
This West Pacific convection over the maritime continent that we've been looking at also
causes subsidence on the other side over the western Indian Ocean.
Recall earlier I pointed out that Somalia is desert-like, despite being so tantalizingly
close to the equatorial rainforest.
The Walker Cell's descent is not helping matters there.
And subsidence in the East Pacific is augmented in response to convection over the Amazonian
rainforest that sets up east-west pressure gradients.
And the Amazonian Walker Cell makes for East Atlantic subsidence as well.
Walker also noticed something else.
He noticed a specific circulation cell tended to oscillate in strength and shift around in
space over a time period of several years, two to five years or so.
He discovered this by comparing sea-level pressures at Darwin on Australia's north coast
with those of Tahiti in the southeast Pacific.
The pressures were highly anti-correlated.
When one was higher than the long-term average, the other was lower.
Normally, Darwin's pressures are lower, reflecting the Walker circulation.
However, when Darwin's pressure rose and Tahiti's dropped, that weakened the east-west
pressure gradient force that was helping to drive the trade winds so strongly towards Asia.
And as the trade winds weakened in response to convection, the convection usually situated
over the west-Pacific shifted eastward towards the central Pacific.
Walker called this the southern oscillation.
Meanwhile, fishermen in the east-Pacific noticed a periodic warming of the coastal waters off
of Peru and Ecuador.
When they occurred, the sea-service temperature changes were often most noticeable about Christmas
time, and so it was dubbed El Niño, the boy-child.
This warming was not welcome because it indicated decreased upwelling.
Remember I mentioned that upwelling transports nutrients to the surface from below, but with
fewer nutrients in the warmer coastal waters, fish populations declined.
And with fewer fish around, bird populations collapsed, harming the guano industry that
used bird droppings for fertilizer.
At some point, periods in which sea-service temperatures were colder than typical were
called La Niñas, the girl-child.
In recent years, scientists have realized that the El Niño La Niña and Walker's southern
oscillation are intimately related.
The phenomenon is now referred to as ENSO, pronounced ENSO, an acronym for El Niño Southern
Oscillation.
And while there's no typical El Niño event, the recipe for the phenomenon goes something
like this.
The sequence takes about three years.
In the year before an El Niño, surface pressures in the West Pacific start rising.
This weakens the trade winds since the pressure gradient force is smaller.
With weaker winds, less water mass is transported westward, and the warm West Pacific water
starts sloshing back.
Riding along the East Pacific coastlines also diminishes, so sea-service temperatures
are rising in the eastern part of the Pacific basin.
During the El Niño year itself, those uncharacteristically warm sea-service temperatures start spreading
westward.
Meanwhile, the Walker's circulation storms shift from the maritime continent eastward
to the Central Pacific, leaving drought conditions behind in Indonesia, Philippines, and Australia.
On the larger scale, atmospheric circulation could also shift, changing storm tracks and
influencing hurricane activity.
Finally, in the following year, conditions gradually return to normal.
Let's look at a particularly strong and famous El Niño event, the event of 1997 to 1998.
This image is from one of NASA's radar altimeters that look down from space, detecting sea-service
height.
The sea surface can be higher somewhere because the wind has piled up more water, or it could
be because it's warmer because as the temperature of sea water increases, sea water expands.
The image is expressing the anomaly, the departure from some long-term normal.
The warm colors indicate above normal sea-service heights, cool colors are below normal.
So we'll start in February 1997 with sea-service heights pretty close to normal, at least near
the equator.
But something, something is brewing in the West Pacific, and anomalously large heights
have appeared by March 12.
Pay particular attention to the areas colored white, those are the largest positive anomalies.
I'll now show you a series of images taking 12 days apart.
By March 24, the high sea level heights have started spreading towards the Central and Eastern
Pacific.
And here's the state of the sea on April 5.
We see the warm water and the high sea levels have progressed most of the way across the
Pacific, and the largest anomalies are now in the central part of the ocean.
By April 17, it looks like the whole thing is petering out, but note it's gotten close
to the end of its journey, at least the eastward journey.
It's now late April, and locally very high sea level heights are now seen off the coasts
of Ecuador and Peru.
Kipping ahead to late May, we see that high heights are now moving back westward.
El Niño is now in full swing.
Here's the development and decay of El Niño in action.
A gigantic area of bright white that develops in the East Pacific is a major of the extreme
nature of this particular event.
This movie runs long past this one El Niño event, so you can see what non-El Niño periods
look like as well.
And watch for La Niña events to show up when the Pacific turns blue.
The main things I'm seeing are waves, moving east, moving west, colliding, waves sloshing
back and forth like in a pan or a tub.
Actually, that's not as bad a description as it might seem.
There are two kinds of waves involved in this, Kelvin waves and Rossby waves.
The Kelvin waves move eastward, very near the equator, and it is their movement out
of the West Pacific Storm region that got this whole process going.
You can see the Kelvin waves in the warm-colored regions, the red and white that's wriggling
like fast-moving worms.
When the Kelvin waves reach the eastern Pacific Rim, they reflect, they bounce off the right
side of the bathtub and head back westward.
But after they reflect, their nature has changed, and they become slow-moving Rossby waves instead.
Curiously, these Rossby waves are related to the planetary waves of troughs and ridges
we examined in the context of mid-latitude cyclones.
The Rossby waves appear in the animation as the cool-colored regions.
Notice, in addition to being slow and westbound, they tend to be offset from the equator, so
we might see parallel bullseyes and bands of blues and purples on either side of the equator.
Our water waves are reflecting off the west and east sides of the Pacific Basin, back
and forth, back and forth across the world's biggest bathtub.
We haven't said much yet about the deep ocean.
The deep ocean has its own circulation, not as directly driven by atmospheric winds, but
a connection between the two and involving the atmosphere helps explain why European
cities can be located much farther poleward relative to their North American counterparts.
This connection is an integral part of the thermohaline circulation.
Thermo means heat or temperature.
Haling relates to salt.
This involves the two properties that determine how dense liquid water is, its temperature,
and its salinity.
Remember the Gulf Stream is carrying warm water far poleward.
There it's warming and moistening the cold Arctic air, and westerlies are carrying this
modified, moderated air to Europe.
Because the originally tropical current gives up heat and water to the atmosphere, what
remains behind in the ocean is colder and saltier.
Both are making the water more dense, and this dense water is sinking to the bottom
of the ocean, forming new deep water which starts spreading southward.
What happens to this cold, salty water after it sinks in the North Atlantic?
Much of it flows all the way to the south pole where it is up-willed and returned to
the surface.
And then it begins its long northward journey, warm by the sun, eventually becoming tropical
surface water again after a very, very long time.
This is a conveyor belt of sorts.
It's the thermohaline circulation, and it spans the globe and has counterparts in other
ocean basins as well.
It's not confined to the Atlantic, as I've shown you here.
Now, many scientists believe if something were to interfere with the sinking of water
in the North Atlantic, the Gulf Stream flow would slow down, leading to a much chillier
Europe.
The idea is the North Atlantic sinking helps pull the Gulf Stream poleward a little bit
like an elevator's counterweight helps move the passenger compartment.
What could interfere with this deep water formation?
Something that prevents the water from getting salty and dense.
Perhaps an influx of fresh water from increased precipitation or the melting of glaciers or
changes in the topography of the land that allow lakes to find new outlets to the sea.
As you know, the Earth's climate is changing, and one consequence of global warming is likely
increased precipitation in the Arctic if only because warmer air can have a larger vapor
supply than colder air.
Remember, cold air can't hold much water vapor, and if there's not much vapor in the
air, there's not much precip you're going to get out of it.
But vapor capacity increases exponentially with temperature, and that's the point.
Increased Arctic precipitation could decrease the density of the North Atlantic slowing
or stopping the conveyor belt.
So ironically, one potential consequence of general global warming could be substantially
severe local cooling.
Am I sure of this?
Well, I'm not.
The only thing I'm really sure of is that the atmosphere-ocean system is very complicated.
A few lectures ago, we discussed exotropical cyclones and the role that the Rocky Mountains
played in spawning new cyclones in the Lee.
Once formed, those cyclones tended to move towards New England and the East Coast, forming
a large fraction of the winter storms in that part of the world.
There are two more hotspots for the development of cold winter storms in the continental U.S.
along the Texas coast and the Atlantic coast north of Florida.
These storms also tend to track towards New England, and there's probably a mountain
influence in both of these areas, particularly in Texas.
But the important extra is the thermal contrast between the cold land and the warm ocean.
Keep in mind that exotropical cyclones like to form along fronts, regions of large temperature
contrast, cold continental polar air pushing to the south and the east coast, realize a
still larger temperature contrast once they reach the still warm coastal waters.
For this reason, cyclones forming along the gulf and east coast can be stronger, can be
stronger than the Rocky Mountain counterparts with deeper central pressures, stronger winds
and considerably more precipitation.
Well, let's wrap this up.
In this lecture, we have surveyed further influences the ocean on the atmosphere and
the atmosphere on the ocean.
As with the atmosphere, we've seen that pressure in the ocean largely represents the weight
of the overlying mass.
Owing to water's vastly greater density, pressure increases downward in the ocean very, very
quickly, and every 10 meters puts another atmosphere on your shoulders.
The upper layer of the ocean is relatively warm and well mixed, and this overlies the
much colder deep water the transition in between called the thermocline.
Thermocline depth varies quite a bit from place to place.
It's deep in places where warm surface water is converging, and it's close to the surface
where upwelling is going on, bringing cold waters from below.
The atmosphere's clockwise flow around our subtropical highs is establishing clockwise
currents in the northern hemisphere Pacific and Atlantic oceans as the air drags and pushes
at the sea surface.
The northward flowing gulf stream in the west Atlantic and the cold California current formed
in response to this, and as usual, it's the opposite in the southern hemisphere.
But as we look deeper in the ocean mixed layer, it got more complicated.
The current turned clockwise with increasing depth, a consequence of Earth's rotation.
The important result is that water's mass tended to move at a right angle to the surface
wind, so for a south moving wind, the water is actually moving west.
This Ekman spiral, as we called it, is responsible for pushing surface water away from our own
west coast, making the cold California current even colder.
That surface water headed west to Asia, becoming part of the maritime continent region of Indonesia,
and that helped drive powerful storms that influenced the tropics across the planet,
the Walker circulation.
But every so often, the Walker circulation or convection shifts in space, away from the
maritime continent, leaving them exposed to droughts and fires.
This happened as sea surface temperatures rose in the East Pacific, impacting the biology
of the local region and storm tracks in surprisingly remote places, Ciselnino.
The surface and deep oceans we also saw are connected through the thermohaline circulation,
the atmosphere a major player in that as well.
That was when the Gulf Stream moved into the polar regions, water evaporated, leaving it
salt and cold and dense, and that sank to the ocean's bottom, starting an enormously
long journey that centuries into the future would bring it back to the warm, tropical
surface ocean.
If something were to interfere with the sinking motion in the North Atlantic, the Gulf Stream
might slow down with consequences for the European climate.
What might do that?
Climate change, perhaps.
We also saw the ocean directly impacts many of the winter storms that affect our Midwestern
and Eastern U.S. by enhancing temperature gradients at the coastlines.
Let's look ahead.
There's one more influence of the oceans on the atmosphere we need to examine, the tropical
cyclone, hurricanes and typhoons, and that's the topic of our next lecture.
