Hello, everyone, and welcome to the session of Incredible Minds.
I'm James B. Barbieri, program coordinator here at the Paris Center and your host for
today.
Any problems, just let me know in the chat and I'll try and help you.
Just very briefly, a quick reminder to make sure your microphone is muted.
We do encourage you all to turn on your cameras.
The chat is open, so feel free to share your thoughts and ideas with the rest of the group
throughout this session.
And we do have closed captions available if that's how you prefer to view the session.
Finding the session is recorded for archival purposes and for you all, you should receive
the link in a few days.
So today we are honored to be joined by Michael Levin, who received a dual undergraduate
degree in computer science and biology, followed by PhD in molecular genetics from Harvard.
He did his postdoc training at Harvard Medical School and started his independent lab in
2000.
He is currently the Vannevar Bush Chair at the Tufts University, an associate faculty
member of the Vice Institute of Harvard.
He serves as the founding director of the Allen Discovery Center at Tufts.
His lab uses a mix of developmental biophysics, computer science, and behavior science to
understand the emergence of mind and unconventional embodiments at all scales, and to develop
interventions in regenerative medicine and application in synthetic bioengineering.
Today he will be talking to us about the collective intelligence of cells with morphogenesis, while
bioelectricity outside the brain means for understanding our multi-scale nature.
And with that, I'll pass it over to you, Michael.
Welcome.
Thank you so much.
I really appreciate the opportunity to share some ideas with you and to be part of this
event and some of the other speakers you've had, which were tremendous.
So let me see.
All right.
Can everybody see the slides?
Is it good?
Okay.
Yeah.
So if you're interested in this after the fact, you can find at this website here,
you can find all of the primary papers, the software, the data sets, everything, everything
is here.
And you can also get in touch with me here.
So today, what I'd like to transmit to you are some examples of the following main points.
I'm going to stress this idea that all intelligence is collective intelligence, and in particular,
the notion of scaling from the competencies of simple subunits to larger kinds of cognitive
systems.
We're going to talk about problem-solving in diverse and unconventional problem spaces,
and we're going to talk about the navigation of these virtual spaces as intelligence.
We'll talk about a kind of goal-directedness.
We'll talk about agency and unconventional embodiments.
And towards the end, this idea of universal hacking and of components of biological systems,
trying to manipulate the behavior of other systems, both above, below, and lateral to
them.
I'm going to spend about a third of the talk using anatomical control as an example of
a collective intelligence of cells navigating a particular kind of anatomical space.
And I'm going to show you lots of data on bioelectric networks as a kind of cognitive
glue that is the ancestor of brain function.
And we're going to talk about the impact that this is going to have on biomedicine.
Towards the end, I'm going to talk about some synthetic bioengineering and ways to think
about creating and then relating to novel types of beings, which has lots of implications
for science, for engineering, and for ethics.
So the talk is going to go in three parts, and what I'll do is, at the end of each part,
I'm going to pause, I'll take some questions, we'll take a break, people can get up and
stretch and get water and whatnot, and then we'll continue.
So the first part is going to be my efforts to break down some common categories and some
terminology that I think is really limiting the field.
And so for this reason, we're going to talk about stretching that into a kind of continuum
of various types of agents, and I want to show you some examples.
So this is, even though this is fairly, fairly a very old view, this is a famous painting
of Adam naming the animals in the Garden of Eden.
This is still actually quite prevalent in many, many relevant discussions.
What you see here is that there's a very sharp binary distinction between Adam here and the
rest of the animals.
So it's very clear that there are different kinds of creatures, fundamentally different
kinds.
But what we know now, because of Darwin and because of Von Baer, is that actually this
notion that there's some kind of a sharp binary category of being a human is actually
a smooth continuum, both on an evolutionary time scale, where if you slide back in evolutionary
time, you see a very gradual set of changes that go from that human all the way back to
a microbe and below that.
And of course, even on the life scale of the individual itself, you see we all start life
as a single cell, and then slowly and gradually we become what is basically considered to
be a standard human.
So we are at the center of this kind of continuum that stretches in two different timescales,
but it's actually even more complex than that, because now with bioengineering and various
other technologies, there are additional axes in this space where we can stretch the notion
of what a human actually is.
And you can imagine slowly adding various prosthetics, various technologies within the
body as is already happening, people who can control wheelchairs with their minds via implants
and things like this.
And of course, biological modifications that we can make both genetic and non-genetic.
And so we see here that and at every level of organization, cell tissue organism and
so on, we can replace native naturally evolved materials with all sorts of novel, either
natural or engineered materials.
And so we start to see that this notion of a standard human can be quite continuous in
a number of different dimensions.
And so I've been trying to develop a framework called TAME, and we'll talk about this more.
TAME stands for technological approach to mind everywhere.
And the idea is to be able to recognize, create, and relate to truly diverse intelligences,
not just the familiar creatures like us and maybe birds and dolphins and things, but also
really unusual creatures like colonial organisms and swarms and synthetic life forms that might
be engineered, software artificial intelligences, possible alien life if that's found.
So all of these things ought to be able to be handled by a mature science of diverse
intelligence.
And they have to be dealt with the same set of concepts regardless of what they're made
of, so regardless of their composition or origin story, meaning evolved versus engineered
or anything in between.
And of course, I'm not the first person to try for something like this.
So Rosenbluth, Wiener, and Bigelow did something like this.
In the 40s where they gave us this ladder, where you can see that all the way from basically
passive matter, all the way up through complex human metacognitive types of capacities, there
are a set of great transitions.
But nevertheless, these things are all on the same spectrum.
The idea was that we should be able to understand how various types of material implementations
can begin to have these kinds of functionalities.
And so one of the essential ways of thinking about these things in my framework has to do
with the relation of an observer.
And that observer might be an engineer, it might be another conspecific, it might be some
sort of a parasite or in fact, the evolutionary process itself, some sort of observer that
is able to modulate what the system is doing.
And so you can think about different ways of modulating a system depending on how sophisticated
it is.
So down here on this end of the spectrum, the only way you're going to make changes is
by engineering directly at the hardware level.
You're not going to convince a clock of anything, you're not going to reward and punish it.
All there is is mechanical engineering.
But you can cybernetics take this to things like this, these thermostats which have recorded
set points.
And so there you can do some interesting things such as modify the set point without rewiring
the hardware and get the system to take on a novel set of goals without having to rewire
it.
And then of course, more complex systems, availous of an interface involving rewards
and punishments and various other behavior shaping techniques where you can rely on the
system to learn from experience.
And then of course, we have even more, even more complex beings which are able to follow
logic and so on.
And so the difference in all of these different systems is not what they're made of or how
they got here, but it's what are the set of tools and techniques that you might use to
relate to that system all the way from physical rewiring to something that looks a lot more
like a psychoanalysis where you're literally trying to affect the model that the system
has of itself, of the outside world and so on.
So this shows you the kind of inclusive framework we're trying to make.
And the interesting thing is that all of us made this amazing journey across the Cartesian
cut.
We were all ones, so-called just physics, physics and chemistry, a little blob of protoplasm
and an unfertilized oocyte, quiescent.
And then through the process of embryonic development, we became one of these functional
creatures or even something like this.
And the crucial thing about this process of self-construction is that there is no magical
sort of sharp red line at which point you go from being just physics to being a true
cognitive being.
So many people would like to look at themselves and say, we have true, you name it, sentience,
cognition, intelligence, whatever term you want.
And then they would look at something like this, which is a little blob of chemicals.
And they say, well, that certainly doesn't have any of those things.
And so then you owe a story of how you got from here to there.
And that story cannot be any kind of a sharp change.
It has to be a gradual process that is in concert with what we know about embryonic development
and so on.
So that's interesting.
So we go from matter to mind in this way that I think developmental biology is maybe the
most magical of the sciences.
But at least we tend to think of ourselves, once we get here, we tend to think of ourselves
as some sort of a unified intelligence.
And in fact, we often, people will contrast the kinds of thing that we are with something
like ant colonies or bee swarms or something like that and say, well, we talk about that
as a collective intelligence, but that's a metaphor.
We are a true intelligence, collective intelligence is something else.
But actually, this is not the case.
And so Descartes, for example, was really interested in the pineal gland because he said that the
pineal gland was unique, it was an unpaired organ in the brain and therefore a kind of
a singular unified location for the mind to interact with the body.
But if he had had access to good microscopy, what he would have discovered is that there
isn't one of anything in the brain.
In fact, inside the pineal gland, you see this, which is a huge number of individual
cells.
If he had had this technology, he could have looked inside of any one of those cells and
discovered that they, in fact, are made of a huge number of different components and
various kinds of active matter.
So there are mitochondria, there are little motors that zip up and down various filaments,
just an incredible number of parts.
And so all of us are collective intelligences.
I'm not aware of any intelligence that is really just some sort of one indivisible diamond
of mind.
We are all made of parts of different kinds.
And so this is the sort of thing we're made of.
This is a single cell, it's called the lacrimaria.
This is a unicellular organism.
It has no brain, it has no nervous system, no stem cells.
It has remarkable competencies over its physiological, metabolic, and anatomical goals.
So you can see here that it's basically, this is at hunting in its environment.
If you're into soft-body robotics, this is an amazing design challenge.
We don't have anything remotely this competent.
And cells have all kinds of other interesting capabilities.
So this is the sort of thing that's studied in the field of diverse intelligence or basal
cognition.
I'll show you another example.
This is a slime mold.
So this slime mold, this is a unicellular slime mold called physarum polycephalum.
And we've put a little bit of it here on this petri dish.
We put one glass disc up here.
We put three glass discs back here.
They're just glass.
They're completely inert.
They're very thin.
They have no food or any kind of a chemical substance on them.
But what happens is that this, and by the way, this slime mold, it's a single cell.
It can be very large, but the whole thing is a single cell.
So what it starts to do is it starts to grow out, basically in every direction at once.
But during this time, during these 600 minutes or so, what it's actually doing as we discovered
is gently tugging on the material around it and reading the strain angle that comes
back.
And based on that strain angle, it builds up towards a decision of where the heavier
mass is.
And the way we know this is because reliably what it's going to do is grow towards the
heavier mass.
And so by reading that strain angle, it's able to gain some knowledge of its environment.
And then for some reason that we don't know, it prefers moving towards the heavier masses.
And so we see that we have this biological material that's very sort of ancient and early
in life has interesting capabilities.
And then the real question becomes, how do these things scale up?
What is it that allows combinations of these cells to do something like this?
So this is a very standard scenario.
The rat learns to press the lever to get the reward, and that's sort of very well understood.
But the interesting thing is that the rat is really a collection of cells, and no individual
cell has both experiences.
So there are cells on the foot of the rat that interact with the lever.
There are cells in the intestine that collect the nutritious reward sometime later.
But no individual cell has the experience of doing this and receiving that.
And so who is it that owns this kind of associative memory between two events that no individual
cell experienced?
So clearly, you need some sort of a, and the standard answer, of course, is the nervous
system provides this, you need some sort of way to integrate individual cellular activities
towards a single being.
Now this is kind of very common.
I want to show you some uncommon examples that people don't hear about a lot to kind
of stretch our idea of what's possible.
So this is a caterpillar, a soft-bodied kind of creature that crawls around and eats leaves,
and it has a certain kind of brain.
Remarkably, it transforms itself into a completely different kind of creature that now lives
in a three-dimensional world.
It flies, and it doesn't like leaves anymore.
It wants nectar.
And so a very different set of behaviors, very different set of preferences, very different
brain.
The brain is actually largely dissolved during this metamorphosis process.
The most of the synapses are broken, maybe most of the cells are killed, and a new brain
is reassembled.
But there's actually really good evidence that the memories that you impart onto the
caterpillar that you train, the moth or butterfly will actually retain those memories, and there's
work on this in beetles and various other creatures.
So you can think about two things.
The practical issue of, isn't it amazing to have a memory medium that can basically be
taken apart and put back together and drastically rearranged and still retain its information
content?
Anything like that in computer science or anything like that.
And of course, it raises some philosophical, interesting philosophical questions, which
is, never mind the older question of what's it like to be a butterfly, the question could
be posed, what's it like to be a caterpillar slowly changing into a butterfly?
Because this is a change that happens not on an evolutionary time scale, but actually
during the lifetime of an active individual.
And so this ability to retain memory through very drastic deformations is really maximized
by this other system known as planarian flatworms.
We'll talk much more about that.
And these planarian flatworms, they can be trained, and if you train them, for example,
to recognize these little bumpy patterns as the place where they get fed, what you can
then do is amputate their head, which contains their brain.
You are left with a tail, the tail sits there doing nothing for about eight days.
It slowly regrows a brand new head and McConnell, who discovered this in the 60s and got a lot
of flak for it was actually completely correct in that these new animals with a brand new
brain still remember that original information.
And so what we have here is first evidence that information is not stored exclusively
in their centralized brain, but actually apparently spread throughout the body.
And you see this ability of those tissues to imprint that information onto the new brain
as it develops.
So this idea of information actually moving through body tissue.
And so you can think about, you know, there's this malfunctioning transporter experiment
from philosophy 101 where they say, well, there's this transporter.
And so what it does is you step into it and it destroys the original body and recreates
a molecule for molecule copy somewhere else.
And so now you've you've transported, but what if it malfunctions and it doesn't erase
the original copy?
How many of you are there?
Well, in Plenaria, you can literally do that because you can cut them into into pieces,
many pieces, and each piece becomes a perfect little little worm.
So so so we start to see that that, you know, kind of the common workhorses of behavioral
science and cognitive neuroscience or rats and things like this are just the tip of the
iceberg.
And there are many interesting phenomena that speak to this question of what are cells,
what are integrated beings, what what's information, how does it move through the body invertebrates.
You see this kind of interesting plasticity.
So this is a tappel of the frog, Xenopus labus.
And here are the nostrils, here's the brain, here's the gut.
And what you'll notice is that there aren't any eyes.
We prevented these eyes from forming.
But what we did do is graft a an eye primordium onto the tail.
And so these cells actually make a perfectly good eye.
And not only do they make an eye, but they make an optic nerve that optic nerve comes
out and you can see what it's doing here, it's it doesn't go to the brain, it stops
here at synapses onto the spinal cord.
And we made this machine that automates the training and testing of these animals and
visual cues.
So what so what we find is that they can see they can see quite well actually, and despite
the fact that they have a radically different sensory motor architecture, it does not require
evolutionary adaptation time.
This happens immediately in one in one lifetime of a single tappel, and they can do perfectly
well with a completely different kind of connection between their sense organs and their brain.
And this this kind of thing has massive implications for evolution, too, because some, for example,
a mutation that causes their their eye to be to be pushed off doesn't immediately get
weeded out because the animals can't see and die, but rather these animals, the behavior
is quite robust.
And so the evolution is free to explore any other consequence of that same mutation.
It really buffers this this competency really buffers the negative consequences of of mutations.
So what we see the reason the reason that all of this plasticity works is that biology
is built on this kind of multi scale competency architecture where all the way from molecular
networks, cellular networks of tissues and organs and so on.
Every level here is not merely a structural set of nested dolls, but is actually a functional
problem solver.
In other words, they are competent, they have competencies in specific spaces.
This might be the space of gene expression or transcriptional space.
This might be physiological space.
This might be familiar three dimensional behavioral space and so on.
And so each of these levels solves various problems at various degrees of sophistication.
And so what I'd like to do is really expand from from this notion that behavior takes
place in three dimensional space and and and understand that that to biology, all kinds
of other spaces that we are not good at perceiving and thinking about those are equally valid
problem spaces.
So we this this this familiar space of behavior, we are very good at recognizing
intelligence when medium sized beings moving at medium speeds through three dimensional
space are doing clever things and we and we recognize that right away.
But there are these other spaces that we are not good at, for example, gene expression
space and physiological space.
I think that if we had a built in kind of innate ability to feel our blood chemistry,
for example, if we had sensors sensors pointing inwards, not just not just outwards, I think
we would have no trouble recognizing our liver and our kidneys as intelligent beings
navigating physiological problem space and solving various problems, the way that we
recognize other animals doing it.
And so I'm going to spend the most of the time in the next section talking about this
problem solving in this anatomical morphospace.
But I just want to show you one interesting example of a different kind of space called
physiological space.
So here's here's an experiment we we showed a couple of years ago.
So so here's a flatworm.
You put these flatworms in a solution of barium.
Now, barium is a nonspecific potassium channel blocker.
So what it does is it blocks the ability of the cells to swap potassium in and out.
The cells are very unhappy, especially the cells in the head, because all these neurons
like to flow potassium in order to keep their physiology correct.
And so what happens is their heads explode literally overnight, their heads, their heads
degenerate.
But the amazing thing is that if you leave them in barium within a couple of weeks,
they grow back a new head and the new head doesn't care about barium at all.
No problem. It's barium adapted.
So we asked we asked a simple question.
What is different transcriptionally?
What genes do these barium adapted heads express that the standard heads do not
express? And what we found out is that there's very small number on the order of
about a dozen genes that are that are changed here to go to become barium adapted.
Now, here's the here's the kicker to all of this.
Plenaria never see barium in the wild.
This barium doesn't exist in nature in the way that the way that we used it here.
And so there's never been evolutionary pressure for Plenaria to know what to do
when they've been exposed to this incredible stressor.
So when you think about how they found these few
correct genes out of a sea of tens of thousands of other genes,
it's a little bit like I visualize it like sitting in a in a nuclear reactor
control room and things melting down.
So you have this this very strong physiological stressor,
which you don't have time to do is to start randomly flipping buttons.
And so because not not only because there's no time for that,
it's the combinations are astronomical, but also because
because many of the things you do this way are going to kill the cell
along before you find the the barium adaptation region of that space.
So so it's so it's a surge of a roughly 20,000 dimensional space
to find a new region of that space that solves your problem.
This is this is absolutely a kind of navigating problem solving
that we really do not understand how this works.
But this is an example of what I mean.
And I think that what evolution does is pivot some of the same
mechanisms and some of the same tricks and the same problem
problems, problem solving strategies through various spaces,
including very early life, I have to solve metabolic problems
and then and then some physiological problems and then gene expression
and then anatomical morphous space.
And of course, 3D behavioral space once brains and muscles showed up
and then linguistic space and who knows who knows what else.
So what evolution does is is is is pivot organisms through these various spaces.
And of course, even the distinction between these spaces
is completely arbitrary relative to us and as an observer.
So as, for example, Chris Fields points out,
if you are a bacterium sitting in a in the concentration gradient
of some nutrient, you could move in three dimensional space
to try to go up up the gradient, or you could move in transcriptional space,
turn on some other gene that would let you instead metabolize
some other kind of molecule that's in that space and solve your problem that way.
So to the to the bacterium, it will not see a clean separation
between three dimensional space and transcriptional space.
All of these things are effectors.
All of these things are moves that it can make in its various spaces to solve problems.
OK, so let's so let's take a break here before we go on to the next section.
And I'll pause and and if anybody has questions, I'm happy to happy to talk about it.
Oh, how long would you like this this break to be?
Um, let's take let's take maybe five minutes, five minutes.
Yeah, if people have questions, great.
And if not, just take five minutes and get some water.
Yeah, if you do have any question, you can use the raise your hand function
or or just come in if if I don't see you.
I see that Gary has.
He's had a couple of questions there in the chat.
I don't know if he wants to come in and ask his questions.
Gary, let me unmute. Can you hear me?
We can. OK.
Well, first of all, I think your work is just amazing and magnificent.
And it's
I just love the idea of a plenarium, you know, regenerating its head.
I mean, that that you showed that McConnell was right about what he.
So here's the thing.
Does what you are seeing suggest the possibility
that panpsychism is what is driving the material adaptation,
that there is a fundamental consciousness
that, you know, that then drives the adaptation of the of the material elements.
Yeah, so there are no, please keep keep going.
No, and the concept of also of semiotic freedom,
which Jesper Hoffmeyer has talked about, which is the idea that
that evolution favors the capacity to communicate, right?
That that the more sophisticated the communication can be that integrates, right?
The species within its body, but also within its
conspecifics, right, within its community,
which might explain why we're here.
Yeah. Yeah, yeah, great, great questions.
Thank you.
There are to me, there are two different dimensions to this to this question.
One is overall the concept of panpsychism.
And I think what wait, if you would wait till the very end,
and we'll talk about this after the third part.
But the other interesting part you said is is about the driving of evolution.
So so I'll just I'll just say one one one thing about it here,
which is that if you think about the kind of pre Darwinian notion of
what what people call whether they associate this with with Lamarck, most of all,
but this idea that that evolutionary change is not random with respect to outcome
that basically by stretching, you know, his neck, the giraffe has children with longer necks.
OK, the problem with the up until 2018,
I would have said that I would have said the following.
The reason that Lamarckism is a strong Lamarckism, of course, of course,
and there's some some mechanisms for for epigenetic inheritance and so on.
But the reason that strong Lamarckism is impossible is has nothing to do
with Weissman's barrier or setting aside the germline.
All of that is completely porous.
People have shown that that doesn't stop any man that that's that's easy.
The hard part and prior to 2018, I would have said impossible
is that the real problem is that genes don't encode specific characters.
In other words, there's no gene for neck length.
And so if you wanted a longer neck, you have to solve this inverse problem
of which genes do you mutate to have a longer neck?
It's, you know, it's it's an it's an impossible inverse problem.
So I would have said that's impossible.
However, looking at this looking at this barium experiment,
what we see here is that the cells have basically done the hardest part.
They have identified which which genetic loci are relevant to the new problem
they're facing.
Once you've identified which those are mutating them by some kind of crisper
type of mechanism or some kind of genomic editing mechanism, that's trivial.
There are lots of lots of organisms to edit their genomes in various ways.
Once you know which genes.
And so, you know, now I have a slightly different view on it to say that
I don't know how they do it, but we do have some evidence that cells can infer
which genes are responsible for specific adaptive outcomes.
And if that's the case, I'm no longer sure that it's impossible
that that to some extent they're driving the evolutionary change.
Because once you and again, this is a very, of course, this is a very controversial area.
I have not, you know, remotely enough evidence yet to prove that that's
that that has implications on a on a global evolutionary trajectory scale.
But I no longer think it's impossible because we can see cells solving this inverse problem.
I mean, it suggests that there's some form of entanglement, right?
I mean, which is which we know is true in quantum physics.
Even though, you know, we don't have a material way of explaining it.
That is that the that the problem solving element is not is not necessarily based
on the materiality of the genome adapting, but that there's some kind of
an influence that comes from the functional need to survive, right?
To, you know, to to change itself so that it can sustain itself
as a living creature in a barium solution.
Yeah. Yeah.
I mean, so I haven't shown you anything yet.
There are some things coming that that may relate to this, but I haven't shown you
anything yet that suggests that the solution has to be any kind of exorbitant.
But the solution has to be any kind of exotic, you know, physics or anything
like that, right? Because because for now, for the next for the whole next section,
which we should start in a few minutes, what you'll see is that there's a tremendous
amount of intelligent problem solving that can be squeezed out of a perfectly
conventional set of mechanisms, not to say that there aren't others.
But but we haven't yet, I think, come to the point where we need to invoke
anything more, more exotic.
But, you know, we'll see.
OK. Thank you.
You, Gary, there are a few more questions, Mike.
Are you happy to take them?
Let's yeah, let's do let's do let's say one more.
And then and then, you know, at the end, I'll stay as long as people want afterwards.
But, you know, let's we'll move on to the second section.
Thank you.
Beth, do you have a question?
Yes.
And like Gary, I want to just say this is this absolutely fascinating.
But unlike Gary, I'm not a scientist.
So this is probably naive.
I'm trying to bring together an idea from the very first of what you said
and what you said at the end.
And that has to do with the scale and the continuum.
I'm curious, you know, thinking about human beings or higher critters
that we have an awful lot of diverse things within us.
And I'm just curious if we don't have a lot of that
what you call the physical space, the continuum that goes across time,
the evolutionary time.
We must be just a polyglot of different levels of evolutionary development.
Is that so?
Yes, yes, you've you've anticipated a chunk of the third part of the talk.
Yeah, you stay tuned.
That's coming. You are 100 percent on the money there.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, it's coming.
OK, so yeah, let me let me move on to the second part.
And then we will, well, you know, we can come back to any of this.
So the second the second thing that I want to talk about is to really give you
an example, a very concrete example of a of an unconventional
collective intelligence of a of a of a problem solving system
that doesn't look like what we're used to thinking about as intelligent systems.
And what we're going to use for that example
is is the distributed collective intelligence of cells
as they undergo morphogenesis.
And then specifically, we'll talk about bio electricity.
So let's I like to start by noticing this interesting thing.
So so Alan Turing obviously needs no introduction,
kind of the father of computer science and some other things.
And he was interested in intelligence and intelligence
in novel embodiments that are not natural
and computation and things like this.
And so he was interested in problem solving machines,
and in particular, the notion of reprogrammability
or intelligence through a kind of plasticity.
Interesting. And so and so he, you know,
he wrote these foundational papers and computer science.
But interestingly, he also wrote a paper on this
on the chemical basis of morphogenesis.
So the question he was addressing is how can biological order
or at least in this case, biochemical order arise spontaneously?
And so you might wonder why would somebody who is interested in computing
and mathematics and machines, machine intelligence,
why would he be thinking about chemical morphogenesis
and embryos and things like this?
And I think that like with many things,
this is just an example of Turing's genius.
I think he saw very clearly that these are fundamentally the same problem.
And I'm going to argue that that's true,
although he didn't write much, if anything, about this that I know of.
But I think he was onto this idea that the formation of the mind
and the formation of the body are fundamentally the same problem.
And so let me take you on a little tour of some of that.
So let's let's ask this question.
This is a this is a cross section through a human torso.
Look at look at the amazing order here, right?
So all the organs, the cells, the tissues, everything is in the right
the right size, the right shape or next to the right thing oriented in the right direction.
And it all comes from a collection of embryonic blastomeres during development.
And it's a self assembly.
Where does this particular pattern come from?
Now, the kind of immediate answer that most people give, well, it's in the DNA.
It's in the genome.
And we're going to come back to this with a vengeance in the third part of the talk.
But I want to point out already here that that is kind of an untenable answer
because we can read genomes now and we know what what genomes encode.
They encode proteins.
They don't specifically encode three dimensional shapes.
They encode the tiny hardware that every cell gets to have.
And so there's still this this this massive question of using that hardware.
How does the physiology of this cellular machine
make this particular pattern and not some other pattern?
And the thing is that the structure of the human body is no more directly in the genome
than the structure of a termite nest or the shape of a spider web is in the genomes of the
of the termites or the spider web.
It's an emergent construction project of the collective intelligence of these cells.
And so we can ask interesting questions.
How do these cells know what to make and when to stop?
And then for the third part of the talk, we'll talk about what else is possible
as an as a regenerative medicine worker.
We'd like to know if a part is damaged or missing, how do we get the cells to rebuild it?
And as an engineer, we'd like to go one step further and say, OK, but can we get these cells
to build something completely different, something that's not like this at all?
And to think about, I like to sort of think all the way forward so that we know where we're going.
Let's think about what is the end game of this field?
You know, when can we all basically say we're done and go home?
And the way I envision this is as something called an anatomical compiler.
So just imagine at some point in the future, you're going to be able to sit down in front
of a computer and draw the plant or animal that you want.
It could be something that already exists.
It could be some organ that you need for transplantation.
It could be some completely different thing, you know, some sort of a six-legged frog
with a little propeller on its head.
It could be anything.
The point is it could be absolutely anything.
And if we had a mature science of this, if we knew what we were doing,
this anatomical compiler would output a set of stimuli that would have to be given to cells
to get them to build whatever you drew, like in this case, this three-headed flatwork.
And so the idea, this is not a 3D printer.
This is not something that meticulously micromanages the position of cells to print what you want.
This is a communications device.
What it does is it's a translator, really.
It translates from your anatomical goals to the anatomical goals of a collection of cells,
which are encoded in a different medium, which I'll show you momentarily.
And by doing that, it basically resets the target morphology of these cells
and gets them to build whatever it is that you want them to build.
And I'll show you some examples of that.
But of course, we don't have anything remotely this sophisticated.
We can only do this in a very small number of cases.
Now, why is this important?
Well, aside from the very fundamental aspect that we need this to understand how evolution works,
we needed to understand our origins, and so on, this is the answer to most medical problems,
with the exception of infectious disease.
If you could communicate your goals to a collection of cells,
you would immediately have the solution to birth defects.
You could regenerate after traumatic injury.
You could reprogram and cancer.
You could suppress aging.
You could solve degenerative disease.
All of these things boil down to one problem.
How do we tell a collection of cells what to build?
If you knew that, all of these problems would go away.
So this is a major unmet need.
Why do we not have something like this?
I mean, genetics and molecular biology have been working really hard for many decades now.
Why do we not still have this?
I want to show just a simple example.
This is a baby axolotl, and axolotl larvae have little forelegs.
And this is a tadpole of a frog, and these guys do not have forelegs.
And so in my lab, we can make something called a frogolotl,
which basically just means you take a bunch of cells from an early axolotl.
You take a bunch of cells from the early frog.
You put them together, and you got a chimeric embryo
that has some cells from here and some cells from there.
Now, we have both genomes.
We've sequenced the axolotl genome, and we've sequenced the frog genome.
Can anybody tell me, looking at those genomes,
whether frogolotls are going to have legs or not?
And the answer is no.
No one can tell you that.
And that is because while we do have some good frameworks for understanding
what a single cell is going to do biochemically by looking at its genome,
we have almost no ability to look at a genome
and guess what the collective is going to do.
Either a pure collective like this,
I mean, you can't even predict the shape of a single animal from its genome either,
but certainly not in these chimeric cases.
What we do not understand yet, despite all the biochemistry and genomics and everything else,
what we don't understand yet is collective decision-making.
We do not understand how cells with specific hardware
make decisions about large-scale shape.
And so here's where we are today.
We're very good at manipulating molecules in cells and making networks and so on,
but we're really a long way from form and function.
And I'm going to argue that from controlling large-scale form and function.
And I'm going to argue that the reason for this,
and the thing that holds back really radically transformative regenerative medicine,
is that all of molecular medicine today is roughly like this.
This is what programming looked like in the 40s and 50s.
I mean, you can see what she's doing.
She's literally rewiring the machine by pulling wires in and out.
This is hardware control.
Now, the reason that you don't get out your soldering iron
when it's time to go from Microsoft Word to Photoshop on your laptop
is that what computer science has figured out is that there are higher-level
ways to interact with the system that does not require you to rewire the hardware,
meaning that you're taking advantage of the inherent plasticity competencies
and various other capacities in the software of the system,
in the activity of the system that you can guide with stimuli,
with signals such as hitting a keyboard in the case of the computer.
And that's what gave us the information technology revolution.
Biology, to a large extent, is still here because all of the exciting technology,
so genome editing, CRISPR, protein engineering, single molecule approaches,
all of it is down at the level of the hardware.
All the excitement is at the level of hardware.
We haven't even begun to scratch the surface of what the actual biological
software can do specifically, the intelligence of the various biological components.
Now, what do I mean by, when I say intelligence?
There are many definitions.
I like this one.
This is William James, who gave us a strikingly prescient definition of intelligence.
It's very good because it doesn't say anything about brains or what you're made of
or anything like that.
It's very cybernetic.
It says this, intelligence is some degree of the ability
to reach the same goal by different means.
That's it.
So in order to estimate the intelligence of some system,
whether it's engineered or biological or hybrid,
you have to, it's an empirical question.
You have to name a space that it works in.
You have to say what you think the goal is.
You have to make a claim about what you think the competencies of the system
to reach that goal, despite perturbations.
That's the key is that it's a, you need to do interventions.
You can't say how intelligent something is by simply observing it.
You have to do perturbative experiments to see what goes on
and what it can do to achieve its goal.
And in particular, James gives a very nice example,
which is the spectrum between two magnets trying to get together
and Romeo and Juliet trying to get together.
And the difference is very simple.
And there's many things in between.
If you've got two magnets, they have some competency to try and meet each other.
But if you put a piece of wood in their way, that's it.
They're going to stand there pressed up against it.
They have no ability to go around or do anything else.
So that's sort of the minimal competency.
Romeo and Juliet have massive competencies
to go around various physical and social barriers to get what they want.
And in between, there are all sorts of self-driving vehicles, worms and cells
and different kinds of creatures that have different degrees of competency
to reach various goals.
So let's talk about this then.
If that's the definition of intelligence,
let's ask what kind of collective intelligence do these cellular swarms deploy?
I've made this argument that the cells of the body making in embryo
are a kind of collective intelligence.
I'm not simply saying that they have a complex outcome.
Feed forward emergence of complexity from simple rules is commonplace.
Many systems do that.
That's not what I mean.
They have a specific ability to adapt to perturbations.
That's more than simple emergence.
And let me show you some examples.
So development is quite reliable and has the ability to reach the specific region
of the anatomical amorphous space, meaning the various different configurations
that a body might have to go from here to here.
So you go from a single cell and then two cells to a whole body.
But the amazing thing is that if you cut this embryo in half,
you don't get two half bodies.
You get two perfectly normal monosygotic twins.
So this system is reliable, but it is not hardwired.
In the face of this massive perturbation, it is able to still get to where it's going.
So if you boil everything down to two dimensions, just for sake of illustration,
the normal embryo does this, but the embryo cut in half,
which is in a different location in that space,
actually is able to get to where it needs to go.
In this ensemble of states, this is the goal space.
The goal states in that space, this is what are considered standard human anatomies are.
And there are various other ways to get there.
And there are local maxima that can be avoided and so on.
So being able to navigate to the same region from different starting conditions
is a kind of intelligence that we view as navigation.
Here is an example in an adult organism.
This is an axolotl.
So this is a salamander.
This guy regenerates his limbs, his eyes, jaws, portions of the heart and brain,
spinal cord, ovaries, amazingly regenerative.
What happens is that when a limb is amputated and they bite each other's legs off all the time
when they're when they're housed together.
So this is a natural experiment that happens, whether it's here or here or up here,
the cells will very rapidly build what's needed.
And they make a standard salamander leg and then they stop.
That's the most amazing part of regeneration that first of all,
that it happens exactly the same way no matter what, where you start from.
And second, that it knows when to stop.
When does it stop?
It stops when the correct salamander arm has been completed.
So you can see that what this is is an error minimization scheme.
This is a system that is going to keep working and changing until a large scale
set point of target morphology that looks like this has been reached.
Now, by the way, this is not just for frogs and worms.
There are some examples.
So for example, the human liver is highly regenerative.
Even the ancient Greeks knew that.
I have no idea how they knew that, but they did.
Human children can regenerate their fingertips.
So below a certain age, they will have a cosmetically very, very nice
regeneration of a fingertip amputation.
And deer are a large adult mammal that regenerates a centimeter and a half
of new bone per day when they're growing this.
So bone, vasculature, innervation, skin, all of it.
So this ability, and in fact, in the correct pattern.
So this ability to regenerate is sprinkled throughout the tree of life.
It is really fundamental.
I want to show you one of my maybe all-time examples of creative problem
solving in this kind of space.
So in that salamander that I showed you, in the nude, if you take a section
through a little tubule that goes to the kidney, you see that it's like
eight or 10 cells typically that work together to make this lumen.
One trick you can do is you can make the cells large.
You can force the cells to be larger.
And if you do that, what happens is it adjusts fewer, fewer of those cells
are there to make the same, roughly the same size of lumen.
That's already amazing that it adjusts the number of cells to the size of each cell.
And that, you know, to being a new born into this world, the embryo cannot
count on having the right size of cells.
It has to adapt on the fly.
This is one of many things you can't count on as an embryo.
You have to solve these problems from scratch every time.
So what it'll do is it'll use the right number of cells.
But if you make the cells truly gigantic, one single cell will bend around itself
and leave a space in the middle to give you that tubule.
What's amazing about this is that this is a completely different molecular
mechanism than this.
In other words, this is some sort of cell-to-cell communication tubulogenesis
kind of a thing.
This is cytoskeletal bending.
This is a single cell bending around itself.
So look what's going on here.
Different molecular mechanisms are being called up in the service
of a high-level anatomical goal.
This is what's known as top-down causation.
In the service of a particular anatomical goal, different molecular mechanisms
can be called up.
So this ability to adjust to circumstance has to do with external circumstances,
like being injured or being cut in half or losing a limb,
but also internal circumstances.
Not only can't you count on your body maintaining a particular shape,
you can't even count on your own parts.
You have no idea what size your cells are going to be when you come into the world
and you still have to be able to solve this problem.
So this is amazing.
And again, not through eons of evolutionary change.
This happens immediately in one generation.
So the final example I want to show you is something that we discovered a few years ago.
Here's a normal tappel here.
The eyes, the brain, the nostrils, and the mouth is here.
So these tappels have to become a fraud
in order to become a fraud.
They have to rearrange their face.
So the jaws have to move forward.
The eyes have to come in various things like that.
And it was thought that this is a hard-wired process.
Basically, every organ in the face moves in a certain direction, a certain amount.
And that way, if you just know which direction
and how much you'll go from a standard tappel to a standard fraud.
We made the hypothesis that this was actually a more intelligent process than that.
And so how do you test it with perturbation?
So what we did was we created what we call Picasso tappels.
So the eye is off to the side.
The jaws are on top of the head.
Everything is kind of scrambled.
And what we found is that even those animals generally make pretty normal frogs.
Because all of these organs move in novel unnatural paths
to get to where they're going and then they stop.
Actually, they sometimes overshoot.
They sometimes go too far and then have to come back.
But all of these things move around until they get to a pretty normal frog face.
So what this is, is this idea that genetics isn't specifying some kind of hardware rearrangement,
hard-wired rearrangements.
What it actually specifies is a problem-solving machine,
and we'll get to more of this in the third part of the talk,
that can recognize unexpected states and take corrective action.
It's an error minimization scheme.
So how might that work?
And here's what we have.
The standard story of developmental biology looks like this.
There are genes that interact with each other as gene-regulatory networks.
They make proteins, which do things.
Some of them are sticky.
Some of them diffuse.
Some of them exert force and so on.
And then there's this process of emergence.
So simple rules lead to complex outcomes,
and you get this kind of beautiful anatomy.
And this is all true.
This all happens.
But this leaves out a really critical component, which this is all feed-forward emergence.
But there are all these feedback loops that if you step away from this target morphology,
either by injury or by teratogens or by mutations or anything else,
all kinds of processes at the level of physics and genetics get activated
to try and get you back there.
There's that error minimization scheme,
which is really a kind of anatomical homeostasis or pattern homeostasis.
And a couple of interesting things about this.
On the one hand, this is, but biologists know all about feedback loops.
It's pretty obvious.
But on the other hand, most of the feedback loops we know about are scalar.
All of these homeostatic loops require a set point.
They need to know like a thermostat needs to know what is the thing with respect
to which we calculate error.
Most of these examples of homeostasis in biology are scalar numbers.
They're pH or temperature level or hunger level or something.
I got there a simple quantity.
In this case, we're talking about the set point of this process being a complex
anatomical descriptor.
It doesn't have to be an exact cell by cell kind of thing,
but some general notion of what the correct shape should be
or the correct length of limbs and stuff like that.
So that's unusual.
And of course, the whole notion of a process that's in some sense goal directed
is a kind of taboo.
There's a real what I call teleophobia out there about people are really suspicious
about models of processes with goals.
But I think that cybernetics since the 40s has given us a mature non-magical science
of systems with goals.
So I think it's okay.
But something interesting about this is that if you only know about the first part of this,
then when you want to make changes up here, let's say for biomedical purposes,
your only game plan is to alter the genome.
And that means you have to solve this inverse problem.
You have to ask if I wanted a different shape up here, which genes would I have to change?
And as we talked about a few minutes ago, that is in general an unsolvable problem
because this process is so complex and so convoluted.
You can't just reverse it.
You don't know which genes to change.
But if there is kind of this homeostasis relative to a set point,
then you've got a different strategy.
Maybe this isn't at the mechanical clock part of that continuum that I showed you.
Maybe this is closer to that thermostat level where you can actually change the set point.
You can revise the set point without having to change the hardware without changing the
genes at all.
And this is what I'm going to show you now.
So what we wanted was, and this is years of work on this now,
what we wanted was to, if this is all true, we should be able to do a couple of things.
First of all, we should be able to identify where that set point is stored.
And I'm going to show you that, decode it.
And I'm going to show you a couple of examples of how we can actually read it
and understand what it says.
And we should be able to rewrite it and let the cells build to the new pattern
without changing out the hardware.
Let me show you that.
So how might this work?
At the very beginning of this, I started thinking about, okay,
how can we even talk about cells and tissues storing a goal state,
storing some kind of a target for all this activity?
And of course, the one really good uncontroversial example of a biological system
that stores goal states and acts towards them is the brain.
This is what complex creatures do all the time.
So the brain stores memories of target states,
and it acts in three-dimensional space to achieve those goals.
How does it do it?
Well, the hardware looks like this.
This is an electrical network where you've got cells.
The cells have little ion channels in their membrane,
which allows them to pass things like potassium, sodium, and so on.
They acquire, by doing that, they acquire a voltage gradient,
a difference, voltage difference between inside and out.
And that voltage gradient may or may not be communicated to the neighboring cells
through these little electric synapses known as gap junctions.
So you have a network of cells that can store different states electrically,
and they can propagate information,
and that information spreads to the network.
And that is what runs the software of the brain.
And so what you can see here is this group made this amazing video
of real-time electrical signaling in the zebrafish, a living zebrafish brain.
So you can see here's what's going on as the fish is thinking about
whatever fish think about.
And it is a commitment of neuroscience
that if we were able to read out these electrical signals,
we could decode them and thus know what the fish is thinking.
We should be able to recover the memories, the goals, the various preferences,
the behavioral repertoires, and so on by decoding this.
So to summarize, and this is the project of neural decoding here in neuroscience,
where you try to image the brain and you make a model
and you understand what that animal is thinking or seeing and so on.
And so the idea is that according to neuroscience,
the bioelectrical signaling in the brain is literally the medium
that contains the cognitive content of the mind.
So you as a person, all your memories and thoughts and everything else
is in some way encoded in the electrophysiology of your brain.
Well, the amazing thing is that this ancient...
So that's a really neat trick, right?
That combination of hardware and software is amazing.
But what's really interesting is that architecture,
the architecture of having this electrical hardware
and thus this very plastic goal seeking clever and problem-solving software
is absolutely ancient.
So every cell in your body has ion channels.
Most of them have gab junctions to neighboring cells.
This is not something that's just for neural cells
and it's something that's been around since the time of bacterial biofilms.
This is evolution figured out this architecture very early on.
And so then one can try to extend this and basically this is the project
and this is what we've been doing for almost 30 years now
is this idea of extending neuroscience beyond neurons.
The real kind of magic of neuroscience is not in the neurons.
It's in this understanding, this scaling up of cognition.
And so what you might imagine is doing exactly the same kind of neural decoding thing,
but not on neurons.
Let's say on embryos or some other morphogenetic system to ask,
here you're asking what is the collective intelligence of neurons thinking.
Here you're asking for what is the collective intelligence
of the rest of the body cells thinking quite literally.
And I can use the thing is, this sounds very strange
and a lot of people will say that this is some kind of a weird misuse of a metaphor.
But the reason that I can apply all this terminology from neuroscience
to outside the brain is because the concepts, the tools, the reagents
cannot tell the difference between neurons and non-neural tissues.
All of the same tools and concepts work everywhere in the body.
This is what we've been showing.
And so the concepts are actually very isomorphic.
And so what you have here is that whereas the electrical network,
just to kind of summarize what I'm saying here,
the electrical network of the brain is giving commands to the muscles
to move you through three dimensional space.
That's the familiar version of neuroscience.
And then we can modify it with various techniques
and we can read it out and so on.
So the electrical network of the brain tells muscles what to do
to move you in three dimensional space.
But the reason it can do that is because it evolved
from a much more ancient system in other tissues in your body
that long before brains and muscles evolved,
we're telling all the cells how to rearrange your body shape
and thus move you in anatomical morphospace.
Same strategy, same hardware, same tricks, except it's a different space.
And so this is what I said before when I said that evolution
was pivoting us through various problem spaces.
So what we did was to develop the first molecular tools
to read and write this information outside of the nervous system.
So how do we do that?
So the first thing is a voltage sensitive fluorescent dye.
So this is a chemical that emits either different brightness
or different wavelengths, light depending on the electrical properties
of the cell that it's sitting in.
And so what you're seeing here is a time lapse of a frog embryo
as during the early stages.
And so the colors represent different voltages.
And so this is a kind of brain scan, if you will,
of all the conversations that the cells are having with each other
as they sort out who's going to be left, who's going to be right,
who's going to be anterior, posterior, dorsal, ventral, and so on.
And so we now have the ability to read out this kind of information.
We spend a lot of time doing computer simulations
to figure out how these patterns map onto the patterns of ion channels
that are present in the cell membranes.
I want to show you two kinds of patterns.
The first we call the electric face.
And this is, again, a time lapse.
Now here, it's gray scale instead of color, but it's the same idea.
The brightness represents voltage.
And so in this early frog embryo that's putting its face together,
there's all kinds of changes, lots of exciting stuff happening.
But look at this one frame taken from it.
Long before the genes are turned on to make the different parts of the face,
we can already see what this animal is going to do.
Here's where the animal's right eye is going to be.
Here's where the mouth is going to be.
The left eye comes in slightly thereafter.
You will see that momentarily.
Here are the placodes on the sides.
The B pattern of where everything is going to go
is already there in the stable electrical states of the cells
if you know how to read them out.
So this is the electric face.
And I'm going to show you in a minute that if you make changes here,
you will change gene expression.
You will change anatomy.
Therefore, this pattern is instructive.
It drives.
This is not just some sort of epiphenomenon.
This is actually the memory of what the cells are going to be doing
to make the face.
So that's a natural pattern.
But here's a pathological pattern.
And we'll talk more about cancer in the third part of the talk.
If I inject a human oncogene, there will be a tumor.
But before that tumor forms,
I can already see where the cells are starting to defect.
They acquire this abnormal bioelectric state.
And I can already see where the tumor is going to be.
So this is a pathological pattern.
So in addition to being able to observe all this stuff,
which is nice, but it's just observation,
what we developed were a set of tools patterned on exactly the same thing
done in neuroscience to study synaptic plasticity and intrinsic plasticity.
And basically be able to, so I showed you how to read the patterns.
I'm showing you how to write the patterns.
So you can rewrite those patterns by manipulating the gap junctions,
these electrical synapses.
So that controls the connectivity of this network.
Or you can actually open channels, open them,
using drugs or close them using drugs, using light,
the various kinds of stimuli to control the voltage of every cell.
So to be clear, there are no applied fields.
There are no electrodes.
There's no electromagnetic radiation.
There are no magnets, nothing like that.
This is molecular physiology using the natural interface
that these cells are exposing to us.
These, this is the same interface that they use to hack each other.
These are, this is the way the cells are communicating,
and we're just hijacking it.
So there are no external fields, nothing like that.
Okay, so using this technology then, we know what happens
when you use it in the brain.
So somebody like Tanagawa at MIT can use this
to put false memories into the brains of mice,
using exactly this technology in the brain.
We are going to put false memories
into the somatic networks of cells that are building the body.
So when you do that, here's what happens.
You can convince cells to make ectopic hearts like this.
Here are some extra hearts in the tadpole.
You can make extra limbs.
So you can ask the cells in the jaw to start generating a limb.
And here are some six-legged frogs here.
You can make ectopic forebrain.
You can make ectopic inner ear organs right here.
Or you can even make fins.
Now that's especially weird
because tadpoles aren't supposed to have fins.
And I'll show you some of that momentarily.
But here's one of my favorite examples.
I showed you, if you remember that electric face,
one of the things about that electric face
was that there was a pattern that said where the eye should go.
It represented the location where the cells should become an eye.
And so we simply said, okay, if we try to reproduce
that electrical state elsewhere in the body,
can we induce some other kinds of cells to be an eye?
And so we did.
So we injected some mRNA encoding,
some potassium channels into a different type of cells
that were not going to be that region.
In particular, they were this gut.
They were fated to be gut.
And if you do that, if you create that pattern in those cells,
sure enough, they will make, they will build an eye.
And these eyes will have all the right cell layers.
So retinal lens, optic nerve, they'll have all that stuff.
Notice, notice a couple of interesting things.
Number one, this bioelectric pattern is instructive.
It tells cells what to do.
It doesn't just ruin the old pattern,
it actually can call up whole organs.
Number two, it expands the notion of competency.
In the developmental biology textbook,
what you will read is that only these cells up here
in the anterior and directed room
are actually competent to become eye.
And that's true if you use the traditional way of inducing eyes,
which is this master eye gene called PAC-6.
But it's not true if you go up a level
and use the bioelectric signals, you can make eyes anywhere.
So it completely changes our idea.
Learning to hack these cells in a different way
changes this, our understanding of their competency.
And notice the third thing that's amazing
is that we didn't provide very much information at all.
I mean, eyes are very complex.
We didn't tell this animal how to make an eye.
We basically just triggered the eye morphogenetic subroutine
with a simple trigger that says build an eye here.
That's it.
We didn't say where the stem cells go
or how to make a retina, none of that.
It's very modular.
It's very hierarchical.
And so the next kind of part of this
that's my favorite is this.
Here's a lens, an ectopic lens sitting out
in the tail of a tadpole somewhere.
So we've induced the lens.
The way we've induced it is just like here.
We injected some ion channels.
These ion channels are labeled with this blue beta-gal signal.
So what you can see here is that the blue cells are the ones
to which we said build an eye.
But there's not enough of them to build a proper lens.
And so what did they do?
They recruited a bunch of their nearby buddies,
all of this stuff here that we never touched.
So it's a secondary instruction.
We instruct these cells to make an eye.
They instruct their neighbors to work with them
to complete the task.
This is something you see in other collective intelligence
is like ants, where when a few ants come across a project
that's too big for them to handle, what do they do?
They recruit others.
And so this ability of the system to self-scale
to the available problem is something
that you see in other collective intelligences.
So we don't have to tell these cells how big an eye should be
or how many cells there should be.
All of this is part of the competency
of this amazing agential medium in which we're working.
And we'll get to that notion.
But the fact that these cells are solving problems collectively,
they know how big this group is.
They know how big it's supposed to be.
The collective functionally knows all these things
because you can see it.
So we use the same kind of strategy
to address the issue of leg regeneration.
So frogs normally do not regenerate their legs,
unlike salamanders.
But what we can do is after amputation,
we can treat with a cocktail of ion channel drugs.
And in fact, they turn on immediately
these pro regenerative genes.
They begin to make a leg.
You've got some toes.
By 45 days, you've already got a toenail and some toes.
Eventually, a very nice leg.
The leg is touch sensitive and motile.
And all of this happens from a brief modulation.
In fact, in the recent work on adult frogs,
we show that just one day, 24 hours of application
of our cocktail, you get a year and a half of leg growth.
So this is not 3D printing.
This is not scaffolds.
This is not us telling stem cells where to go
or what tissues go next to what tissues.
We have no idea how to build a frog leg.
It'll be a really long time before anybody
can micromanage that process, but you don't need to.
Because the cells already know how to do it.
What you do need to do is to convince them
that that's what they should do instead of scarring.
And that doesn't take very long.
24 hours is plenty.
And once they've decided that that's
where they're going in morphogenetic space,
they will keep going.
And this is how regenerative medicine
can take advantage of the competencies of these cells.
And here I should do a disclosure,
because David Kaplan and I are co-founders of a company
called Morphosuticals Inc.
And what we're trying to do is the same thing in rodents.
So David makes these amazing wearable bioreactors
that apply to the wound site, our drug payloads,
which are various things that attempt
to convince the cells that they should regenerate.
So hopefully, eventually, we'll be using this
in clinical practice.
For now, we've done it in frog.
We're currently trying to do it in mammals
and eventually, hopefully, in patients.
OK.
For the next story, I want to switch back to planarium.
So this kind of animal.
And I want to, at this point, make good on the promise
that I made about 10 minutes ago, which
is to show you how those gold states are actually encoded.
How does the tissue remember what a correct animal
should look like?
And the planaria are a great example of this,
because if you cut them into pieces,
and the record is something like 276, I believe,
each of these pieces regrows a perfect little worm.
They make exactly what's needed, no more, no less.
And in fact, it's a tough problem, because even
if you make just one cut here, these cells back here
have to make a tail.
These cells up here have to make a head,
but they were exact neighbors.
Right up until the time you cut them,
they were exact neighbors.
And yet they have radically different anatomical fates.
So you cannot decide if you're going
to be a head or a tail based on your position in the animal.
They have the same position.
You can cut anywhere.
It's after the cut, you have to now figure out,
what am I missing?
What do I still have?
And what does a correct planarian look like?
So oh, and by the way, these animals are also immoral.
In case you're interested in aging,
planaria are, they do not age.
There's no such thing as an old planarian,
because they continuously regenerate their tissues.
So we wanted to ask this simple question.
OK, here's our planarian.
And we amputate the head, and we amputate the tail.
So you have this middle fragment.
The middle fragment reliably regenerates
to have one head, one tail.
How does this piece know how many heads and tails
it's supposed to have?
So we investigated and found out that there's actually
an electrical circuit, which I don't have time to go into,
but there's an electrical circuit, which actually
encodes the number of heads that they're supposed to have.
And so what we were able to do then is this.
Here is a visualization of the normal electrical pattern
in these fragments, so one head, one tail.
But what you can do is you can rewrite that pattern
to say two heads.
Now, this is kind of messy still.
So the technology is still very much in development,
but you can already see, you can do that.
And when you do that to this animal,
they go ahead and they make a two-headed flatworm.
This is not Photoshop.
These are real two-headed animals.
Notice something interesting.
So here's anatomically one head, one tail.
The gene expression for the head is, of course,
in the head and so on.
This animal, this bioelectrical map
is not a map of this two-headed guy.
This is a map of this perfectly normal, anatomically normal,
one-headed animal.
Not only is his anatomy still normal,
his molecular biology is still normal.
The anterior marker is still only on in the head,
not in the tail.
So, and yet, if you were to cut them,
they go on and to make two-headed flatworms.
So let me pause here and just explain,
to underline what's going on here.
This bioelectrical pattern is what I promised before
as a readout of where the information
for the target morphology,
the target, the correct pattern to build,
this is where it's stored.
It is literally stored in this electrical map,
the way that memories are thought to be stored
in the brain.
Also, a single normal planarian body
is able to store one of two different ideas
about what a correct planarian should look like.
In other words, this again,
sounds very much like the nervous system
where the exact same hardware, your brain,
can store many, many different types of ideas,
and you do not have to genetically edit your brain
to have it store different types of information.
It's just built to have different targets
that it can remember.
And so, and the third amazing thing about this is that
this pattern memory is a kind of counterfactual,
meaning that this is a memory of what I am going to do
if I get injured in the future.
It's not what I'm doing now.
It's what I will do if at some point in the future
I get injured.
So that ability to, it's a very primitive version
of what's sort of magical about brains,
which is this ability to mental time travel,
to think about, to have memories of things
that happened long ago and are not true now,
and to have anticipation of things
that might happen in the future
that are also not happening now.
People think that this is very much
the kind of thing that brains do and it is,
but the evolutionary precursors of that are ancient,
and even the planarian morphological intelligence
has a degree of ability to do this kind of mental time travel.
Now, why do I keep calling it a memory?
Because if you take these two-headed worms,
and you cut them again in plain water,
no more manipulation of any kind,
they continue to form two-headed animals.
So no genetic change.
The hardware is untouched.
These, the genomes here are exactly the same.
We haven't done any genomic editing,
nothing wrong with their genomes.
And yet this is a permanent line of animals
that will continue to generate two-headed creatures,
even though they have the normal wild-type genome.
So the question of where is,
remember that slide I showed at the beginning,
that human torso, and I asked,
where is that information stored?
Where is the information stored
for the number of heads a worm should have?
It isn't genetic,
because you can take the exact same genetic hardware
and have it be two-headed.
But what the genome does do
is to build an electrical circuit
that by default stores the information for one head,
but it can be pushed to other fates,
for example, to store information for two heads.
So this is why I call it memory.
It's long-term stable.
It's rewritable, and we can also, by the way,
take two-headed and put them back to one-headed.
And it has this latency,
which I just showed you, this conditional recall.
It doesn't kick in until you've injured the animal.
And so here you can see,
this is a video of these two-headed critters
doing their thing.
Okay, and so what we're doing now
is lots of computational modeling,
and actually using lots of ideas
from connectionist machine learning
to try and understand specifically
how the electrical circuits that are in these planaria
can store different types of target patterns
and reconstruct those patterns
even when the information has been damaged.
Now, I've shown you this story about two heads and so on.
It's not just about the number of heads.
One other amazing thing you can do
is push them to make heads of different species.
So here is a planarian with a nice triangular head
that's appropriate to his species.
We can cut off that head,
perturb the electrical network topology,
let them settle back down.
And when they regenerate their heads,
sometimes they make the normal head,
but sometimes they make round heads
like this S-Mediterranean.
Sometimes they make flat heads like this Pifelina.
Again, no genetic change here.
This has nothing to do with rewiring the hardware.
What it is is pushing that same machine
into other attractors in that enormous space
of morphogenetic configurations
that they're able to traverse.
They're normally very good
at going exactly where they need to go,
but they can in fact visit other regions of that state space
that normally belong to other species.
And not just the head shape,
but also the shape of the brain,
the distribution of stem cells,
just like these other species,
150 to 100 million years distance.
So again, this notion of reprogrammable biological hardware,
they can do other things beyond the default
that they normally do.
And by the way, they can go even further
into the latent morphospace of a typical planarian
and Darcy Thompson as early as 1917,
he had this notion of living beings
exploring various kinds of mathematical morphospace.
You can make them go further than a typical planarian
and you can make these things that are sort of,
they're not flat anymore.
They're round and cylindrical
and they're sort of hybrid shapes
or these crazy spiky things.
These wild type cells are capable
of building lots of different stuff.
And so what we're doing now is really trying
to make these full stack computational models
that go all the way from the lowest level molecular details
of which genes are turned on and off.
And then build the models of the bioelectric states,
the cellular and tissue-wide bioelectric states
that result from these ion channels
and eventually all the way up to body-wide decisions
and algorithms, which is what you need
for that anatomical compiler
that I talked about at the beginning,
which is to understand how the tissue
is actually making decisions
about large scale shape, number of heads,
type of heads and so on.
Okay, so just a couple more minutes
and then we'll take another break.
I just, the last thing I wanna show you here
is a biomedical intervention that emerges
from this kind of approach.
And it has to do with fixing frog brains.
So here's a normal tadpole brain,
here's the forebrain, here's the midbrain,
here's the hindbrain, this is the normal structure.
And if you expose these guys to various teratogens
like nicotine, what you'll see is alcohol, nicotine,
lots of different things.
What you'll see is that a real defect in brain formation,
the eyes are connected to the brain,
the forebrain is basically missing,
lots of problems here.
And so we wanted to know,
well, how would you fix something like this?
It's very complex, we don't wanna try to tell
every cell what to do, how do we fix this?
And so Alexis Pytak, who's a member
of our Allen Discovery Center,
made this computational model.
And with FiveHalfPy, who's a staff scientist in the group,
they simply asked the question,
what underlies the bioelectric gradients
that normally tell the cells how big and normal,
and what shape a normal brain should be?
And so when you have a model like this,
you can ask it questions and you can say,
well, if the pattern is incorrect,
what would we have to do to make it correct?
And so the model gave us an answer.
It said, well, there's this particular channel called HCN2.
And if you were to open that up,
it would be, the pattern would be restored
and the cells would know what to do.
And so here's an example,
and this is actually a much more difficult case
than that teratogen case I showed you.
This is a notch mutation.
So notch is a really critical neurogenesis gene
in the absence of notch.
You can see the brain is,
the forebrain is gone, the midbrain and hindbrain
are a big bubble full of water.
I mean, these animals are profoundly affected.
But even though that notch mutation is there,
if you force the cells to have the correct bioelectrical
pattern by using the strategy given to us
by the computational model, the brain becomes normal.
So they get their shape of the brain back,
they get gene expression back,
and they get their IQs back.
Their learning rates are indistinguishable from controls.
So this is an amazing example
of not only instructively repairing complex defects
using this bioelectrical approach,
but specifically fixing a hardware defect in software.
And I'm not saying that's gonna work
for all genetic defects.
There are many things that bioelectrics
are not gonna work for,
but it's again, this idea of plasticity.
The idea is that broken hardware is not the end of the line,
that if the algorithm is good,
which for example, in Plenary, it's absolutely amazing,
if the algorithm is good,
you can often get around these defects
and still get to where you need to go
if you can remember what the correct pattern is.
And so the biomedical roadmap looks roughly like this.
We're making this sort of turnkey system
where, and you can sort of play with parts of it
or already online,
where you know what the incorrect pattern currently is,
you should know what the correct pattern is,
and this is something that we're still working on
to acquire these physiomic data sets.
And then the model can actually tell you
which channels and pumps to trigger,
so how to communicate your anatomical goals
to that set of cells.
And then of course, once you know which channels,
then it's pretty easy to pick drugs that you already know.
So looking forward,
the impact on biomedicine
is to complement all of this,
all of these current kind of technologies,
so surgery, transplants, stem cells, genomic editing,
rewriting, gene regulatory networks,
molecular drugs that target proteins and so on.
All of these things are bottom up,
they're micromanagement,
they're targeting the pathways
to exactly do what you need to do.
You can complement that
by taking advantage of the tissue intelligence.
And so we've talked about,
in this part of the talk,
we've talked about many examples
of cells and tissues solving problems.
They can find new ways to deal with physiological challenges,
to with anatomical challenges,
and with gene expression challenges.
So they have various competencies,
they can recruit neighbors as needed,
they can find different paths to the same outcome.
And if we can sort of take advantage of all those subroutines
through either cell training or tissue training
or various kinds of other triggers,
which we call morphosuticals
and the subset of electrosuticals,
then I think,
and you can find all the details here,
really transformative types of regenerative medicine
are gonna be available.
And I think that overall,
and possibly surprising nobody who works
in these sorts of traditional alternative medicine modalities,
the future of this approach
is gonna look a lot more like a kind of somatic psychiatry
than it is like chemistry.
Because bioelectricity is that interface layer
that enables top-down controls,
in other words, memories of global patterns
in various spaces,
to filter down to the molecular machinery
that actually activates them.
And so that's something that's really quite unique
to this bioelectrical layer.
And it's not just some, this is important to mention,
it's not just some rare thing that works
in the case of hypnodermatology and mind body medicine
and weird altered states and biofeedback.
It works 24-7 in your body.
When you decide in the morning,
you wake up and you decide that you're going to work,
that high-level cognitive intent
of what you want to do
has to depolarize your muscle cells
for you to be able to get out of bed.
So voluntary behavior is already showing you
this mind-body connection,
this idea that these high-level executive cognitive goals
have to eventually trickle down
to control molecular events in your muscles
and in your glands.
So this is the way our bodies work as a multi-scale system
all the way from high-level cognitive structures
down to the molecular pathways.
And bioelectricity is the layer that does that.
So I'm going to call a break now.
Let's take a couple of minutes.
Everybody gets some water.
I'm going to be back in about three minutes
and then people can ask questions.
But take a break for a few here.
All right, I'm back.
If anybody wants to start asking questions.
Yes, I can see Matthew's got his hand up already.
Great, thank you.
Hey, Michael, thanks so much for this
really astonishing research that you're doing.
This is wonderful to listen to.
I know you're a scientist,
but I think you're also verging
on some deep philosophical questions here.
And so I want to ask you if you think that the work
that you're doing, showing the work
that these bioelectric fields do,
it's obviously challenging a certain kind of reductionism.
But do you think there's a new philosophy of nature
opening up as you push the frontiers of biological science?
And what I mean here is, particularly,
to give an example on the question of memory,
it seems to me that the distributed memory
that you're finding in multicellular organisms
seems to suggest something more along the lines
of the philosophy of nature
that Bergson or Whitehead would suggest
where memory is not as the scientific materialist
philosophy of nature would suggest something
that's memory could only be something stored
through some material trace.
What Bergson, Whitehead and other thinkers
in that vein would say is that to understand memory
or consciousness, you really need to see nature
as this process of what Whitehead would call accumulation
so that the past is inherited in the present
and it's still present, the past is present in other words,
it's not gone, it's not somewhere else,
it doesn't need to be recorded on some material medium
necessarily, though of course traces are left
as nature accumulates in this process of growth.
And so it seems to me that memory therefore becomes something
that if we're gonna talk about how or where is it stored,
it's stored everywhere, not only in the organism
within the skin boundary of the organism
but the whole environment is in some sense
storing the memory if we wanna think of it that way.
You take the organism out of its environment,
is it really gonna be able to produce the form
that we would think it's remembering,
because it depends on all this environmental context
to do what it does.
And so yeah, that's one example of what a new philosophy
of nature might suggest as regards to memory
but how do you see your work venturing
into these deeper philosophical questions?
Yeah, so let's say this, I think that the right way
to think about the relationship between the experiments
and all of that and these different philosophical takes
is as a set of, so my framework you can in fact,
you can see it here, it's called the TAME,
technological approach to mind everywhere.
And the reason that I emphasize technological
is that I want the philosophical concepts
to be testable and to do specific work.
In other words, what I am looking for
is for different lenses or different ways
of looking at these phenomena that facilitate progress.
So a philosophical worldview is to me is useful
to the extent that it can be applied to the things we do
to drive new discoveries, new capabilities
to drive a research program basically.
So the reality is I've borrowed in order to make all
of these kind of new findings and that my lab has found
these were done because we borrowed from all kinds
of unusual ways of thinking about the world
that are not standard in the field.
And so to that extent, I do think we absolutely interface
with interesting different philosophical views
be they, you know, Berberxen or whoever else.
But that's it for, that's what I'm looking for.
So for example, on the specific example that you mentioned,
if you say that memory is sort of everywhere,
that's fine, I suspect that has a lot of value to it.
The next question is, okay, how do we turn that
into a specific intervention that shows us to be able
to do something that you could not do
if you didn't have that worldview.
So that's where the rubber has to meet the road
in terms of facilitating experimental advances
and finding new research.
So I think that's a longer, we can have a whole other
discussion about where I've borrowed a lot of this stuff
from because it is interesting, but everything to me,
everything has to eventually interface strongly
with the research enterprise.
Thank you.
Let's do one more.
Don't see any hands up yet,
but also given the time to be, we can carry on.
Yeah, let's keep going and then I'll do the last part
and then we can talk about whatever people want at the end.
Okay, so in this final part, I wanna come back to,
so let's remember where we were.
We started out acknowledging this kind of multi-scale
architecture of the body and trying to widen this idea
of intelligence towards a continuum of competency
from very simple kinds of things,
too much more complex things in diverse problem spaces.
And so, and then we went through some very specific
examples of bioelectricity as a kind of cognitive glue
that holds together these competent components,
for example, cells and allows the collective to solve
problems in morphogenetic space
and the implications for biomedicine.
I wanna circle back kind of to a somewhat more
philosophical aspect to really start to dig into
what does it mean to be an agent or a self
and how does it work that components are able
to make these emergent cells?
And then I wanna show you some novel organisms
as a kind of tool with which to explore this latent space
that I've been hinting at.
So, here we go.
Remember back to the original kind of goal
for this framework was to be able to think about
very diverse kinds of agents all in the same space.
So how do we think about synthetic beings
and possible aliens and cells and tissues and humans
and birds and everything else kind of on the same,
using the same framework.
And so, and so what I come up with was this notion
of a cognitive light cone.
So cognitive light cone, which is shown here
and this is kind of a, if anybody's into physics
you'll recognize this is a kind of upside down
Mankowski cone where space, all the three dimensions
of space are collapsed onto this axis
and time is on this axis.
And what the cognitive light cone is,
is simply the size of the largest goal
that a given system can work towards.
So not how far away can it sense
or how far away can it act,
but the size of the largest goal state that it can pursue.
So if all you care about is the local concentration
of sucrose, then maybe you're a bacterium
and you've got a tiny little cognitive light cone
that has a tiny bit of memory
from what the concentration was 20 minutes ago,
a little bit of predictive capacity and that's it.
If you are something like a dog,
well, you have a lot more memory going backwards,
more predictive power going forwards.
You have the ability to have the goal
of let's say protecting the whole sort of property.
So you have some idea of the size of a yard
and what's going on,
but you're never going to care about what happens
three times, three towns over a month from now.
It's just that that's too far in the future
and also in space for that cognitive, as far as we know
for that cognitive system to have any of that as a goal.
If you're a human, you could have an absolutely enormous
light cone where you might be working towards world peace
over the next hundred years
and you could have these very large light cones.
And by the way, you have the added psychological pressure
of knowing for a fact that some of your goals
are not achievable in your lifetime
because your cognitive light cone is bigger
than your actual survival, your possible survival.
So if you're a goldfish, you don't have that problem.
All your goals are achievable in your lifetime
because they're all very kind of short path.
And of course, as maybe it was Beth or somebody had pointed out
that we are of course compound intelligences
because we are made of components
with their own little cognitive light cones
in their own spaces.
So we are this huge patchwork of compound intelligences
all of which see different worlds in different spaces
and are all cooperating and competing and so on
both across and within levels.
So with this notion,
let's think about a few things.
First of all, let's go back to this idea
of a collective intelligence.
So if somebody shows you a human brain,
if you didn't already know what a human look like
and maybe even if you did
because it's not an obvious question
and somebody asks you, how many individuals are in there?
How many selves are in there?
And it leads to the fact that we do not know actually
how much brain matter it takes
to support a single human self.
I mean, we see the normal case,
but this leads to people saying things like,
wow, with such a, for a B or something like that
with such a tiny brain, it does a,
well, we don't know how much it takes to be a single self.
We don't have any way of guessing what that's gonna be
until you already know what a human is.
So let's look at this example.
This is a schematic of an early blastoderm
of an amniote embryo, let's say it's a bird or a human.
And what you see is a bunch of cells.
There's 50,000 cells and we look at that
and we say, oh, there's an embryo.
Now, what are we counting when we say
there's one embryo there?
What is there one of?
There are tens of thousands of cells.
What is there one of?
What we're actually counting is alignment.
We're counting the fact that all of these,
and that alignment is literal
because the cells physically have to align with each other
and also alignment in morphogenetic space
because all of these cells normally
are going to work together to build one individual.
They have one particular large scale pattern
that they're all going to build
and that is what we're counting as one.
And now, could you guess in advance
how many embryos there are
or how many individuals are in this brain?
It's a very similar as I was saying before
with the Turing, the kind of allusion to Turing.
It's a very similar problem.
Can you tell how many are going to be in there?
Is it genetically specified how many are in there?
Well, the answer is it is not.
So here's an experiment that Lutz first did
in the 40s and I used to do as a grad student
in the duck embryo.
So what you can do is you can take a little needle
and you can put some scratches in this blastoderm.
And so what happens is that once you,
when you made those little scratches
until they heal up, which they will,
but until they heal up, every region
which does not feel the presence of these other regions
becomes an embryo.
It self-organizes an embryo and then it heals.
And then what you have is multiple areas
that are conjoined twins or triplets.
And then in between them,
you have these little weird little disputed zones
where these cells can't quite tell who they belong to,
but in the end they have to make a decision
and they become part of this or part of that.
And this is really, there are a couple
of interesting things here.
First of all, because of this,
because you can split this up into some number of islands,
the number of cells, just imagine this is a human embryo,
the number of individuals in there is not fixed.
It is not determined by the genetics.
It is set in real time by the physiology.
It could be zero, it could be one, it could be two,
it could be some number of embryos,
probably up to half a dozen, let's say.
And it's very important for the making of cells
that they are self-organized,
meaning that they don't know,
each cell does not know where it,
where every cell is some other cells external environment.
So where do I end and my neighbor begins?
Or where do I end and the outside world begins?
This is something that is not true
for almost any current AI or robotic system,
because they don't have to put themselves together
from scratch, they are told right from the beginning,
they're programmed to say,
this is your border, here are the inputs,
here are the outputs, you are here,
the outside world is there.
That is not the case for living beings.
We have to self-construct and we do not know right away
where our borders are, how many of us are in there
and so on.
This also taking it back to the brain, of course,
is this issue of individuation,
because in split brain patients
and dissociative disorders and so on,
you find out that there actually are more than one self
within a standard human brain,
how many could fit in there, we do not know,
but the record for these dissociative kind of cases,
I mean, I think I've read in the 60s,
60 different personalities that could be in there.
So this idea of an active medium,
an excitable medium that differentiates
into a number of coherent selves is really key.
And so now you have to start asking yourself, okay,
so as we are self-constructing out of this,
sort of this Freudian ocean of possibility,
some out of 20 or 50,000 cells,
three or two or one embryo will form,
what are the dynamics that actually allow individual cells
with their own tiny little goals,
what are the goals of cells?
Well, every cell wants to become two cells
and they have metabolic goals
that they try to meet and so on.
What allows them to scale up
to work towards very sort of a large complex goals
like building a whole embryo?
I mean, that's huge.
No individual cell can know what a whole embryo is,
but the collective does.
So what allows that?
Well, here are some hypotheses.
One thing that allows it, I think,
is the kind of memory wiping that happens
when cells are electrically connected.
Because when two cells signal each other
the old-fashioned way,
where they just sort of secrete a chemical molecule
and it comes over here and the cell senses it,
it's very easy for this cell to know
whether that signal came from the outside or not.
So they can maintain,
these two cells can maintain their individuality
and they can maintain different memories
and the cell can ignore the signal
or do something about it, whatever.
But there's something magic
about these electrical gap junctions.
When the cells are joined by these gap junctions,
this signal, let's say it's a calcium spike
from being injured.
This cell got poked with something
and this calcium spike is a trace of that event,
a kind of a memory n-gram of that event.
It will immediately propagate through these gap junctions
and that the interpretation of that signal for this cell
is exactly the same as it would before
its own calcium spike.
Calcium doesn't have any metadata on it
that says, where did you come from?
So by moving through this,
there's a kind of memory,
kind of identity wipe that happens
where this cell now has that same memory trace.
And as far as it's concerned,
that's its own natural memory.
It has no way of knowing that's a false memory.
So to this cell, that's a false memory,
but to the collective,
it is an absolutely true memory that the collective had.
So that kind of wiping property,
it strips ownership information.
It makes it very hard for each cell
to maintain an individual identity
with respect to what its history was.
And it makes collectives out of individual cells.
And of course it makes them bigger.
So my memory become our memories,
my stress state becomes our stress
and my goal becomes our goal.
And so by when a single cell in this diagram,
when a single cell has some size of a cognitive light going
and some ability to anticipate and remember,
a network of these cells has a bigger computational capacity
and a bigger spatial sensorium.
And it can actually have larger scale,
more complex states as set points.
And now you can start to see how a collection of cells
could actually work on something like building an arm
or building a whole body.
And so we can imagine,
and so we're doing this now
is doing these very specific computational models
of how little tiny homeostatic loops like this,
for example, measure the pH and act
become very large homeostatic loops
about something completely different.
Single cells cannot remember anything like this,
but a giant collection of cells could.
And so this is a very active area of research
is to figure out exactly how that scales up.
The implications are these,
here's what evolution has done.
Evolution has enabled single cells to work together
to enlarge their cognitive light cones
where the goals scale from the very humble goals
of single cells to the more grandiose goals of collectives
where they can work on something gigantic
like making sure you have four fingers.
This cell doesn't know anything about what a finger is,
but this collective does.
So evolution gave us the scale up,
but there's a failure mode to this.
The failure mode is cancer.
So here's where when these cells
are electrically isolated from each other,
this is human glioblastoma in culture.
So these individual cells can roll back
to their unicellular past.
They do not become more selfish.
A lot of game theory kind of approaches
treat cancer cells as more selfish.
They don't become more selfish.
Their cells get smaller.
They're just a selfish.
It's just that the self here is huge.
Their self is very tiny and they do the best they can.
But biometically, if you have that kind of weird perspective
on cancer as a disorder of selfhood,
then what you can do is something interesting.
And we did this years ago.
You can induce tumors using human oncogenes,
but what you can do is use these ion channels
to force the cells to be in the correct electrical state
to maintain proper communication.
And when you do that, even though the oncogene is blazingly
expressed, it's labeled in red here.
You can see it's all over the place.
There's no tumor.
This is the same animal.
There's no tumor because the genetics might have a defect.
The hardware might be a little bit broken.
But as long as the cell is physiologically
part of this network that contains large scale
goals like building nice skin, nice muscle, and so on,
they're kept away from tumorogenesis
and harness towards these large scale anatomical goals.
So the last piece I want to show you, it goes beyond this.
So we've been talking about goals in different spaces.
So the tiny metabolic goals of single cells,
the morphogenetic goals of cellular collectives.
And now we can ask the following question.
Where do these goals come from?
And what other goals can novel beings have?
And so this is a project that I also
have to do a disclosure here because Josh Bongard and I
have another company called Fauna Systems, which is all
about AI-designed biorebotics.
And this is all work done in collaboration
with a Bongard lab at this Institute of Computationally
Designed Organisms.
We asked the following question, how much plasticity
do these cells have?
And when they're liberated from their normal boundary
conditions of the animal, what will they do?
How will they reboot multicellularity?
How will they navigate anatomical and behavioral spaces?
What can they do?
So here's the experiment.
And all the biology here was done by Douglas Blackest
and the staff scientists in the group.
What we did was we took an early frog embryo.
And at this stage, where they have about 1,000 cells or so,
we cut off these cells up here, which are the skin.
This is all faded to be skin cells.
And we dissociated them and we put them back
in this little depression here.
And so they're just skin.
There's no nerve.
There's no muscle, just skin.
And what could they have done?
Well, they could have died.
They could have spread out and gotten away from each other.
They could have formed a nice two-dimensional monolayer,
the way that cell culture does.
What they did instead was something quite different.
Oops.
What they did instead, after we put them
in this little depression, all these little skin cells,
they got together and they formed this round thing
we call a xenobot.
It's called a xenobot because Xenopus lavus
is the name of the frog.
And we think it's a biorebotics platform, so xenobot.
What they do is these little guys
achieve spontaneous motion by using their cilia.
So frog skin has little hairs, little,
motile hairs called cilia, which it
uses to distribute mucus down the side of the animal.
So instead, what they do is they use it to row against the water.
So they start to swim.
So they can go in circles.
They can patrol back and forth like this.
They can have these collective behaviors
where they can go on a long journey
or they can interact with each other
or they can sit there doing nothing.
They have all kinds of behaviors.
Here's one moving in a maze in water.
So you'll see what it does as it goes.
It takes the corner without bumping into anything.
And then at this point, it spontaneously decides to turn around
and go back where it came from.
We are not pacing it.
We are not controlling it.
There are no, there's no neurons here.
This is a piece of skin living its own, its new best life.
And you're watching some of its behaviors.
It has all kinds of active calcium signaling.
This is the same technology used to read out brain signaling.
We are currently in the process of trying to decode all this
to see what the cells are saying to each other.
What are these two, what if anything
are these two Xenobots saying to each other?
They can regenerate.
So if you cut them almost in half, they will seal up.
So look at this.
So here's like 180 degree hinge right there.
Look at the power it takes to fold itself back
into its new Xenobot shape.
And something else that's amazing is by modeling.
And so Josh Bongard and Sam Kriegman in his lab
did a bunch of computational modeling
in the simulator of these bots running around.
And they noticed a kind of unusual predicted behavior
that they tend to rearrange their environment
in this weird way.
So they went, so we went ahead and we built some of the ones.
Then again, Doug sculpted some of these things
in ways that the AI suggested.
And we discovered something remarkable,
which is called kinematic replication.
Notice that we've made it impossible for these animals
to reproduce in the normal froggy fashion.
They don't have any other things there.
They're just skin.
But within a couple of days,
they discover a novel way of making copies of themselves
that's basically Von Neumann's dream.
It's able to construct copies of itself
from material it finds in the environment.
So this white stuff here, these are all loose skin cells
that we sprinkled into their world.
What they do is they run around
and they both collectively and individually,
they collect them into little balls
and then they sort of polish these little balls
and compact them.
And because they're not working with a passive,
some kind of passive particle,
they're working with an agential material,
just like we were the engineers,
Doug Blackison was working with an agential material,
these cells that have an agenda,
they like to assemble into the xenobot.
These little blobs become the next generation of xenobots.
And guess what they do?
They run around and collect more cells
and they become the next generation of xenobots and so on.
And so this ability to make copies of itself
using kinematic replication is just one of them.
We're just scratching the surface here of what they can do.
There is much, much more coming.
And so this suggests an interesting set of questions.
What did the frog genome actually learn during evolution?
Well, it can make frogs, sure,
and this is the normal tadpole path,
but it turns out,
and something we would have never known
if we hadn't tried this experiment,
it actually can do other things.
It can make the exact same genome.
We didn't edit the genome here.
We didn't give them any weird new nanomaterials.
The same genome can have a different developmental path.
This is what an old xenobot looks like.
I mean, it has this weird structure
that who knows what it's changing into.
And then it has different behaviors
that's different from what tadpoles do.
So here's some interesting things about it.
First of all, for any other creature,
when you ask why does it look the way it looks?
Why does it have certain behaviors and properties?
The answer is always the same, well, evolution.
So selection, right?
So for eons, the system was shaped,
it was selected for specific behaviors,
everything else died out and there you go.
But here, you can't use that story here
because there's never been any xenobots.
There has never been any selection to be a good xenobot.
Where did these capacities come from?
Where did their ability to do kinematic self-replication,
which to our knowledge,
doesn't exist anywhere in the biosphere,
where did that come from?
Now, we don't know what their cognitive capacities are.
We're studying that right now.
What can they sense?
Do they have preferences?
How can they learn?
We don't know any of that yet.
But we do know that they have novel morphologies
and novel behaviors and so where does that come from?
So one way to think about this
and that same genome by being probed in this way
is showing us a bit of the latent space,
a bit of what they are capable of.
So this is kind of, you know, Jeremy Gay,
who's an amazing graphic designer
that does a lot of our artwork,
did this homage to the famous Hofstadter book,
Gerd Lescher Bach,
where he was pointing out that how you look at certain objects
reveals what you see and what they can do.
And so through that frog genome,
when you look through it in a particular way,
yes, you can see the tadpoles
and yes, you can see xenobots
and maybe you can see other things.
And so what we can say here
is that these kind of synthetic organisms
are really a tool.
They're almost like a periscope or a telescope
that lets you look into another space
that we normally don't see into the space of possibilities
or for example, anatomical structure.
And so for the last couple of minutes,
I just wanna talk about this
and the future of all this in bioengineering and so on.
And the concepts that we wanna talk about are these.
We've already talked about multiscale
competency architecture.
This idea of polycomputing,
which Josh Bongard and I came up with to indicate
the fact that any physical process
can be treated as a computation,
as a different computation by different observers,
depending on how they interpret it.
And that these observers ourselves observing each other
and various conspecifics and parasites and so on,
this idea that really because of this competency,
because cells and tissues are not a passive material,
every part is able to hack all the other parts
by providing signals that exploit their functionality.
Just like we as engineers,
and that whole middle part of the talk,
I was trying to show you that
triggering complex organ formation and so on,
you don't have to try to micromanage the molecular steps.
If you can communicate with a larger system
to tell it what you want it to do,
you can take advantage of that.
Well, biology, we're late to that party as engineers,
and biology has been doing this all along.
So I wanna show you a couple of examples.
The first thing I wanna just mention is,
building with a gentile materials is very different.
So when you build with a passive material,
like making Legos,
it's on you to put every Lego where it goes.
All they do is hold shape.
They have very little competencies
besides holding their shape.
So you have to control everything.
This is molecular medicine.
This is synthetic biology now.
This is bioengineering.
You build everything yourself.
But so if you wanted to make a tower out of Legos,
you have to put everything where it goes.
It's easy.
There are a few surprises,
but the problem is if it falls down, that's it.
You could try to make a tower out of dogs, for example.
If you made a tower out of,
if you tried it the old fashioned way
by stacking dogs on top of each other, that doesn't work.
The dogs have their own agendas.
They're gonna walk off, not gonna work.
But there's a new set of tools
basically from different parts of this spectrum
that we talked about,
different ways of interacting with systems.
If you don't insist on treating them as this kind of system,
but you're open to the idea that your material
might actually be this kind of system.
And in the case of dogs, it's very obvious.
In the case of cells, it's only now becoming apparent
that they are also somewhere here.
What you can do is train the dogs.
It's a very different strategy.
You're now doing behavior shaping
as opposed to old school engineering.
But the good news is that this tower repairs itself
when you knock it down, they'll get right back up.
And so the question about this competency is,
what can you expect the subunits to do
when you're not there to manage them?
And how do you construct complex things
out of units like that?
And the way you do it is by using their natural interface,
in this case, learning rewards and punishments
to control their behavior.
This is hacking.
Hacking not in the sense of the people
who steal your credit card numbers,
but in the sense of using a system
in not necessarily the way that it was intended to be used,
but in some clever way that exploits
the system's own properties for a complex outcome.
So we see this all the time in behavioral science, right?
So there are these crazy parasites,
this toxoplasma that causes animals and humans
to become less risk averse.
So captains of industry and people
who die on motorcycle accidents going too fast
tend to be infected with this stuff
because it actually changes your risk aversion level.
And we've got a fungus that controls ant behavior
and so on.
So we know that creatures hack each other's behavioral policies
for navigating three-dimensional space,
but that's not all.
What we're now starting to understand
is that they're really interesting hacks
that happen in anatomical and physiological spaces.
In order to do that, the material, right?
It's a gentle matter.
The material on which evolution works,
so cells and tissues, has to have these various competencies.
It has to have memories.
It has to be able to measure things to take in inputs.
You can't hack something that doesn't have any of that,
but life does.
And I wanna show you a couple of examples
of this plasticity.
So here is, and this is not Photoshop,
this is, these are real animals.
These are flies and on their wings,
they are running a kind of stripped down
ant morphogenetic program,
like a two-dimensional ant morphogenetic program.
And the reason they do it is because when they flap their
wings in a particular pattern,
it looks like ants scurrying around
and their predators don't wanna deal with the ants
and they scare them off.
So it's kind of amazing that on their wings,
they're able to have these very specific patterns,
but it's no more amazing than the fly itself.
I mean, this is just a simplified version
of what the fly itself is doing,
but it's in computer sciences,
would be kind of virtualization.
The fact that the same tissue can actually make
different kinds of patterns.
Now, I wanna show you one of my favorite examples
of that kind of hacking.
This is the traditional thing that happens.
So here's an acorn and we know that what acorns,
acorn genomes know how to do is make acorn,
is make oak leaves.
So they're green, they're flat,
they have this particular structure.
This is what that genome does.
Turns out that with just a little bit of prompting
from a wasp, these cells are also able
to make something like this or like this.
These are galls.
These are made by the plant cell
that is infected by this parasite.
The parasite is hacking these plant cells
to get them to build something completely different.
Would we have any clue that these flat green cells
are able to build something like this
if we didn't see this example?
So this is another one of these cases
where you need to do perturbation experiments.
In this case, this is a natural one done by this wasp
to see the latent space of what the system is competent to,
what is it capable of?
What else can these cells do?
And can you imagine all the things that these plant cells
could do if they can build this kind of stuff?
So just to finish up here, to really,
I think all of this pushes in a particular direction,
kind of again, going back to the sort of
philosophical side of things, is this an organism?
It's got a body and it's got some sort of
cognitive architecture, this frog, is this an organism?
We tend to think so because we as humans
have really tiny little observational slits
through which we see the world.
We like things that happen not too slowly
and not too quickly.
We only can perceive in a certain range
and thus we only see the animal right here,
but we now have tools like the xenobot and others
that can collapse the bigger picture,
which we normally are pretty blind to,
into a scale we can actually appreciate
because this is not the organism, this is the organism.
It's the cells plus all of the things that can manipulate
them to do various interesting things.
It's also the evolutionary cycle wrapped around it.
It's complex beings like us engineers,
simple beings like various microbes and the parasites,
and of course the low agency aspects
of the environment like chemicals.
Why do I say all of this is part of the organism?
Because if you don't understand all this other stuff,
you really do not understand
what else these cells are capable of.
This manifestation is the default.
It is the most common thing,
but we are completely blind to all of what it's capable of.
If we do not understand the other inputs into the system,
and this is somebody else had mentioned
that the environment and the context,
I mean, they're not always there.
In fact, we need to explore all kinds
of ones that don't naturally exist
to really understand what this organism is.
And so the Xenobot is really a kind of tool
you can use to peer into other spaces.
They'll be physiological, the transcriptional.
I mean, we're studying now
what the transcriptome of these Xenobots.
It is not like the transcriptome of frog embryos, by the way.
This is what it is.
The environment is full of affordances.
Some of them low agency,
some of them rather high agency and everything in between.
And all of this is part of what actually defines
what a complex organism is.
So having seen all this, just to end here,
having seen all this,
I will point out that all of the biological natural forms
that Darwin was impressed by when he said
endless forms, most beautiful,
all of that N of one run down the tree of life
is a tiny region, just a tiny region
of the state space of all possible beings
because life is so interoperable
and so hackable.
Pretty much every combination of evolved materials,
so DNA cells and so on, designed material.
So active matter of various smart appliances and so on.
And software, any combination of those three things
is going to be some viable being operating
in some kind of set of spaces with some cognitive system.
So cyborgs, hybrids, various kinds of chimeras,
various kinds of robotics,
all of these things are somewhere
in this giant space of possible minds.
And this has massive implications for us
on a societal level.
Because going forward, none of the concepts
that we grew up with, the sharp distinction
between humans and non-humans,
between machines and living beings,
between intelligence and sort of faking intelligence,
none of these categories are gonna make it
through the next couple of decades.
We need to scrap all of that towards a continuous view
and a new system of ethics that does not depend
on the two things that we used to depend on.
In the olden days, you could ask,
what are you made of and how did you get here?
Meaning evolved versus engineered.
And based on that, you could make a decision
of how to ethically relate to something,
you sort of knock on it.
And if you hear a metallic clangy sound,
you would say that, ah, you come from a factory,
you're gonna be pretty boring,
I can take you apart, whatever.
None of those things are gonna be good anymore
because we need to develop novel ways
to recognize and to relate to beings
that are nowhere with us on the tree of life.
They are, we simply cannot judge them that way.
And this is going to be an exciting
and grand challenge for the species
to get beyond a very simplistic view of agency
towards a more expansive compassion towards other beings
of radically different composition and provenance.
So I'll stop here and just say that lots of papers
that go deeply into all of the things
that I sort of briefly went over,
in terms of machines and everything else.
I'm gonna thank the people who did all the work.
So these are the postdocs and graduate students
who did all of the work that I showed you today.
Many collaborators are various funders,
the disclosures again.
Jeremy Gay did all the amazing graphics
and most of all the animal model systems
because they do all the heavy lifting
in teaching us about these things.
So thank you so much and I will take questions.
That's wonderful.
Thank you so much, Michael, for your presentation
and for your work.
I mean, the implications are outstanding.
So thank you so much.
Given the time, are you okay maybe to take five, 10 minutes?
Yeah, yeah, sure.
It's my fault that we went over the two hours.
So yeah, no, no, no, we all wanted to listen.
Yeah, if anybody has questions, I'm here.
Sure, let's go for Richard first.
Well, thank you very much.
I'm a non-scientist and a poet.
And I found this absolutely fascinating in every respect
and you zipped through it at enormous speeds.
So I've only been able mentally and hourly
to take in part of what you've said.
So I've just got a very simple non-scientific question.
Right at the end, you said,
we have, all of this opens up
our distinctions between what is machine
and what is biological, what is non-biological,
et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
And you mentioned all of your work
posits the demand for a new ethics.
So this is a personal question to you.
And I raise it because all the way along,
I've been having all sorts of little ethical quarrels
with myself, not just with you,
but with everything that you've said.
So can I just ask a personal question?
What are your own personal ethics vis-a-vis the work you're doing
and vis-a-vis the directions
in which you see the future happening?
And what I've got in mind here, of course,
is that you have spoken about the benefits
of this kind of work,
but we all know that scientific advances can be used by,
let's say, evil people or people who want to use
and manipulate materials to their own set
for their old selfish needs.
So where does that come in?
And are we in the region of Mary Shelley's Frankenstein?
Are we in the region of Promethean attacks on the gods?
There's a few things going on in my head,
but it really comes down to, I think,
to ethics and your own views.
I think that's just enormous admiration
and thanks for everything that you've given us so far.
Well, thank you so much.
I appreciate it.
I must say I love your background as you can see.
I have a lot of affinity to that.
So thank you.
Let's see, here's what I want to start with
and I will answer all of that,
but here's what I want to start with.
There's a standard kind of view
that even implicitly underlies a lot of the concern
when people ask me about these things,
which is basically this, everything is fine
and you scientists better not do something
to really screw it up.
That is kind of the mainstream assumption.
And that was sort of understandable back in the day
when we really could think that things were created
by someone for us to be the best that they could be
and really we ought not to screw it up.
But I think now, I think it's safe to say
that we have a different vision and this is my vision.
Things are absolutely not fine.
And I'm not talking about just the environmental,
various environmental calamities, but I get,
and I'm not a clinician,
but I receive daily phone calls and emails
from people in the most unbelievable biomedical suffering.
I mean, my kid has a birth defect.
I got a tumor, I lost a limb.
I mean, you can't imagine.
So people call me every day with this stuff
and our ability to address that degree of suffering
and to improve people's opportunity
to reach their potential given the limitations
of being born, even in a healthy body, right?
These limitations, I consider us to be so far off of fine
that it's, I can't even begin to describe that.
I think we are not starting here
and hoping that we don't drop, we are down here.
And to me, so here's my ethics to get back to your question.
When people ask me what keeps me up at night
about all this stuff as an ethical concern,
here's what keeps me up at night.
It's the possibility of failure to live up to the promise
of using this kind of information
to improve the lived experience for all sentient beings.
That's literally what it is.
And I should say, this is not,
I'm definitely not the only person working on this.
There are many, many scientists throughout the world
who have the exact same issue
who are all working towards the same thing.
Various degrees of freedom of embodiment
and regenerative medicine and all of these kinds of things.
So this is not just, so I don't see it that I myself,
I'm going to sort of fix all these problems.
I'm speaking now for my view in the community
that we have a moral responsibility
and an absolute kind of imperative
to use this information to improve the state
of beings in this world now.
I do not believe we were sort of both physically in the world
and in terms of our IQ level,
our susceptibility to various weird diseases
to brain degeneration.
I do not believe that any of this is optimized.
Evolution did not optimize this for our happiness.
It did not optimize for intelligence.
Evolution optimizes for biomass.
That's it.
And so it happens to have dropped us at this level,
which is a little bit of IQ
and a little bit of survival over seven, eight decades tops.
And that's it.
And I don't see this as optimal in any way.
This is due to the vagaries of the evolutionary process
and it is now on us, now that we can,
to make improvements for everybody.
That's how I see this.
Thank you very much.
That's a terrific answer.
Thank you.
Tell you on me then, is absolutely crucial to your work.
Is that right?
The goal, the view that we are working,
we are goal-orientated is absolutely crucial then.
Absolutely.
And in two ways, let me say this about you.
So goal-directedness,
and I'm saying, never mind just us,
all the way down to you can even,
with least action, the kinds of things
you can even talk about particles and simple matter,
simple matter systems, all the way down.
And the reason, people who don't like any of it,
say don't use the word, people who really like teleology
say use teleology, don't say teleonomy.
Teleonomy was apparent to the goals, right?
And it's sort of this hedge that some people use
to sort of try to avoid being on the bad side
of the modern paradigm and so on.
The reason I actually like teleonomy
is not to go soft on the teleology angle.
I'm full in.
The reason what's interesting about teleonomy
is the fact of apparent means that you're acknowledging
that there is an observer from whose perspective
you're describing this.
And I think that's critical.
Most of, if we sort of drill down
into the philosophical underpinnings
of the things I've been talking about,
it is very critical that there is not one
objective right answer to all of this.
How intelligent is something?
Well, you're really taking an IQ test yourself
when you make that claim.
You might have a human brain
and you might think it makes a great paperweight
because you weren't smart enough to know
what else it knows how to do.
So all of this from the perspective of some observer
being that being another cell, a human scientist,
a conspecific, a parasite who seeks to hack the system
and engineer, everything is from somebody's perspective.
So that's why I like teleonomy,
but I'm 100% into the teleology angle.
So Gary's points earlier about non-locality
and the implicit idea that,
I don't know, could one end up with a Gaia hypothesis?
Does this relate to a Gaia hypothesis?
The whole of nature,
there is a purpose somewhere inherent
in the whole of nature.
Well, yes, although I wanna be really clear on this,
it is not simple.
I mean, those kind of hypotheses
are often criticized in the following way.
Well, you can just add those labels to anything.
You can sort of look outwards and say,
there's nature, I'm gonna call it Gaia and here we go.
So I'm not saying that,
what I'm saying is that actually,
I'm insisting that all of those kinds of things
are actually empirical hypotheses.
So that means that if you have the Gaia hypothesis,
what that should do for you is to be able to say
which tools can you use to benefit
from the agency you're hypothesizing.
So for example, if you think that
some sort of ecosystem is a higher level
protocognitive agent, you should be able to train it.
You should be able to find them and decode the memory.
You should be able to show some tools
from behavioral science that work at that level.
And to the extent that you can do that,
your hypothesis is validated, right?
All of this, and we do this all the time,
we apply these kinds of, to me, all of these claims,
what these claims really are,
protocols for engineering protocols.
So if somebody gives me something and says,
I tell you that the level of intelligence
in the system is X, what I hear is,
ah, so here are the things in my toolbox
that I can use to interact with it.
That's what you've told me.
And you might be right and you might be wrong,
or I might be more or less clever
and find some better way to interact with it.
But that's what I hear.
So the Gaia hypothesis maybe,
but it is a hypothesis that should be empirically tested
and somebody should come out and say,
look, I've done associative conditioning
on a whole ecosystem, and it works.
And we've done that on molecular networks, by the way.
We did that on molecular network models,
which look very deterministic and very simple and all that.
Turns out they can do six different kinds of learning.
Who knew?
Nobody would have known until you do the experiment.
And Gaia, shut up, and thank you very much
because I'm sure lots of other people have got questions.
Thank you so much.
Thank you, Richard.
So yeah, so unfortunately we are towards the,
we're getting, we've gone quite a bit over.
However, if after we finish the call,
I can always leave the room open.
If, Michael, you're happy to stay
and answer any questions that there may be.
Sure, I'll stay.
Yeah, I'll stay for another 15 minutes.
I've got till 2.30, so I can, yeah.
I'll stay for another 15.
Fantastic.
Well, just for the purposes of the session,
we should close.
But Michael, do you have any final words to leave us with?
No, I think I've said,
I've drawn on a lot long enough.
So thank you, everybody.
Great questions, great discussion.
I really appreciate your listening.
No, thank you.
Well, thank you so much, Michael.
Your work has been, as I said, outstanding.
So I hope we show all the best of luck with your research.
And that...
Thank you so much.
Yeah.
Thank you.
And yeah, of course, thank everyone who joined us today.
Before we go, just a quick reminder that tomorrow
we will have Dr. Julian Mossbridge
talking about human thinking and human being
as part of this series.
But until tomorrow, if you do have any questions,
feel free to drop us an email at elinoratbarcenter.com.
And thank you again, everyone.
Thank you, Michael.
As I said, I will leave the call open.
I'll pass it over to you, Michael, as a host
to carry on for whoever would like to.
But thank you again, everyone, from here at the Bar Centre.
Thank you.
Yeah, so I think we can...
Yeah, everyone would like to jump in.
Yeah, that's fine.
Michael, thank you for that stunning presentation.
It's a very general question I'd like to ask.
And it's really to do with evolution.
I'm aware of many very credible scientists
who believe that there are other mechanisms involved
in evolution, some form of intelligence
or maybe a mechanism that results in good choices being made.
I can think of one quantum physicist that actually says
that, well, consciousness chooses.
Given the astonishing things you've discovered,
what is your intuition about evolution
and whether or not it could possibly be or it is
random mutations giving some kind of advantage?
Yeah, well, a couple of things.
First, the very best person to talk about this with
is a guy named Richard Watson in the UK.
And he has what I think is hands down
the biggest advance in evolutionary thinking.
And I don't know how long.
So you guys might want to invite him to speak.
But here's what I do know.
Given the various things we've observed our systems doing,
it would not be very hard to build
a synthetic biology system in which edited its genome
with some degree of conscious intent.
Okay, that would not be difficult.
Therefore, given that I sort of go with this idea
that whatever is not physically impossible
is probably doable somewhere,
I would find it not surprising at all
that that would be the case
because I can certainly see how we would construct
such a thing.
However, what I don't have is a lot of evidence
that that in fact is what's happening.
So my gut feeling is if I had to say gut feeling,
I do not believe that the standard purely random account
of evolution is sufficient to explain what we see.
But I'm not sure there's superb evidence
to sort of rule it out.
And I want to be very clear in distinguishing
because people tend to jump from one to the other.
One thing is saying that there is a non-random influence
over the process, right?
And I think that's not surprise.
I wouldn't be surprised by that at all.
It's quite something else to say
there is a high level benevolent intelligence
guiding the process tour, right?
That's a whole other kettle of fish, right?
And I have zero reason to think that's the case.
So some level of control mechanism that isn't randomness,
I'm probably on board with that, but that's it.
I wouldn't, I don't think we can, I mean, it's not impossible
but I don't think we can jump from that to anything else.
So that's, you know, just want to say that.
Great, thank you.
That's very clear, thank you.
Thank you.
Okay, just.
Who else?
I think Niels and Vyans had a hand up.
Yeah, please, somebody go.
Does Neil want to go in or I'd be glad to.
I have sort of a non-sense.
Ladies first.
Okay, thanks.
Listen, I just wanted to know something about
from one of the very first slides you presented
of a cell gravitating towards the three petri dishes.
If there had been a nutrient in the upper petri dish,
would that migrated up there
or would it still go on towards the weightier?
Yeah, great, great question.
We have started but not finished a book,
not a book, probably a paper on the psychology of slime mold.
And all of these kinds of questions
in terms of what does it prefer?
How does it make decisions?
When two things are, you know, sort of great question.
It depends on the nutrient and it depends, I mean,
nutrient, if it's hungry, nutrients tend to win.
So if it's hungry, it will go for the food
and ignore the mass.
By the way, those little, I should say,
those little white discs, they're not petri dishes,
they're little tiny glass discs.
Right through a glass, tiny glass.
Each one of which weighs about 10 milligrams.
So this thing can sense at a distance of 10 centimeters,
the difference between 10 milligrams and 30 milligrams.
It is ridiculously sensitive.
But nutrients, nutrients will tend to win.
Yeah, it's just been the most amazing presentation.
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Niels.
Yes, amazing, a lot of stuff and little bits floating
around here and there and all over the place.
That was very interesting.
In my case, I've been a computer chap for over 50 years
and I've managed to do what I now can see
quite remarkable things.
And so I spent some time trying to keep up with you
because I immediately started thinking about all the things
that I could implant into this.
And so it's really,
you've heard about P equal NP complete, I'm sure.
Yeah.
What difference would that make, do you think?
To find, because that would basically be able to hold
everything together in all its complexity.
And so I have some experience with that for
in terms of transportation modeling and pedestrian
and all these interactions and things.
So I was thinking, I'm not sure if I'm going to be able
to get involved in there and try and simulate it
in a deterministic way, not in a stochastic way.
Yeah, drop me an email.
I mean, this is, we do about a third of my group.
My background is computer science as well.
And about a third of my group is computational
and the others are bench biologists.
So we do a ton of modeling and simulation of this stuff.
So just drop me an email and we could talk
about what can be done.
Yes, I would love to do that.
Great, great.
Yeah.
Okay, thank you.
It was a great talk.
Thank you so much.
Lots of information in that.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Phillip.
Hello.
Hi.
I'd like to take you back to the body of the planaria worm.
And we're talking about the heads and the two heads.
And in order for the body to form,
apparently there's a bioelectric distribution that.
Allows us to happen.
And I'm wondering what you think of the source of that distribution
within the biomass of the body is.
Yeah.
Are you asking physically which cells it's in?
Are you asking where it came from?
I'm asking where it came from.
Right.
Well, that's, that's a great, that's a great question.
So let's, um, the, the best way to think about,
and we're still,
we're still groping for the right metaphors to understand it,
but let's, let me, let me give you what, what I have so far.
Um,
The thing with asking where things came from is, is this, and I think,
you know, maybe, maybe some of the, um,
non science people on the call will like this more than,
more than the science people, but, but, but here you go.
Um, imagine a, um,
um, uh, imagine a Galton board.
If you haven't seen one of these things, you can buy a toy of it on Amazon.
It's 15 bucks.
It's a wooden board like this and you bang a bunch of nails into it vertically,
you know, vertically, and you take a bucket and you take a bucket of marbles
and you dump it over and the marbles go boom, boom, boom, boom, boom,
and they land on the bottom.
They always land in the same pattern, this beautiful bell curve, right?
They always make this beautiful bell curve.
So you can ask this question of, um,
where's the bell curve encoded?
So you look at the wood and you don't really see it there and you look at the nails.
You don't really see it there and you look at the distribution of nails and
I really see it there.
What you find out, and this is, you know, uh, uh, mathematicians,
like, like, uh, Pythagoras and Plato have been saying this for, for,
for a long time.
What you find out is that when you build certain kinds of machines,
you are actually harnessing patterns that exist.
I don't know where, you know, Plato thought there was a separate world for them,
but, but, but this is, you know, so, so for example, when you make a couple of
transistors, meaning ion channels, when you, ion channels are transistors,
they're voltage gated current conductances.
When, when evolution discovers a couple of ion channels,
it can make logic gates which come with truth tables.
Evolution doesn't have to discover truth tables there.
You get that for free, right?
And the fact that the NAND gate is, you know, uh,
it has these special properties, you get that, you get all of that for free.
It's a free gift from somewhere.
We don't know where it is.
So what we have here is something similar.
What evolution did is find a set of ion channels that are expressed
in a standard planarian that by default, when you turn on the juice,
what that system does is stable is, is, is, is find and stabilize in an
attractor in the state space of the, of the electrical circuit that corresponds
to one head.
By default, still, you know, reliably, that's what it does.
When you, when we, when we've learned to perturb it, which took, you know,
10 years to learn to do that, you can push it into a different state and
it'll do that.
But the question is where did it come from?
It's sort of like asking, uh, you know,
if I give you a collection of parts for a calculator and you turn it on,
and it says zero by default on a little LCD, where did that come from?
And it's, it's the result of the laws of physics of computation and some
other stuff working out through the physical machine.
And this, all this sounds very airy, fairy and, and sort of, um, uh,
philosophical, but, but, but here's a practical part.
Imagine that your evolution and you, in your world, the most fit thing is a
triangle of a particular type.
So, so, so you're sorting through this population and eventually you find the
first angle and then you do some more, you know, every generations go by and
you eventually find the second angle.
And now you're done.
You don't need to go looking for the third angle.
You know what the third angle is because, because they add up to 180.
How did you, how did you, if your evolution,
how did you save two thirds of the effort in, in evolving this thing?
Where did this magical fact that you know what the third angle is?
Where did that come from?
So, so we get here to the point where, um, asking where things come from is tricky.
We can, we can do the biophysics of that, of, of showing what the space looks
like and why the system lands in particular regions of that space.
But it's not super easy to figure out, to ask, it's like, where's the
distribution of primes come?
Where's that encoded?
You know, all the physical facts of the, of the universe could be different
and the distribution of primes would still be what it is.
So I think we're, we're literally bumping up against that old question of
where the truths of mathematics live.
Okay, I'll just say one final thing.
Thank you for the answer.
But what perplexes me very much is how the two headed version comes to be so
quickly, you know, another, another stable configuration emerges.
It's, it's, it's very perplexing to me that I agree that it's perplexing.
And, and I think the, you know, when I first started to understand the,
when I first saw that Xenobot running around and it suddenly like hit me
in the head, there's never been any Xenobots like evolution has zero
explanatory power here.
I, I, it suddenly dawned on me that what, what, what, what Plato would say to
this is that the two headed planarian and the Xenobot have always been there.
They're part of this latent space that we had never had access to.
And we finally built a physical machine that enables us to see that part of
the space.
I think that's what that's what he would say.
I think that something existed in the past that laid down a certain behavior
pattern that they're tuning into.
I don't, I don't think they're creating those patterns.
I think they're finding patterns that already existed.
Yeah, I mean, I said, I, right, I think you and I are on the same page here.
The patterns exist, but I think we have to be, you know, the traditional,
the traditional scientific story here would be they, they are patterns that,
you know, typically in a normal tree of life, what you see is these are patterns
that either existed in some ancestor and were shaped by evolution to be.
That's not the case here.
But I agree with you, the patterns exist independently of what we've done.
We've just stumbled onto them for the first time and who knows what else is out
there.
Okay, very good.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you for burning things. I'm going to have to go in about a minute.
All right.
Well, thank you so much, everybody. This has been, this has been really fun.
Yes.
Yeah.
Lots of, lots of great things for me to think about. So, so thank you so much.
