Welcome to the Basin Conspiracy, I'm Eni Ashbrodsky, I'm Steven Zuber, and I'm Katrina Stanton.
At one moment while I remember my last name, today this episode is about choosing the kind
of family structure that you want.
I was going to call it should you breed, but that sounds much more...
We might be focusing a little bit more on childbirth, and should you do it, or should I do it?
But I think we should prefer to do it also just in general terms as well.
I mean we're not here to analyze just your decision.
Although while we're talking about it, you recently were thinking quite a bit about whether to have children or not.
Yeah, for the past five years or more.
Oh, should I? I didn't realize it had been that long.
I spent a lot of time thinking about this and going back and forth and being a fence sitter.
I originally wanted to have kids, and by the time my husband and I got married, we thought,
oh yeah, we're going to go through the process of pregnancy and popping out baby,
and we also want to go through the process of adoption.
And that way we can have two kids and we can have all the experiences, not all of them,
but at least those two.
So you originally wanted to have a kid, why did you want to have the kid back then?
I just always thought that I wanted to raise a child and have that kind of family structure
with kids involved, and I have had a privileged upbringing.
I have cool parents. I think I'm pretty cool.
I think we think you're pretty cool too.
I think I'm a pretty nurturing person. I always thought I'd raise a kid, and then some things happened.
I dated a few people who were definitely vehemently child-free.
I had a friend who had a kid who I did not like the situation that she was in
to the point that I was worried that it would happen to me too.
It was a lot of discussions, and so for a while I was thinking that I probably wasn't going to,
and then that changed again in the last couple years, the last few years.
So, yeah, and I'm here, of course, with Kinga Ash and Stephen who are both child-free
and intend to stay that way.
Yes. Originally I could go either way. I was like, yeah, sure, I could have kids.
As I've gone on and thought about it more, I've realized I do not want kids,
and I do not think I would be the kind of person that could.
If I was stuck with a kid, I think I could figure out how to raise them pretty well,
but I wouldn't want to. There's enough else that I want to do with my life
that I don't think I could be happy giving up all that time and dedicating it to a child instead.
My thought process was similar.
I don't know if there was ever a point where I was actually a thinking adult,
where I was like, let's have kids, but, you know, growing up,
you kind of just, that's like the normal, you kind of imagine that's where your life will go.
Somewhere down the line, I don't know, I think I might be an okay parent.
I think it's not so much that I'm worried that I would be distracted from doing other things that I would like.
It's that I know that what I would want to do would be completely rewired upon becoming a parent,
and that, like, suddenly I find nothing more fulfilling than pushing my child on a swing
as opposed to, like, doing something that if I wasn't a parent, I'd find more fulfilling, right?
Yeah, I don't know why you would. Why do you? Well, I guess that's part of the reason that I didn't want to
in the first place, because I watched my friend, well, she always wanted children, badly.
She got pregnant, she had a baby, and then everything changed.
She used to be super adventurous and go out and travel around the world all the time.
She used to paint, she was very highly creative, and I would come over and ask her what she'd been up to,
and she'd been, oh, mostly staring at my baby.
Did she say it like for lonely, or like she had a great time doing it?
It's all she wanted to do. That's what I'm saying, right?
But I was like, I don't want that happening to me.
Right. But I also don't think it would, because I don't see how I would find fulfillment
in staring at a sleeping baby all day, every day.
There's some people, I guess, who don't have that radical of a change when they have kids, but it's a risk.
I've said that evolution has killed you once, and it can do it again.
And obviously, I only say that to people who have gone through puberty, because...
What? I get it, I get it.
Yeah, I cannot relate to, I can sort of relate to my prepubescent self,
but I know that my prepubescent self would not relate to me at all.
He would be thinking, why are you wasting all this time and energy going after girls,
because they're not all that special anyway, and what's the big deal?
And it was a radical personality shift, and I can see how, if hormones in my body
changed me to the point where I am happy spending hours just smushing my face against the girl,
that I could possibly see hormones coming along and changing me again,
where I could spend hours just looking at a baby googling, or doing that googling,
you know what babies do, they're like, hey, how do I teach?
What is the world?
But I could see myself having a dramatic value shift when I have children,
and I don't want to do that, I'm very happy with the way I am right now.
For me, that change...
Well, very happy in quotes.
You seem like a pretty happy person.
I have my moments.
Okay, for me that change has already kind of happened,
so part of me kind of realizing that I do want to go back to original plan
at the time of marriage and have a kid again, is because I really want one.
So for a while when I was thinking I wasn't going to go through the process and have a kid,
I was wistfully kind of thinking, well, maybe I'll meet someone who has a kid.
Maybe I'll meet someone and I'll have an awesome kid and I can be their stepmom.
And I was like, just admit to yourself that you want to have a kid,
and also maybe be a stepmom, I don't know.
I'm also thinking it's nice to kind of hold that card in reserve.
You know when you like a video game a lot and there's an expansion for it that has come out,
but you aren't done with the original video game yet,
so you're holding off on getting the expansion?
I think maybe that's what having a kid is like.
Like right now, I am very happy with my life,
but if it ever gets to the point where I'm bored with what I'm doing,
I can always pop into having a kid expansion and see how that works out.
It's a good fallback plan for something fun to do.
Well, here's the other part of that.
You talked about spending so much time on kids and not being able to spend time on other aspects of life.
Maybe traveling, maybe going out and having adult time.
I don't know, climbing rocks, whatever.
You can do that with a kid, but it is a pain in the butt I've seen it.
Rock climbing with children? Oh my goodness.
They're so small and weak.
They are. They're awful at rock climbing.
So my plan, and I don't know if it'll work out, is to get more parents involved.
That sounds like a way to kind of offshoot some of the dedication required, right?
Well...
So it sounds like we are about to talk about living in larger group settings before we do that.
Do we want to talk about the pros and cons of actually having children?
Yeah, sure.
So yeah, before we talk about being poly or fusing families or that kind of stuff and having kids,
let's talk about all of the struggles that I've gone through even thinking about procreating myself instead of adopting, for example.
Well, even before that, how about happiness?
Right.
That's probably what you're getting at, right?
That is one of the things I'm getting at.
Yeah, that it seems to be somewhat out of style to have children in nationalist communities,
and out of style is not really a good way to say it.
But it's something that doesn't happen nearly as often as it does in the general populace.
And it's not looked down upon.
There's quite a few people who are having kids, but it's not the default life course.
Nor should it be.
Right.
And I think one of the reasons is a lot of people have hesitation about bringing new beings into the world
when we don't really understand how to make the beings that we're bringing into the world have a happy existence.
It seems like an overwhelming responsibility to create a life and then maybe have that life be miserable.
I didn't know you were going that way.
I thought you might have been going the way that turns out that being a parent makes you less happy on average.
Maybe.
Well, some research indicates that you consistently score your happiness less than you did pre-baby until like 20 years later.
Hadonic index is definitely lower, but people generally also feel much more fulfilled in their lives when they have children.
So it's offset with a different type of happiness.
You mentioned that evolution killed you once, it can kill you again.
I liked that quote.
For me, agreeing to become a parent would be a lot like signing up for a software upgrade where you're not quite sure what you're getting.
Right.
And the software is your brain.
And so it could just completely rewrite your values in a way that you wouldn't have liked a year before.
But now that you're there, you're like, well, I'd never want to go back, right?
So that isn't super appealing to me since I'm somewhat happy with the way that I am now.
And just kind of throwing dice on it doesn't sound super attractive.
And based on, you know, what we've observed of all other humans, it's probably not going to be catastrophic.
Oh, yeah.
Like, I mean, that that's not really the concern.
I guess it's just I wouldn't want my values to shift so much that I couldn't really identify it with my past self.
Like, I don't think I'd ever, I can't imagine going through so much of radical change that I would be completely incomprehensible to my past or future self,
on which way I was looking at it, but just not a way that I would find desirable.
For me, the happy middle ground would be being a close uncle.
So like when I was living in Fort Collins with my brother a few years ago, he had a dog and I had all the fun of being a dog owner minus most of the responsibility.
And so I think that level of parenting would fit me perfectly.
Because I like the idea of helping young person grow cognitively and, you know, have experiences and that sort of thing.
But making that a full time job sounds like a drag to me.
So that nice middle ground would be perfect.
If I can if I can land that somehow that's that's that'd be a good way to go.
Every now and then you run across articles on the internet that have titles like women who don't have children have empty meaningless lives and I'm not ashamed to say it,
which, first of all, is insanely insulting.
And I want to stab the person who said that.
But the fact that someone could write an article like with that sort of title, well, maybe just means they want clicks.
But it also I'm assuming means that they have had a rather dramatic value shift since they had the children that they're able to say something like that.
My friends with a difficult child.
Oh, I didn't mention that he's also in addition to she's obsessed with him.
He's also a really difficult child.
Unusually so.
She she keeps telling me over and over again that she she wants childbirth for me.
It's such it's such an amazing experience.
It's such an amazing thing to go through.
She specifically said that she wanted me to breastfeed.
It's like she wants me to have the joy and closeness.
She's like I've never loved someone like this before.
It's like an alien infestation has come taking over her brain.
Now she's trying to spread it to more people.
It's exactly what I was picturing at the end of Three Worlds Collide where they merge with super-happies.
And it's like afterwards you'd be talking to your friends who didn't merge like this is great.
You should really try it.
There's not going back.
But trust me, you'll like it.
I was pretty cool with the super-happies.
So that makes me feel a little bit better about it.
There's interesting articles about how the fetus is actually competing with the mother's body for resources.
And so it does latch on and start feeding into hormones and kind of like a hostile takeover to preserve itself.
So that's the exact opposite feeling that you were describing.
It's true, but also I think pregnancy is really cool and it's brutality.
I would agree with the brutality.
I'm not sure I would agree with the cool part.
I think it's really neat.
Katrina was also the one who talked about how cool it was to host a parasite.
It's really right.
And she's the one who owns Death Stalker 4, so we know she's into the brutal shit.
I'm pretty sure that's Tim's.
Okay, well, it's in your house.
We have a lot of great movies in here.
Katrina's like, watch what my uterus can do.
Watch what my body can do.
It's amazing.
It is actually pretty.
Gotta put it through its paces.
Maybe that's part of why.
I mean, obviously I wouldn't be going through childbirth directly, but I'm also about kind of like taking things easy.
So I like the relaxed path more.
Not like let's push my body to the limit.
That doesn't super appeal to me, but I can see how it could to some people.
I'm not sustaining that point of view, but that's not also something that attracts me.
It is interesting that a lot of people I meet who don't want children are the kind who are somewhat unhappy with their own lives.
I wouldn't say unhappy, but went through emotional difficulties.
I'm sorry, do or do not?
I do not want children.
I had a very difficult late high school and early college period.
And I don't know if I want to put someone else through that and seeing as I had that that means I am genetically likely to pass that on to my children, somewhat likely anyway.
And yes, I know there's triggering events and not everyone who has the genes will experience that kind of thing.
But I don't feel right knowing that I would be creating a being that might go through that sort of thing.
Okay.
That makes sense.
The person who would otherwise be the obvious choice for genetic other parent of a kid I would have has chosen not to do it for reasons like that, not to pass on genetic, various genetic diseases that a kid might pick up.
I can think of a few better reasons to not have kids, right?
If you say the phrase bad parents, you tend to get people throwing things at you.
But I think it's the bad parent who says, you know what?
I have all these problems, but I want to have lots of kids, which means you want to probably create more people with the same problems that you had.
Even if you lived a life that you wouldn't have chosen for yourself, you're going to choose that for other people.
That seems kind of like a bad decision.
Here's my philosophy.
People who don't want to have kids should be empowered to not have kids.
People who do want to have kids should be empowered to have kids or raise them.
Eliezer is very, as far as I can tell, psychologically healthy.
He seems to have a great time with life, but he has chosen not to have children.
And he said until humanity can create new life from scratch and know how to make it work well, it would be morally irresponsible to just roll the dice and bring something new into the world.
There's a somewhat popular version of that argument that gets circulated.
I'm not sure what the full version is.
I was going to look into it and then didn't find time slash desire.
I'm sure someone's heard of it out there.
Feel free to write it in that people born today on average don't have the best possible lives of people who've existed in the past.
Really?
Which is a weird argument to make, but there is some coherent version of it that I've read about and I've read philosophers talking about it.
Can you find links and put them in the short description?
Can you tell me why?
Because at the outset, I'm thinking that we probably have better lives than our ancestors in many different ways.
I think so too.
I think the example they write up was something like Cleopatra versus the average kid today or something.
Didn't she kill herself with snakes?
How do you kill yourself with snakes?
She did.
She took snakes and she's like bite me and then they did and then she died.
Maybe it wasn't Cleopatra, maybe it was some general pharaoh.
I feel like Egypt was involved.
But in any case, I will find a better version of it and post it.
But the idea that by some measure you're producing people that maybe like Eleazar was saying that they're not as happy as possible because that seems like a fuzzy goal and a high bar.
But who might have lives that are less inclined towards as much well-being as is usually attainable or something.
Like I said, there is some stronger version of that argument I think and I don't know what it is.
There's also the idea that...
It's been a number of years since I read what he wrote so I really hope I'm not misinterpreting him or misrepresenting him rather.
I really got the feeling that it was just the moral negligence of not knowing if you're going to create a happy person or an unhappy person.
That you don't want to take that sort of risk on creating a new being.
Yeah.
Or you know, there are people who might subscribe to something similar to Jason's mindset which we talked about or which we talked to him a while ago.
Yeah.
That all life is negative.
Or you know, you could even take like a less extreme version but to say that yes, you'll make somebody that has a somewhat happy life,
but they're going to increase the aggregate amount of suffering in the world because they won't have a perfect life.
And that's an inherently bad thing.
Isn't this maybe, well, not Jason's argument, but Eleazar's argument as Eneash has described it.
Isn't that a good argument for personal eugenics where you try to stack the dice in your favor?
Like, I'm happy with my life.
I love the world.
I love being in it.
I love doing things.
Maybe I should be looking out for somebody else who has similar characteristics and is just a happy person in that way.
It could possibly work.
That does something stacking the deck in your favor and that I think is the responsible way to go about it.
If you're going to have children anyway.
Right, exactly.
I mean, so I like the idea of empowering people on both sides, whether they choose to not have children or have children.
And yet my inner totalitarian says that not everybody should be allowed to have as many kids as they want.
And that again gets you some looks and some garbage thrown at you.
It's fair though because there's an argument that in the long run the crazy religious fanatics who say,
breed, breed, breed, breed as much as you can are going to take over the universe because the rest of us are going to constrain our breeding
and eventually we will be outbred to such an amount that they will, if we go and colonize Mars, who's going to go?
If even 2% of them are the crazy religious fanatics, they're going to own all of Mars.
I don't think that's fair.
I mean, one, that's where my husband came from.
Right, Mars.
Crazy religious fanatics family.
I know, I came from two actually, although they were not into the breeding as much.
Yeah, and I'm really happy that he exists.
And I'm happy that you exist.
Oh, thank you.
I don't think that you would be terrible choices for colonizing Mars.
And I think that everybody has something really special to offer to the world.
The counter argument is that those sorts of religions tend to have a low retention rate, that they may spawn a lot of people,
but not all of them stay in the religion.
The way I've always looked at it is, if your way of perpetuating your ideology is just to bang out as many kids as possible,
you might have a shitty ideology.
The quiverful movements.
Yeah, that maybe you should let your ideology stand up and fight in the ring of ideas rather than on the battlefield of who can have more kids.
It would be uncharitable to say that if these people acknowledge the truth of that statement, they know that they would lose,
so they choose not to take that avenue, right?
Right.
And yet there might be something somewhat to that.
And you know, it also doesn't really matter, because in the end, regardless of how high-minded my ideals are,
if I lose, I lose, and they take over the universe.
So do you think that there is a moral imperative for people who you think there should be more of to pop out more kids?
I'm always happy when people that I think high of have kids.
And less happy.
I'm not going to go forth and say that there's a moral imperative for them to have kids, but I encourage it.
You know what I was looking up before you guys came today?
What's that?
The value of a human life.
In terms of?
The economic value and how different agencies have valued it.
So it was, I think, the EPA, it was over $9 million per.
Wow.
And the Department of Transportation, about $6 million per.
Still oppressive.
At the lower end.
I want to read what you were reading.
That sounds interesting.
I thought it was like $900,000.
No.
No.
That was about maybe a decade ago.
People were, they were trying to figure out how people valued their own lives and came to around a million dollars based on the decisions that people make, the risk that people will take.
But there's all sorts of other things to consider, right?
It sounds like not all lives cost equal though.
No, they don't.
There's a range.
And that kind of makes a lot of sense.
And there can be lives that have negative costs.
For example, people who go around murdering other people.
They're just, that's $9 million every time.
If you rack up enough of those, you're really in the red.
Let me, let me qualify my statement that some people are worth more than others.
If me and the President of the United States are in a burning building together, one of us values, one of us is, should be valued more to someone who can only run it and save one.
The person who, the country depends upon who's, you know, whatever, maybe not even the President, somebody more important.
You're right.
Presidents are known murderers.
If me and Elon Musk were trapped in a building, you should probably save Elon Musk.
He'll probably do a more net positive impact on the world than I will.
Well, and he is, he is literally economically worth more.
He's just simply has more, more money in the bank.
But you see the co-host of the podcast?
I think not.
That's right.
And we don't want to just put it in that who has more money in the bank account either.
Because that'd be pretty calculus.
No, no.
But I think that probably enters into it because how much money can, how much money can they spend?
Right.
Like, what's the net worth?
Plus, how many years of productivity do they have?
Right.
Plus, how much good do they do for other people?
How many networks are they attached to?
You know, we were talking about how to value animals and a lot of that's actually a lot more codified when it comes to humans.
Okay.
So how many life years do you hinted at?
It's another thing to really anticipate there.
You know, me versus 119 year old, they've got maybe a few months left, right?
So hopefully they'd pay me.
If they've made it to 119, they may never die.
They might never die.
They might never die.
250.
250.
What about, what about a toddler?
Yeah.
So like, you don't want to just, I'm not, I want to read more about what you were saying
as far as the worth of people.
Because I am not used to thinking of it in terms like that.
People are inclined for good and bad reasons to prefer children over adults.
As far as like, if I can only say one scenarios, right?
From a traditional perspective, it's obvious you go with the child because you need to
keep replenishing the human population since we die off and we're older.
Right.
That's, I think, one of the reasons we're...
But from a more economic perspective, the child has only had, or the toddler has only
had a few years invested into it, whereas if you get someone who just came out of college,
you've spent 24 years, maybe 22 years, investing tons of energy and tons of money into training
this person, and they are about to hit their productivity and start paying society back
for all that.
And so they, they would be the one that you want to save more, probably.
If you're not thinking in terms of your apish hindbrain, right?
Right.
So if I were going to...
If you're entirely in terms of economics.
We, our apish hindbrains really prefer 13-year-old women.
Do you know why that is?
I was actually going to bring that up.
What?
Are 13-year-old women the most expensive?
It's because in, in the olden days, and I mean the really olden days, that was when
you got married.
People start having kids themselves.
Yeah.
So yeah, it turns out that there was an experiment done where they asked parents at what age...
Just people.
Oh yeah, well, I mean, in the one experiment they asked parents where they...
Okay.
It was something along the lines of, at what age, if your kid died, and I don't think they
did it like a range per family, but they asked a bunch and gave different age ranges.
It would be the most devastating if your kid died.
And it turned out 13 to 16 years old was like the most devastating range, because that's
right about when they're about ready to have, well, the...
They did it, they did it for cultures all over the world, I think.
And anyway, the theory is that in hunter-gatherer societies, that's when they start, you know...
Getting ready to procreate.
Exactly, procreating.
So that's when you become most valuable is when you're at your reproductive years as
a young teen.
Yeah.
Only tangentially related, but it sparked in my head.
Remember in the Bible that verse that any woman who's menstruating has to go off into
her own hut for seven days and cannot be touched by men because she's unclean?
There's something in some...
You guys don't remember that?
I do.
In fact, it's one of the...
There's a fun thing about it, and you can't like sit where they've sat.
In some versions, I'm not sure if it's Christianity or not, you can't be in their shadow.
That one I had not heard.
That's popular in Northern India.
Okay.
There's even a huge disdain for menstruation because it's all big and scary or something.
I mean, it's not...
I'm not trying to...
No.
I have some up a little in it.
It's a stupid thing to believe.
I remember we should get back on topic, but I remember reading that in the more traditional
societies, that probably wouldn't have happened to a woman maybe more than four or five times
What?
Because you kind of start having kids...
Oh, right.
Kind of start having kids right away, and then when you have a kid, afterwards there's the
whole breastfeeding period where apparently you don't have periods either, which I did
not realize.
And then after that, you're kind of back to being pregnant again, and so there's probably
not going to be more than five or six actual week-long vacations.
Yeah.
That's about right.
Week-long in a single hut vacation.
Yeah.
It's not exactly a retreat.
It's more of like, you can't come back until you're done with all that business.
It's sexist bullshit, but I was shocked to hear how uncommon it might have been.
That's an interesting way to look at it, and there's probably something to that.
That's a fun thing to think about.
My question for you guys is, how do you value future lives that don't exist yet?
That is a really difficult question.
Can you be more specific?
Yeah.
So I guess in two different ways, the future lives of people who definitely will exist.
Right?
So 500 years in the future, valuing those lives.
Do you depreciate it by the article that I'm going to share?
So it's 7%.
If you do that in 500 years, the value of a single life is between $100 and $200.
Right?
How is that the case with our nine million now?
Because if you depreciate it's 7% per year.
Oh, 7%?
I thought you meant 7% total after 500 years.
Okay, yeah, I got you.
That's so weird.
I don't know if I've thought of it in those terms.
Certainly, I guess no one would say about 7% less over years.
Surely it depreciates that, right?
Your value of future humans?
On one and two at a level, and I'm kind of spitballing as I think of it,
I identify less with civilization 100,000 years from now as I do civilization a century from now.
And so it's harder for me to feel emotionally that I should care as much about them as I do about my direct ascendance
or the people I might interact with or something.
And yet intellectually, I can't see why that's possibly the case.
Other than the fact that there might be a lot more people in the future,
so anyone that might are a little less,
if that's the way you're inclined to think about things.
Robin Hansen has an interesting point.
I can't wait to hear Robin Hansen's analysis.
No, it's an interesting point that there's two ways we can have lots of people.
We can either have tons of people right now and burn through the Earth's resources quickly,
or we can have only a little bit of people strung out for a long period of time
and burn through the Earth's resources slowly.
Is he not including space travel and M's in either of those scenarios?
Yeah, this is assuming that there's a limited amount of resources
and that we're not going off-planet.
Just thinking of the total amount of people that the Earth can support over its lifetime.
Sure.
And he was wondering why do some people think it's best to have a whole lot of people
in a short time span and others want less people over a long period of time?
Because some people think that innovation is linked to world population.
And the more people there are, the more innovation there is.
Okay.
I apologize for my crying dog.
We obviously do not value that for a child's life.
Or at least her.
Enough to let him into the podcast room.
That's right.
We don't have a lot to add right now.
This isn't the animals episode where you guys can hang out.
Yeah, if there's a strong correlation between population size and innovation,
that's not just like happenstance of history, I'm not aware of it.
Like as it happens, we've had more innovation in the last few centuries
than we did in the preceding several thousand years,
that might be due to other factors.
Not just like the fact that there's more people per square foot or something, right?
Or square meter, whatever.
In freedom units we call them feet.
So I would be somewhat inclined to say let's stretch it out
because the farther we've come from the past,
the farther along we've gotten technologically.
Continuing that trend, the longer we last, the farther that will go.
Whereas if we just, let's see if we can hit 20 billion by the year 2050
and the earth doesn't make it through the year 2300,
that sounds undesirable, right?
I'm also of the opinion that if we have too many people too soon,
we can crash something.
Whereas if we draw it out, the earth can recycle a lot of the waste we put out.
And like the less people we have, the fewer we have to take care of.
So like, you know, assuming that not everyone on earth is self-sufficient,
some people need help.
And like if you're just making as many people as you can for the sake of making them,
you might have...
Can we assume that you have the same percentage of ultra productive people at all times?
Or do you not assume that?
I don't... I guess I'm thinking in the terms of like what we're talking about,
like people who tend to have more kids being highly religious
than I think of like the world's bottom,
billion percent of people who are flourishing,
sometimes in religious cultures or otherwise,
but you know, often without access to child preventative interventions
and thus having more kids.
So like if everyone's producing at the same rate,
then that might be just, we'd increase the number of people who are not living
optimally satisfying lives.
If you do buy the premise that the more people there are,
the more innovation there is, right, the more technological innovation,
innovation in general, would that be an argument for people having children?
It would, because we're on a limited timeline.
We only have so many thousands of years until an asteroid hits earth
or somebody creates an AI or something.
And if we can get more innovation to solve those problems faster,
we can avoid those problems.
Yeah, I would be in somewhat about it,
because I'd use that to directly challenge the premise that we're staying on earth
for the whole time, right?
So if innovation continues to go up,
we won't just rot out on one rock.
We'll expand.
On the other hand, humans have a really big carbon footprint.
One of my favorite bumper stickers is,
my SUV has a smaller carbon footprint than your dog,
because it's true.
The dog?
The dog, yeah.
Well certainly than your honor student.
Well certainly than your honor student, yes, but even the dog.
So we have a couple of ethical questions.
One, overpopulation is an issue.
There are people who are starving, who need homes and resources,
so why have more kids when everybody else is doing it?
Another question is, humans weigh heavily on the earth,
and the impacts of that don't just affect other people negatively,
potentially, but they definitely affect other species negatively.
So is it selfish of me to say that if I were to have kids,
and I am going to say this, if I were to have kids,
I would want them to be genetically half-mine?
Well heck, I'd even like one that's a clone,
just to see if I can do a better job than my parents.
I have a clone.
That's true, you do, but not one that you raised.
That's right.
How's your clone?
He's good.
I have a twin brother, if that was confusing to anybody.
That's very sweet.
I wish I had a twin.
Yeah.
All the rumors about us being able to read each other's thoughts are true.
But is that selfish?
I don't know.
That's what I'm trying to figure out.
Okay.
What's his name's first law, which I don't even know is an actual law,
but that all traits are at least partially heritable.
And I would like to see, when you asked if I am happy,
there's not the term used, you used whether it should be morally required
for people who are awesome to have children.
But I do want people with traits that I like to have children
because I want to see more of those in the world.
One of my goals is to make the world more the way I like it
and having more people in it that have traits that I like
is one of the ways that that can happen.
Why do you want your kid to be half yours then?
You can choose potentially two other people who are super awesome
and combine their genes and then...
Okay, here's the thing.
First of all, my parents don't listen to this podcast,
but if ever in the future, my parents go back and listen to these,
Mom, Dad, please don't listen to the rest of this episode.
Stop right now.
Okay, good, we're clear.
So Mr. Mr. Borsky is just still with us.
There's no way that turned you off.
Seriously, no, they should stop listening right now.
Like give me a call or something and we can talk about this instead
of just hearing it on the episode.
But one of the reasons I don't want to have kids
is because I see the amount of time and effort my parents put into me
and the payoff that they got, which is basically shit.
What do you mean shit payoff?
I have abandoned their religion.
I don't see them very often.
I don't feel like I have very much in common with them.
Really, my relationship with them really took off
once I moved out of the house and didn't see them for six months.
And then I could go back and visit them, you know,
every month or so is a good time for me
and I don't talk to with them on the phone much.
I know this hurts them because they've actually said it to me.
They say, we think you're distancing yourself,
but I just, I don't have that much in common with them.
I still harbor some resentment towards them
and I have the distinct impression that if I were to have kids,
there's a decent chance that the same kind of thing would happen.
Would you be unhappy if they became hyper-religious
and you didn't have a lot in common with them
or in your imagination land?
I would much rather invest that time and money
in building relationships with friends
that I have a lot in common with
and that I can actually share my life with
than putting it into a child who's going to abandon me
when he turns 18 and go off and do his own thing
because I'm the old geezer that he has nothing in common with.
So do you feel like your departure from what your parents' values was a bad one?
No.
If your hypothetical offspring had a departure from your values
in a way that was just as positive as yours was from your parents,
even if it didn't align with what you wanted,
wouldn't that be desirable?
It would, in my opinion, not be a positive departure
because if I thought it was positive,
I would have departed towards that myself.
See, I've had this weird sense,
even as a kid, I would identify with my future self
in a way that I'd be like,
well, I don't think future Steven will ever think that I'm a complete idiot
because he'll understand that I tried.
And so, I mean, that only tangentially relates in the sense that,
you know, in the sense that a child is a continuation of yourself
in some way, like it was genetic.
I wouldn't want them to do just what I did because I did it
if they had an existence that,
but what if it was like, damn, what should I have thought of that?
Right.
But I feel like I have so much more in common with people
that I share intellectual space with,
that I share memes with rather than my parents
and my siblings that I share genes with.
I think that's okay.
I think, so from my perspective,
if I have a kid and they are diametrically opposed to me
on all sorts of different things,
as long as they are happy and having a good life
and a good presence in other people's lives,
then that's a win.
Even if they leave and don't want to talk to me and think I'm lame and...
I just imagine them like holding hands with their monogamous spouse,
like with you at dinner,
like eating a red steak just glaring at you.
Their monogamous opposite gender spouse.
That's the picture in the head that they painted,
like somebody was opposite of you.
I'm picturing all the things that I can't picture you doing.
And I am already pretty fine with those people.
Right.
And so I think that part of it is,
as long as they didn't go down in ways that made their lives bad
or the lives around them bad.
Being sociopath, that's kind of a risk you have to take,
but it's also not super likely.
It's not as likely as the other,
as them not being sociopath.
It's something like a 1 in 100 chance of having a psychopath.
There's probably some factors that increase or decrease that.
But how much better off would my parents have been
if all that time and energy they put into me,
they had put into cultivating friendships with other people instead?
Have you ever asked them how they felt?
No.
I've never asked them that,
even though both me and my brother,
we definitely in different ways turned out
not what they expected or necessarily wanted,
or not what they proved of.
But Dad said at no point did he wish ever
that we were different people than who we were.
Well, I'm going over tomorrow for one of my monthly dinners.
Yeah.
I'll ask them then.
I mean...
I hope that they'll say that they're happy that you're you.
That's exactly...
I've always felt like a huge disappointment.
That's almost exactly what I was going to say,
that I hope that they would say.
And I don't want to go out too far and say that they're lame
if they don't say that, but their values should be...
It's okay.
I can say my parents are lame.
It should be something along the lines of,
look, Inyash, we're...
Of course we wish that your values stayed aligned with ours,
however there were versions of saying that is,
but we're happy that you are who you are and we wouldn't,
you know, whatever, something, insert thing.
But that's a kind of heavy topic.
Yeah.
Well, that's the conversation I had with my parents recently.
Right?
It's like, I think I want to go through with this.
I think I want to have a kid.
But here's what I'm worried about.
I'm worried about the environmental impact of having a kid.
I'm worried that my kid will turn out a shit.
Like, they'll be horrible and hurt people all the time.
And that's when my dad said, you know,
at no point did I regret having kids
and at no point did I wish that you were different people.
So...
It's pretty solid.
Yeah.
So I thought that was nice.
To hear that from him because I hadn't before
and I wasn't even sure that that was the case.
I get the distinct impression I'm not going to get that answer.
Then fuck him.
I mean, I'm not just saying that just make you feel better,
but that is, I'm prepared to say that it is incorrect of them
to think that, no, we'd rather you be unhappy and be with us.
Well, I'm sure they'd rather that he be happy and be with them.
Right.
Which is probably what they think.
If only he would come back to the fold
and Jesus would make him happy again.
And my parents would really rather that I just stopped by every other day
and just tea with them and ask them about their lives.
But I don't do that.
They live two blocks away from here.
Like every day they walk by the house to see what's going on.
Kind of give it the yellow hairy eyeball.
Right.
And my mom owns this house and I pay rent to her
and she gave me an amazing deal to get me to live close to them.
Ah, tricky.
Honestly, I would take that deal.
I mean, just for two places to live.
I took it.
Yeah.
Fuck yeah.
This is a nice place.
I would not take that deal from my parents because they have way too much of a wanting
to control your life sort of thing.
Oh yeah.
My parents don't.
Yeah.
It would be a thing.
They would be like, well, you're staying in our house under a great deal.
So you're going to do this.
Oh yeah.
Fuck that noise.
I would rather live in a shit house apartment.
There's been a bit of that.
Yeah.
But now it's seeming like a good idea because if I pop out a kid in four years.
It's true.
They can watch it.
They can help take care of the kid.
And if I get more parents in, more co-parents in this house.
Yes.
Did we want to move on to that particular subject?
No.
I wanted to talk about the morality of adding somebody with a huge carbon footprint.
I mean, we talked about the value of human life.
Humans have a great deal of value to other humans.
But when it comes to the rest of the world, do we have a negative, I mean, it seems pretty
clear to me that we have a pretty negative impact on the world of the non-human part
of the world.
Someone's going to figure out how to get all that carbon out of the atmosphere, right?
Might as well be your kid.
You're like, Timmy, you have to become a scientific genius.
I'm going to shop around hardcore for sperm because I do not have, I do not have a sperm
source yet.
That's what I was going to say is that you could adopt, you could adopt Elon Musk's
and you could adopt some scientific savants kid that they don't have time for.
And you can just donate sperm, right?
So if you're concerned about your genetic material getting out there, there's other
ways to go about doing that.
Maybe the best thing Elon Musk can do for some humanity right now is not try to find
better batteries, but just donate sperm two or three times every day.
How old, how old is he?
I'm not sure.
That's a good question.
Let's see what the phone has to say.
He's right past the age where it starts to sour.
That's why he's got to do it three times a day.
He's only got a limited time left.
Oh, if you couldn't hear the phone said he's 45.
Yeah, the phone said he's 45 and on our subreddit we had a little discussion about how sperm
quality goes down markedly after the age of 40.
What if they only wanted to do it the old fashioned way?
Is it worth having Elon's kid if that was the only way to get it?
Yes.
You'd have to meet the guy first.
I'd have to meet him.
I would have his kid.
You may be a much bigger fan though.
I have one person who I think is listening who I'm sure was shouting that so I had to
get it out there.
You're welcome.
As far as the impact that people have, I mean, it's weird.
I'm on more on Katrina's side of the fence as far as considering the rest of the world
and yet that's not an externality that I'm particularly concerned with and I might be
a failure of intuition there, but especially I think part of me predicates most of my
thinking on this in terms that humanity isn't going to spend the next thousand years on
Earth.
We'll probably have people hanging out here but probably a lot less than we'll have elsewhere.
I was going to backtrack quickly because we were talking about the impact on Earth and
if I spend time making sure that people who want contraception and family planning are
able to access that and I can help prevent unwanted pregnancies, does that mean that
I can morally slip a pregnancy of my own in there?
I'm going to say yes because I like you, but that seems kind of like the opposite of the
murder offsets where if I save three people's lives I'm allowed to kill one.
Well, I was just thinking about, you know, vegan arguments, right, where if it's difficult,
if you really, really want to be eating meat then it makes sense to get other people not,
right, so to donate money towards a vegan advocacy group, an effective vegan advocacy
group and that can really help farm the animals more than just you not eating meat.
I think that's completely legit offset.
And it's in keeping with my philosophy that people who don't want to have kids shouldn't
have to have kids.
So you can help people who don't maybe have the resources or desire to raise kids.
I don't think you have to necessarily feel guilty about having kids at all.
How can I offset it?
Also, although consider if your goal was to help as many people have access to child
preventative interventions as possible, imagine how much more successful you could be at that
if you didn't spend a bunch of time being a parent.
Mm-hmm, yep, that's the other issue is all that money and all that time that you spend
being a parent, wouldn't it be great if you donated it to the Against Malaria Fund?
Yeah, things get slippery when you go that way.
It's tough to think about.
They do because there are so many things that you're totally wasting your time doing when
you could be making more money to give to the Against Malaria Fund.
And why are you out having fun when you could be so...
There's a level of which that breaks down, right?
Or like maybe where it doesn't.
So, at least as far as I haven't read any of Peter Singer's stuff that he's written
in like the last several years, but for the most part he kind of just bites the bullet.
And he's like, yeah, unless you're living at the level of the people that you're helping,
you can give more.
I can trust that with like, Will McCaskill of the Center for Effective Altruism is kind of like,
you know, as long as you're doing something, you're doing better than almost everybody else.
So, by all means, go forth and have some fun.
And what if you have...
And what if you are an altruistic person?
You have altruist kids who have altruist kids.
And then they can spend so much more of their time also helping with human causes.
Wait, are we poor or against propagating memes to reproduction?
Right, that's what I was about to say.
Peter Singer, I don't know how many kids he has, but assuming that even if he had zero...
Even if he had 10 kids, he has done much more to help altruism through his memetic contribution
than his genetic contribution.
Yes, but genetically, we were talking about different contributions.
So genes seem to be what, up to 0.8 in extreme cases, or we don't know, between 0.5, 0.8.
I mean, how many kids...
Of somebody's personality.
Assuming, first of all, that Jesus was a real person that existed, how many kids did Jesus have?
Who knows?
We're going to go with 0.
Because we're already assuming that he existed, so let's give him some liberties here.
And yet, his ideology has had more impact to the world than his genes ever could have.
Yeah.
And I read somewhere that one-third of the men in China are descended from Genghis Khan,
which, at that point, I'm like...
You don't call him Genghis?
Not ever since listening to the Hardcore History Podcast where Dan Carlin corrected me.
Oh shit, I bet Dan Carlin's got it right and I've been saying it all my whole life.
Well, most people have.
All of us have.
Yeah.
I think he started more than one-third of people, not more than one-third of people.
I thought he was, maybe that was the number, but it was some ridiculously large percentage of people.
Are now descended from him, yeah.
But at that point, his contribution doesn't really matter anymore, right?
It's so washed out with everything else that's happened in the intervening centuries that...
What difference does it make how many kids he had?
The political system, the political change that he brought, made a much bigger impact.
So I don't think having kids is really any sort of way to change the world at all.
Having kids is like a personal decision, in my opinion, and if you want to change the world, you go for means.
Yeah.
Okay.
And I think that there's also something to consider that there's a great chance that none of the three of us will be of the scale of Genghis Khan or Elon Musk or Peter Singer or Jesus, right?
Mm-hmm.
We won't be world-changing figures that people will be talking about in 5,000 years, probably.
Maybe we should have the kids and keep the human race going.
Something like that.
Okay.
Someone's gotta do it.
I'm not endorsing that argument, but there's something to be said about it.
Well, someones are doing it.
Many someones are doing it.
There's another...
So we don't have to.
You certainly don't have to be the one to keep the human race going.
I was trying to make a joke.
I hear that.
Okay.
When we make the transition to family dynamics, I want to hint that there is one other way to keep your memes going in a way that's valuable to you, and that's just to not die.
Yes.
So...
Put it there.
That is the goal.
Maybe that's popular among child-created people.
So I'm not gonna have...
I don't plan on having kids, but I also don't plan on my beliefs and memes dying out with me because I'd like not to die.
The best way to influence the far future is to be around to influence it.
I like that.
Good luck, Stephen.
I don't get good luck.
Good luck, Enya.
I think she was more confident that you were gonna make it.
She's like, Enya, she don't need luck.
You got this cut for it.
You got this cut for it.
So that's a topic for another day, but that is something that I imagine someone bringing up and that cost my mind as well.
So I just wanted to put that out there that that will be talked about eventually.
So what other reasons do you have for having kids?
Because I want one.
That's a very good reason.
I want to do it.
I like the idea of raising kids.
I like the idea of having children and going through that process.
And I don't know, it's really hard to say because a lot of it's a biological imperative with me.
Where I'm just like, I walk around and every day I see people with children and I get a craving for having a kid.
And that's a weird thing to be going through.
And I get sad.
I have broken into tears when I thought that I wouldn't be able to have a kid.
And I still might not be able to.
Because there's so many obstacles to get through before I can do that.
I mean, I guess there's some, but statistically the chances are good.
I don't know.
Well, so things that I have to be able to do, I have to find a dad.
Statistically the chances are good.
I have to find a dad.
Unless you're really picky, which it sounds like you might be.
I am.
I'm very picky.
And the people who I have to pick from.
She's like, oh, I know, are you fuckers?
Why don't you guys stop being so shitty?
Well, so I think.
And sire my offspring already.
And be worthy of sireing her offspring already.
So, so newsflash.
Although Inuyasha already knows this one of Inuyasha's partners.
She and her husband.
Is that right?
Mhmm.
Moved in with a partner and their other partners.
So they, they merged families with children.
And as soon as I saw that, I was like, now I know someone who's done it.
Awesome.
I know it can be done.
I, I want to have, um, but I want to have more, more co-parents.
So people who are absolutely permanently dedicated to whatever kids are involved.
I think that is a really toxic failure mode of modern, modern nuclear families that it's just the parents in a house on their own in the suburbs.
Whereas it used to be an entire tribe was there to help you raise your children.
Parents would go off and do whatever parenting they had to do and the old people would stay back or however they work things out.
There was much more of a community and a social net to help with children.
And now it's just the two parents and maybe if they can open a grandparent or if they hire a nanny or something.
Mhmm.
Yeah, that sounds like a whole other, uh, much more isolated.
Right.
And nannies, nannies are not forever.
Yeah.
Nannies are going to leave at some point.
Right.
Which is because you can't pay them to just hang out in your, in your home with your children forever.
But you can delegate some of like the responsibilities to like not make it so that you have to do everything or that you and your one partner have to do everything as in like some dynamics, right?
Yeah.
And that sounds like a recipe for disaster as well.
So there are, you know, potential grandparents living two blocks away, as I mentioned.
Yeah.
Um, I think ideally, and I've talked about this with, with my spouse, um, ideally we would,
I could find somebody who I could be in a romantic relationship with like a serious long-term community relationship with who would live with us if they have another partner, that person too.
But of course we would all have to get along, which is one level.
Yes.
We would all have to kind of want this kind of relationship thing.
I would have to, in the situation, have a romantic relationship with one of those people.
And they would have to be a fit genetic parent for my eugenics project.
So you're right.
That is, that is quite a number of things to clear.
It is.
Yeah.
It's pretty, that's pretty weighty.
It's not insurmountable though.
Not insurmountable.
The way I see it, I have a couple of years to meet said person or people.
Certainly not a weekend project though.
Just know them and then a couple more years to kind of make sure that that situation works before adding a kid to it.
Unless they already have a kid.
Then you start.
Then we're good to go.
Yeah.
So there's that.
But I think, you know, if that doesn't work out, there's, I don't have to be, we could just find friends and see if anybody's into a family merge that way.
Yeah.
I don't have any polyamorous or romantic ties in that people are doing that and that seems to be working pretty well.
Although I feel like I'd have better luck roping somebody into staying if I could make it.
If they're romantic ties in mostly if it was their genetic offspring.
Anchor baby.
Yes.
Exactly.
I don't want to get us too far from this, but there was one important thing that I forgot to bring up in my decision to become a parent.
Yeah.
I think I'm much too, I'm not neurotic as the right word, much too pessimistic, isn't it either?
I'll describe it and you guys can tell me what it is.
I would be too constantly freaking out about whether or not the kid was like hurt or dying at any given point, right?
So, you know.
You would be one of those hover parents.
I wouldn't even necessarily like necessarily hover, but like.
Just curl up in a corner and just be like.
Exactly.
Right.
Back in your fingernails.
I like hard and example.
Let's do the heavy hard example first.
Like my mom told me several years ago that when we were little kids, the elementary school I went to kind of had this the street on one side of it that you could access by the short path that came down from the school.
And she parked down there and we'd be picked up there after school.
And she told me a few years ago that she would sit there and have panic attacks most days.
And wonder like, I kind of filled in the blank for her and I was like, I totally get what you're going from where you're going to.
You were sitting there thinking today's going to be the day that they're not going to come down.
I'm going to freak out eventually get out of the car and there's going to be a crime scene at the school and two dead kids.
And that would be costing my mind pretty much every day.
And so like Harry mentioned in methods of rationality when Professor McGonagall offers to help him pay for an owl as a pet.
He's like, I had a pet rock once it died.
I think the owl I'd be constantly freaking out about whether or not I feed it, whether or not I fed it and whether or not it was slowly starving to death in its cage and whether it was all my fault.
Wondering where its dad was or that kind of thing.
So I still have dreams about that, about walking in realizing that I haven't fed my pets in a year and that seeing all these pet carcasses.
They're mostly dead, but some of them are alive.
But they're just starving and it's horrible and they've been anguished for all this time.
I don't mean to paint that mercenaries for anybody with that vivid description, but that is something that is definitely a factor in the sense that I don't know
if I could ever relax.
And relaxation, as I hinted earlier, or as I said explicitly earlier, is very important to me.
So the idea of me sitting there constantly trembling in agonizing fear is not super appealing to me.
I do think we have been talking quite a bit about how children are all this time and all this energy and money that we should at least mention the counter argument by...
Brian Kappel?
Maybe.
Maybe.
It was one of the Economist's...
Economist?
Economist.
Economist.
Economist.
So Brian Kaplan published a book about why having kids is easy and you shouldn't worry about it.
Okay, that's the one.
Is that what you're talking about?
Yes.
He went around on a book tour.
Is he the one that does marginal revolution?
I don't know.
Okay.
He was billed as the anti-tiger bomb because the super strict mom book also came out at the same time and she was also on the interview circuit.
And his argument is basically that having kids is not that big a deal.
They seem to get very little changes to their life outcomes based on parenting and other environmental influences.
Within reason.
Within reason, yes.
As long as you don't abuse them and give them the basic resources they need.
He referred to twin studies.
Yeah.
So kids, when they grow up after a certain age, they somehow revert back to their programming and they are likely to make the same amount in income.
Regardless of how much you poured into them when they were small.
Mm-hmm.
And so his argument is, you know what?
The genes are going to out in the end.
Just have as many kids as you want.
Don't freak out too much.
Let them go play outside.
Let them do whatever they want.
Have fun.
They'll be fine.
Yes.
Have fun with your kids.
That's his basic argument.
Yeah.
You can afford to have six, seven kids if you want for less than what most people pay to do one kid nowadays.
I'm glad you guys are on me with that because that's something else I wanted to bring up.
I heard about it through, oh jeez, Jonathan, a professor of psychology at Yale called, sorry.
Jonathan Colton.
It's going to drive me insane.
It's my favorite professor.
Did he go to Yale?
Did he?
Or Princeton.
I get them confused.
Oh shit, I didn't know.
Well yeah, John Hodgman talks about how they went to school together.
I never know if I should believe John Hodgman though, or if that's part of his character.
Oh, I guess that's possible.
Was it like an actual series that didn't interfere?
Nope, this was his book, which is all false knowledge and lies.
Right.
That's a scary book to put out there.
Anyway, I heard about exactly what you guys are talking about, and I can't remember who he cited, but Paul Bloom mentioned the same thing, that more or less your kids are going to turn out, how they're going to turn out, barring obvious, you know, tying them in a basement kind of thing, genie style, right?
As long as they get a bare minimum okay upbringing, they're going to turn out basically however, so they don't need to freak out too much.
Which is reassuring for people who might be concerned, so you're already, you know, whether or not you'll be a good mom.
I think that, honestly, if you're worried about that, you're probably going to be a better parent than many parents, who that thought never crosses their mind, or at least not until they've already had kids.
Some of us might know people like that.
So, you know, giving that level of content beforehand, I think, is a huge boon.
But also, they're basically going to be fine no matter what, you know, just don't starve them, let them, you know, teach them to read.
Or maybe they won't be fine, but you haven't done it to them, unless you're really terrible.
Don't be really terrible.
Don't be really terrible.
That's a good life lesson.
And maybe don't, but it doesn't matter if you force them to play piano at the age of four or not.
So, continuing talking about cohabiting families, there is a recent popular article that I think people are kind of excited about.
People in California, they got a big mansion, and it's a mansion for single parents.
So, a bunch of different single parents can live there with their kids, and that way they get the benefit of having other parents around.
That is cool.
To look after the kidlands, and the kids have the advantage of having siblings, having other kids around.
The only issue is that it's not necessarily a permanent setup, so people come and go, or at least they can.
So, I guess my goal would be to have something as permanent as possible, at least while the kids are growing up.
That sounds really intriguing.
If that kind of thing were more easily attainable, and I guess more common, which might make it easier to get, I'd be more inclined to have kids, I think.
Because, like I mentioned, the idea of being a nearby uncle is super appealing to me, and not like I would delegate completely,
but the idea that it's not necessarily going to take up 100% of my time every day for 50 years, or at least 20, is more appealing than the alternative, right?
Well, there's some great benefits to that.
You're not as tired when you're spending time with the kid.
So, you have more time to pay attention to them, instead of more just being present while they're doing whatever.
And they also have more role models, more different parenting styles.
There are people who can deal with different situations better than others.
So, you're adding a lot, I think, by having more co-parents, or certainly more adults.
That's that I did talk to somebody who grew up in a commune, and she said it was terrible for her.
Why?
Nobody took primary responsibility for the kids.
So, while there was always an adult around, she didn't really have...
It was like a bystander effect for parenting?
Yeah, it was a bystander effect.
So, there were parents who were just really completely focused on raising certain kids.
There were people that she could always absolutely rely on and know that she was going to be with them, and they weren't going to peace out or go somewhere else.
Can we elaborate on the word commune in this context?
When I think of it, I think of the fenced-in area where you're not allowed to leave that recent movie that Hermione was in.
So, I'm assuming that's not what you meant, because there's no...
No!
Communes are like the hippie farm where everyone...
There are a bunch of different kinds of communes that you can have.
I'm assuming she was at a hippie commune.
Well, I mean, I've definitely known.
I had a friend growing up who was in a commune, and they had bought out development with a bunch of townhouses,
and they would share in the work of doing a community garden, a community vegetable garden,
and they would have community dinners and rotate cooking at the community center.
Yeah, that is fucking awesome.
And they would have the kids with babysits.
If I were to ever live in a non-by-myself situation, I would want to do something like that,
where I'm in a large group, like a commune sort of thing.
I think that would be my ideal.
I would love to try it at any rate, because I really idealized that,
and it just seems like that's a more healthy way to live.
But I don't know, I haven't actually tried it, so I can't say for sure.
Her setup, the friend I'm talking about when I was a child,
but they also had, they were definitely in separate families.
It wasn't that they were all one blended family, and the adults took turns looking after the kids,
but no one really took responsibility.
There were definitely, her parents were her parents, right?
And responsible for taking care of her, like the bookstop there and discipline and stuff like that.
They also had all of these other benefits of other adults being in the community.
That's a separate situation from this other new friend that I have,
who was saying that her upbringing in a commune was terrible,
because nobody took primary responsibility for her.
Some of that sounds attractive.
Yeah, that's interesting.
I don't know, it's like a group home.
I know that there's a number of those around the country.
Various nationalist groups have created something like that.
I wonder if there's another number for it,
because group home sounds like kind of like a quarter of the way house,
not like a half way house, but the place where, you know,
so yes, I'm familiar with those as well in the nationalist context,
where it's a big house or a set of condos or something where everyone kind of just does their own thing.
That sounds somewhat appealing.
I don't know, part of me is too anti-social to appreciate that maybe, but...
There are also setups for poor single mothers,
oftentimes, you know, who are pregnant as teens,
where they are put into living situations in communities with senior citizens,
and they have kind of a work exchange,
where when the moms go to work, the seniors can stay with the kids and read to them
and teach them in exchange for the moms getting groceries for the seniors
or driving them to and from doctor's appointments
and kind of helping each other out.
That does sound cool, except with the fact about leaving your baby with somebody you barely know,
but assuming you get a chance to meet them and hang out with them before,
it's like, alright, well, watch my kid, I'll be back in eight hours.
I hope you guys are both still here when I get back.
Again, see, that was the first thing that came to my mind.
That's why I can't be a parent.
People are going to steal my kids.
I didn't mean for it to go there.
My first thinking is, I would come back and something terrible would have happened.
This would be like the one psycho in a movie and so whatever.
Yeah, I'm not a parent because of that reason.
Alright, well, I hope that everybody's not judging me too horribly for thinking that I want to have a kid in four years.
I don't think anyone's judging me.
I think that there's a lot of hurdles, so I don't know if it'll happen or not,
but definitely there's something that I'm leaning towards.
No one should be judging for that.
You're a very responsible and articulate person.
Oh man, certain ex-boyfriends have.
Well, I mean, there's reason they're ex-boyfriends, right?
We don't have to name names other than the fact that if they didn't think that way and I thought the opposite way,
they might not be exes, so screw those guys.
That's my...
Alright, there we go.
Alright, I'm not alone in being a dick to strangers.
Strangers are the best people to be dicks to.
Alright.
Hey, let's do some listener feedback.
It's the feedback time!
I'll go first really quick.
We got an email from Westward101 who had lots of ticked separate paragraphs,
so we'll just cherry pick a couple of those.
One of them said,
See, zoob, may I call you zoob?
First of all, interjecting, off text.
No?
We don't know each other that well for nicknames,
and even give me a real name so I can't give you a short-hand nickname.
Westy.
In any case.
No, I'd prefer not, but I won't stop you.
So, you said that you liked the burning building discussion,
dropping down the rabbit hole into the value of a painting versus a baby.
That's interesting to me.
No one mentioned grabbing the painting because it has more value.
I wouldn't, but some people would choose to remember it.
You can always make another baby.
That is a line of questioning that we didn't really consider.
I think mainly because I don't give objects really any value.
They have value because people like them,
whereas to some different extent, humans have value innately.
You know, however, all the fuzziness around that, you kind of get run going.
So, yeah, the idea that like,
well, this painting is worth a lot, so,
baby's with his manufacturer, but this Mona Lisa is the only one in the world.
I mean, I never really cared about that, but maybe someone would.
I can see how they'd make that argument, but that seems like a weird place to go.
But rarity.
Rarity, does that matter to you at all?
I mean, when you're talking about, I don't know,
maybe compare paintings to paintings.
Yeah, sure.
I mean, if there were literally a million copies of the Mona Lisa
that were hand-painted or something and they were all identical,
then they would be less valuable.
Does it matter if they're hand-painted?
I mean, I think people care less about...
Yeah, because there are already tons of prints.
Yeah, I think people care less about the prints or less expensive.
Do they matter if they're hand-painted by Leonardo da Vinci?
Because...
Some people think so.
Okay.
So there is an interesting point.
It was like, if a painting can be forged well enough to fool experts,
it makes me wonder why the original is so valuable.
But apparently it is to some people.
I don't really get it, but I don't get art.
Also, pretty soon here with laser, 3D laser mapping and X-rays,
we would be able to reproduce the original in an exact perfect format.
But it's not the same.
Some people would say.
Okay.
Yeah.
No, I agree.
I mean, I would take a picture of it.
I don't care.
Just like two humans aren't the same.
Well, not just like two humans aren't the same.
Yeah, but two humans are actually different.
Whereas an exact reproduction of the Mona Lisa,
even down to the thickness of the pigments on the canvas,
would be basically...
I mean, if you were to cover them both up
and then do the magicians thing where you switch back and forth,
so no one can figure out which one is the real one,
would it matter?
Some people would be pissed.
I think it would be funny.
Well, certainly something would be pissed, yeah.
Wait, so does that mean that if there are two copies of Steven,
Steven and his twin?
What's his name?
Scott.
Steven and Scott, it wouldn't be as big a deal
if one of them were exterminated.
No, because genetic information is only a small part of what makes them unique.
True.
Yeah, I think there's an important distinction between like...
There's a two completely unrelated people.
Um...
No.
No.
Because, I mean, like, to whatever makes me valuable,
and the extent that some of that comes from our genetics,
that also makes Scott valuable.
You know, excluding all the stuff that is epigenetic.
Whereas, like, a painting,
if it is molecule for molecule as close as it can possibly be,
that's kind of all there is to the painting.
There's no...
There's nothing like...
There's nothing that it's like to be the painting
that we'd be losing if one was lost.
There was an interesting experiment done some years ago
where you could even ask, like, secularists and atheists,
you know, would you give...
I would give you $10,000 to take your wedding ring,
make an atom for atom copy, and then destroy the original.
Would you be okay with that?
And most people were like,
well, no way, this one's sentimental, it's magic.
I was like, no, we're gonna duplicate it, like,
in a Star Wars-esque or Star Trek-esque copier.
I'd be fine with that, it's just a ring.
Right, but some people have, like, a sentimental value.
Intellectually, I'd be fine with that,
but I would still feel a little twinge that I wouldn't admit to anyone.
Yeah, kind of the same, right?
So, like, I would take the money, but I'd be like, ah.
But I can see where they're coming from,
but I think that there's an obviously correct answer there,
that, like, the thing doesn't have an important aspect to it
that you're losing by duplicating it.
There is, yeah, there's definitely a correct answer.
It just making your emotions line up with that answer
is a hell of a trick.
Also, the painting doesn't give a care.
You know, speaking of the burning building and the painting thing,
I was listening to a Radio Lab episode
where it was recorded in, I think, Haiti after a major earthquake.
After the major earthquake?
I'm not sure if it was the major one.
I actually don't even know if it was Haiti.
I think it was definitely some developing country, though.
There was, it was an episode about triage,
and there was an old lady with emphysema who was dying slowly,
who had to have oxygen every day,
and after this particular disaster,
the oxygen was running low,
and they needed it to help younger people
who were going to live longer anyway.
The old lady only had maybe a few months left in her,
but she was the sweetest old lady in the world,
and everyone loved her.
And at one point, they were transferring her to a different hospital,
and she just had her one oxygen tank,
and they were like, this is the last one for her.
She doesn't get another one, we need it to help other people.
And in the episode, they were recording it live in the ambulance
as she was running out of air and gasping for more oxygen.
And I was like, I know this is the correct answer on utilitarian terms,
but motherfuckers, someone give her some fucking oxygen.
I cannot listen to this.
Maybe you didn't sign up for the feels on a radio live episode.
That sounds kind of too heavy just to throw at you.
Yeah.
Why didn't they bring oxygen?
Uh, this story continues,
and I'm going to leave everyone in suspense,
and they can hear for themselves whether or not she lived through this.
Great, then you can talk to the episode.
Yes, I will.
It was, it was really,
it was really an interesting thing I learned about myself
because I had always been of the opinion,
this is the right thing to do,
even though we don't know how many lives may be lost by,
by giving the oxygen to this old lady that only has a few months anyway,
it's the right thing to do to let her die,
and I could not freaking do it.
And I wasn't even there.
I was listening to a pre-recorded episode that had happened months ago,
thousands of miles away, and I was freaking out.
Damn.
That reminds me.
So why couldn't it just give her oxygen?
Because resource distribution is sometimes tough,
which we brought up overpopulation in the episode,
and right now on earth, people,
some people I don't think anyone really worth listening to
is talking about like,
oh, the earth's already overpopulated,
and it's like, no, it's not.
There's plenty of stuff.
There's plenty of people worth listening to say that.
Uh, okay.
I will, I'll take your word for it.
I guess I don't, for me, like,
it's not like there's too many people,
they just resource distribution's hard.
So like, in the extent that they're going to qualify it in that way.
Yes, that's what people mean when they say there's too many people.
Well, or they're like, they're just, you know,
I tend to hear it in less articulate forms.
So let me take back what I said about no one worth listening to.
Unless they're going to qualify that statement with some further reasoning,
they're not worth listening to.
But yeah, right now, it's not like there's just too many, period.
There's too many because.
And the main thing is like, yeah,
we just need to find an easier way to get stuff to them.
I want to finish up the westwards email really quick,
and we're going to skip around a little bit.
How do you pronounce Bayesian?
Is it Bayesian or Bayesian?
And I say it both ways.
You're asking Bayesian Bayesian Bayesian Bayesian.
I say it both ways.
I, if there's an official ruling,
I think that there's probably second preference and it's whatever one is the other one,
and you can probably go either way.
Yeah, do whatever you want.
And then two, two quick facts that I thought were interesting
that we didn't bring up during our animals episodes.
Lots of animals are granted rights, not just companion animals.
There's individual versus species issues again,
but endangered species lists are an example of animals given protective status,
which is kind of interesting.
Like, yeah, we'll stomp around and not really care until they're almost gone.
It's like, oh shit, we need to get our shit together,
which is, you know, at least we're doing that.
So sometimes.
And so depending on the animal,
they no longer provide any ecosystem services because there are so few of them.
Yeah, sometimes I think it'll be tough,
but at least there's some interpretation about just wiping a species off the planet today, most cases.
And I didn't know this, assuming this is true.
There are more tigers and private ownership in the continental U.S.
than exist in the wild world, than exist in the wild worldwide.
I've certainly heard that before.
I think it may well be true.
Does private ownership it conclude like ones that are like live on wildlife sanctuaries
or like ones that live in people's backyards?
I believe it would be sanctuaries ensues as well.
Oh, okay, then that's not nearly as bad as my first interpretation.
Well, how do you think they get to the sanctuaries?
Right, from people's backyards.
But I'd prefer more be in sanctuaries than in backyards.
Right.
What do you mean as composed to out in the wild where no human is responsible for them?
Yeah, that's a bummer.
Tigers are fucking awesome.
Guys don't pay to take pictures with tigers.
It's always a bad situation.
Yeah.
PSA.
Unless like, you know, it's a selfie through a fence.
It's a selfie through a fence?
Yeah.
Okay.
What about the white tigers that they have down in Vegas with the two guys who love the tigers a lot?
Roy and Siegfried and Roy?
You mean one of them got horribly mauled by one of the tigers?
I do.
Yes, he did.
Yeah.
Tiger loves him so much, right?
That's because I'm not going to go into this right now, but I'll go ahead and put up some resources on the site.
So those tigers are also not terribly well treated?
Well, one of the issues with well performing animals in circus type situations kind of like that are not well treated because it's really hard to treat a tiger well in captivity like that.
Also, you know, making them work and but it also encourages people to try to get tigers as pets.
One.
Yeah.
As much fun as it would be to have a giant cat as a pet, they're just not for it yet.
Yet.
Growth mindset.
We can make them later.
We almost have the technology.
All right, you're up.
So continuing from what we said earlier about having a hard time making emotions line up with what we have decided is the right decision or what we hope is the right decision based on analysis anyway.
Mr.
Oliver says that when he's confronted with information about this on our politics is the mind killer episode.
He tries to.
Political pitfalls is the name of the episode.
Oh, I'm sorry.
Political pitfalls.
Yes.
We should know this.
We should.
We were the ones that recorded it.
That he tries to get his news from unbiased sources to counter the the normal bias that he encounters.
And he says that he thinks he falls into overcompensation bias and favors candidates more equally than perhaps I should on an emotional level.
He says I'd like to have my emotional reaction to a candidate be the same as my intellectual reaction to them, which would be a fair analysis of the policies utility to me.
But I think that is a good point.
And I have, I don't know how to do that because to to really analyze something intellectually, you kind of have to emotionally distance yourself from it, right?
I'm not sure if you have to have to.
Like, sometimes they, I guess it depends.
Like we mentioned, sometimes they don't match up.
But if you have, if you come into something emotionally, you're generally pulling in some sort of bias with you, right?
Yeah.
Yeah.
If you start that way.
So if somebody has an abhorrent position on a policy issue, then why not feel angry about that?
Right.
If they have power.
Exactly.
But if you really want to analyze it, you then have to kind of suppress that anger for a while and really give it a fair shake while you look into the details and see their argument, whether it really is abhorrent or not.
Because you don't know, you can't base just on your emotional reaction.
I don't know about you, but I get kind of tired of all the scandals and don't want to listen to them anymore.
And I, I think to myself, well, I should really look into this and see what, what the real, what the truth is about this.
And then I'm just like, I don't even want to click on it.
I don't want to have to change my mind again.
It's an endurance thing.
Politics is an, is an endurance sport.
Yeah.
I'm the same way.
I, I can't really do it, but this season's almost over.
Right.
No, I, I try to do that, but I, I get where he's coming from because then afterwards it's hard to make.
Once you've decided, no, this really actually is terrible and we shouldn't exterminate all the Jews.
It's, or whatever the situation may be, it's harder to get your emotions back up to that point again where they're, where you feel it viscerally, right?
No, I know.
You don't think so?
No, not in a particular circumstances.
This is what I refer to as the, you make a excellent case for infant, infanticide problem.
Right.
That you, you, if you stop and you really consider the situation and you're like, okay, no, you're still wrong.
But now it's no longer a emotional gut reaction, like go to hell for even suggesting it.
It's now you're just, you're wrong and I reject your position and you have to remember what, what rejecting it means rather than feeling it emotionally.
Right.
I don't think you have to get really upset about it again.
No, I think you should get really upset about it if it's something like exterminating all the Jews.
Again, that's really easy to get upset about again compared to some other stuff.
Yeah, I happened to watch the third debate with a bunch of super liberal nonprofit leaders, which was cool.
But I also found myself kind of thinking, why are they complaining about people's hairdos so often and how they look and, you know, someone walks in and someone says, oh my God, he's so fat.
I'm like, the fatness of Mr. Trump should, should have no impact on how you feel about this.
I agree.
I would not want to pull that emotion back in.
And there was somebody else who was saying, I can't believe that anybody with half a brain would support this candidate and like, okay, so this is, I think that that's not a healthy way to look at it because obviously people with full brains do.
So the question is why and what are you missing and what perspective are you, do you need to understand better?
That's exactly right.
That if you literally, if you say something along the lines of I literally can't imagine what they're thinking, then you're not, you're, you have a poor imagination or you're not trying for enough.
There's some internal narrative to somebody who's going to vote for the candidate that you don't like that makes sense to them.
And that is probably comprehensible to you if you had explained or just thought it through really well, right?
Yeah, or at least you would understand why even if you deeply, deeply disagree with them.
Yeah.
But I guess that's kind of easy for me to say, because I don't have the depths of that immediate emotional reaction.
It's easy for me to kind of overcome that.
I don't know, I, of course, have not overcome that, but it's easy for me to ask the question, why do people feel this way in a meaningful way?
That's not just their idiots.
I think it's a good question.
But then your problem is, once you've asked, so people who feel this way are not idiots, why do they feel this way?
You have problems getting back to the fire in your belly that you had when you were railing against the stupidity before you, before you thought about it a little bit more.
No, I mean, I don't know.
I think you do.
And to me, that's a good thing, and that's one of the intended consequences, is that once you understand where your opponent is coming from, it's hard to think of them as mindless idiots.
Or obviously wrong, or obviously half-brained, or whatever the words are, right?
Well, I don't want to get to the point where I'm throwing firebombs into the RNC offices anyway.
Right? Because that is just not, that is what that level of emotion can lead to.
It's not productive.
And no, it's not. It makes the whole thing worse.
That's not what I was advocating for, was it?
No, no, no.
I think I was arguing for the opposite.
Right.
I'm not even a fan of vandalizing, like, signs in people's yards.
You know, like people have their free speech, you know, let them vote for whatever they want, let them talk about who they like more than, that's kind of the whole point.
To the extent that you value democracy at all, that's kind of the point.
Either get on board with people who are like, no democracy sucks, or just accept some people will disagree with you.
Or get angry about people being stupid, but don't bomb things. It's terrible.
Please don't bomb things.
If you're that angry, you're probably not trying to, you're probably not imagining your opponent's position well enough.
They almost certainly aren't worth bombing.
Also, you're being counterproductive. If you're that angry, do something that is actually productive.
What about the argument that we can think that way because we're privileged, and we're not the people who are directly affected.
We're not going to be deported if so and so gets into power.
We're not going to be, you know, denied these basic rights.
Right.
You still sort of don't think that murdering strangers is your best way to go about getting your position here.
No, there are limits, right?
I mean, there are other ways to campaign for what you prefer.
And I mean, let's turn it up to 11 and go back to, you know, kill all the Jews, right?
Like, at that point, maybe it would be worth it to start just murdering the people who are, you know, for exterminating you.
But I'm not really prepared to dive down that rabbit hole.
Okay, definitely not in the listener feedback section.
All right, well, thank you for joining us.
No, because that is where it gets interesting, but that's also where I'm more confused and less willing to take any sort of stance.
The safest stance to say is to say, don't ever resort to actually killing people.
Moving on, I can't find this comment again, and it might have been in an email that I can't find or something.
So from Westward, when we were talking about what gives an entity moral worth, and I said that if I can talk to someone and recognize them as a person, then I'm willing to extend them the rights.
Westward 101 says, just whether an entity would pass a Turing test doesn't cut it for me.
That's a pretty limited skill set and one I bet could happen in the next decade.
And my reply to this is that obviously the Turing test is not foolproof, like any other test that can be gained.
But if I'm talking to someone, and I can't tell if that person is my lover or a really good copy of my lover,
I am not willing to take the risk that it's a non-conscious copy and it's okay to take away their rights or kill them or whatever.
If it's gone to the point where I can't tell the difference between a quote, real person and this person that I'm talking to,
I am more than willing to say, I'm going to err on the side of not murdering people, potential people, and stripping them of their rights and treat it as a real person.
The thing I like about that reply is that it's generalizable and that's valuable to me as far as general rulemaking.
So yeah, that sounds good to me.
I mean yeah, Turing test aside, I mean it's a weird test, there are humans who fail it, they do an annual competition every year.
Or I guess that's what annual means.
And there are people who are voted as less human than some of the programs.
So I mean it obviously has a couple quirks to work out.
So I mean that's why it's not like the, that's it, that's the test we know now kind of situation.
But it's the first step to thinking, alright we're going to take this seriously or not.
I think we're done.
I think we're done.
I think we had some discussion on the subreddit and stuff but a lot of the stuff was addressed there and we can't go into all of it.
But I just like these listener feedback sections.
So do keep writing in, we've got the website where you can add a comment, you can email us.
It is called TheBaseyAndConspiracy.com.
That's right.
Email us at baseyandconspiracypodcastedgmail.com.
Or comment at the subreddit under slash r slash the basin conspiracy.
That's it, those are the only ways.
Stop trying to contact us in other ways.
I don't know how you got my phone number but I don't like it.
Anyway, thanks again for listening and we'll see you again in a couple weeks.
Let's try that one more time.
It must be in a couple weeks.
Yeah but see them.
Oh my goodness.
Thanks for listening.
Come back in a couple weeks for the next episode.
Bye.
I just found out how to get a vegan pumpkin slice.
