Okay, since you know who I am and you know how I operate, I'm all about protocols, not
putting the proverbial cart before the horse.
That being said, tonight, one night, one night only, we're going to put the cart before the
horse.
The way that I want you to approach ELEC 110, and this is a recipe for success, because
like I said, I've been doing this for a couple of years, I know what works and I know what
doesn't.
And I guarantee you, I guarantee you, if you follow the syllabus, if you do all the assignments
that you're given, if you follow that recipe for success, you will be successful, you'll
pass this class.
Guarantee it.
I don't know if any of you also know, Lake Washington Technical College has a guarantee
that if you graduate our program, go into industry, and your local, whoever you go to
work for says you don't know what you're talking about, we will re-educate you for free to
get you to the standard that industry says, you know, how many students have been sent
back to the electronics program?
Zero.
Zero.
So I know it's working.
So keep in mind, the way that this is supposed to work, I think this really is the best recipe
for success, is I like to read through the chapter very quickly.
And what that does is like format your hard drive for what you're about to receive.
That of course is a given that you've already reviewed the syllabus.
In reviewing the syllabus, that shows you specifically, like on page one they start,
the course outcomes and objectives, and then you look at how those course outcomes and
objectives of the syllabus, which is really the training contract between you and I, how
closely the book and the chapter works meet those objectives.
So read through the objectives in the syllabus first, then read through chapter one, or chapter
17, whatever chapter you're on, just like a book.
But this isn't a book, it's a textbook.
So when you get to the end, it's not going to be like, oh, I never knew it was going
to turn out like that, okay?
I mean, this is a textbook.
It's a text slash reference book.
After you've read through the chapter, then go through it with a fine tooth comb.
Whenever you come to an example or a problem, take out your calculator and do the math and
follow along and do every practice problem.
Keep note of that because that's going to be part of your written assignment.
Then when you're all done with the chapter, then I'd read through it again very, very
quickly just to make sure you retained all that information.
Some of the stuff that we're going to talk about tonight in chapter one like atoms, molecules,
you probably have heard before, right?
The periodic table.
A lot of you have heard that already before.
So keep that in mind that if you're going through the book and the book is talking about stuff
that you already know, you don't need to beat that to death.
And that's actually good because it's going to draw you to focus your attention on those
areas that you don't understand.
And you're going to be able to dump all of your energy into the stuff you don't understand.
Does that make sense?
I mean, it sounds really basic when you think about it like that, but that's really what's
going to be the most effective means of traversing this.
Normally, I will not lecture on a chapter until you've read the chapter, done your homework,
and gotten together in your teams and completed a peer review, right, of your homework.
Once your homework has gone through that process and then you've got completed homework, then
come into lecture because you know what I want to spend my time and lecture, lecturing
on?
What you didn't get out of the book.
What you didn't get out of the assignments.
That's how I want to spend the majority of my time in lecture.
Fair enough?
Okay.
Let's get started.
These slides here actually follow the book.
And these slides, by the way, are available online on the Google site.
The TAs helped you out on how to get that site.
The links are right there in your syllabus.
So what you could do is you could download these from the site to your computer and then
put them on your laptop or home computer and have the same slides that I'm showing you
tonight.
Also, there are audio files of this lecture, an MP3 format, that you could download, Joe
Greenock on MP3, right, and listen to me when you're working out at the gym or running
from the police or whatever it is you do when you listen to MP3s.
And then also, we're going to be adding to this now videotape of the lecture that we've
got our TAs back there working on right now.
So ultimately, we'll be able to upload that.
And the reason that I go out of my way with recordings, with the slides, I've got nothing
to hide.
I've got nothing to hide.
As a matter of fact, I want to give you as much information as I possibly can so that
you could benefit from that information.
And you know what?
How many of you here own any DVDs, your favorite movies?
Why would you own a copy of a movie?
Why would you do that?
Isn't seeing it once good enough?
Why would you go out and buy DVDs of a movie?
Because they're cheap.
Unless they're given away, so it costs money.
What's that?
Yeah.
If you could watch it any time you want, but why specifically would you purchase a particular
movie?
Because it encompasses your interest.
Exactly.
It encompasses your interest.
And for those of you that have movies, how many of you have watched a movie the second
time and picked up stuff out of it the second time around that?
There's some movies I've seen in the theater that I'm like, I got to go out and get that
DVD because I want to see this again.
Yeah, I know how it ends up, but I want to see it because I missed something in the beginning
and I want to look for that thing that I missed in the beginning or whatever.
So it's perfectly natural for you to want to hear this lecture over and over again.
For some of you, once might be good enough.
I go to church on Sunday, my pastor normally, he gets up there and he preaches.
I get it right the first time.
I don't need to hear it again.
For some other people though, and actually at my church they do audio recordings and
then people can listen to that content.
They want to hear it again.
Normally I get it the first time that's the kind of guy that I am, that's the type of
learner that I am.
Look at that.
That's the other thing too with taking notes.
Some of you, it's been a while since you've been in school.
Try to hone your note-taking skills.
When I emphasize something, I'm usually emphasizing it for a reason and that reason is you may
see it again in the future on a quiz, on an exam, but most importantly, you may see it
in industry because one of the things I don't want to do is teach you the exam, teach you
the quiz.
That's not what it's all about.
One of the things that I want to share with you is I'm not really concerned.
I mean, I want all of you to pass my quizzes.
I want you to all pass my exam.
I want you to all pass this class, but to be totally honest with you, do you know how
I measure your success?
I measure your success as to where are you going to be five years from now?
Did I give you anything out of this course that helps you in that position you're in
in five years?
In ten years.
The payoff for me is when you call me and say, Joe, I'm in town or I'm passing through.
I'd like to buy you lunch.
I like lunch.
Swing by, buy me lunch.
Tell me what's going on.
Tell me what you're doing now and how I had an impact on that.
I actually, I went on a cruise over Spring Break, Caribbean.
I was just getting ready to get on the ship and I get all my emails forwarded to my phone
and I got an email from a student that I had in 1993 and he introduced himself and he says,
I don't know if you remember me.
My response back to him, of course I remember you, you know, because again, we established
a relationship, a professional relationship, but he graduated.
He went down to California, kind of dropped off the radar.
He was going to be in the area and was wondering if I'd be available next Friday to get together
and we could visit and I said, Alice, she's unfortunately I'm out of town and, you know,
that is how I measured the success.
Number one, that he remembered me.
Number two, what he learned here is part of his present reality.
So that's what I want all of you to think about.
Yeah, you want to pass the quiz, you want to pass the exam, you want to pass the class,
but where are you really going to use this stuff?
Anyway, kicking things off here, this is section one of the book, section one of the book.
Every of the texts that deals with what are called DC circuits, DC stands for direct
current and we're going to talk about the difference between direct current and alternating
current throughout this.
Chapter one deals with the fundamentals of electricity and I got to tell you that these
first few chapters are like sacred chapters, you know.
We should like ring bells and like hit gongs and chimes or whatever when we speak of some
of this stuff because if you want to be successful in electricity and electronics, these things
that we're going to speak of are critical attributes of what makes stuff work.
As far as I'm concerned, I'm going to let the cat out of the bag from the get go.
The four, the big four things that we're looking at that drive this entire industry are four
properties, the properties are voltage, current, resistance, and power.
Voltage, current, resistance, and power, voltage, current, resistance, and power.
My cell phone works because of voltage, current, resistance, and power.
My car computer works because of voltage, current, resistance, and power.
Satellite TV works because of voltage, current, resistance, and power.
Anything electrical or electronic works because of those four.
So what we really need to ensure is that these four properties that we're going to discuss,
we fully understand up one side and down the other.
As I said earlier, I've been doing this like since puberty, so you would think that I know
everything there is to know about voltage, current, resistance, and power, no, I do not.
Occasionally I get questions from students that are associated with those properties
that I can't quite answer, even though I've been doing this for so long.
So I'm on a continual journey to learn as much as I can about those four properties.
So we're going to kick things off of chapter one here, dealing with the fundamentals of
electricity, but pay special attention to those four properties, voltage, current, resistance,
and power, the big four, I like to call them the big four, because they are the big four.
It's what everything is based on.
If you know what's going on with voltage, current, resistance, and power, you know what's
going on inside the circuit, we're going to talk about that.
So kicking things off, fundamentals of electricity.
One of the things that I do at the start of every lecture is I review the objectives.
The objectives that I review are the same objectives that are on the syllabus.
That's a pretty good reason why I selected this textbook to use.
Although there's errors in this textbook, although it's not the best textbook on the
face of the planet, the objectives in the textbook reflect the objectives in the syllabus.
One of the other things I want you to fully understand is I don't teach the textbook.
I teach the curriculum.
The curriculum is contained in the syllabus.
The curriculum is derived through input from our local industry advisory committee.
This is a group of volunteers that get together on a regular basis, sit down and tell us what
we need to be doing for this program to stay competitive.
This book works really good because you're going to do all the chapters in it, but occasionally
in the future you may get some textbooks that the instructor is going to say you don't need
to do this chapter.
Why?
It's not part of the curriculum.
Local industry really doesn't think it's important that you learn that aspect of it.
So does that make sense?
One of the reasons that I review the objectives as well is to prepare you for what you're
about to receive.
It's like formatting your hard drive so that when I start talking about this stuff, you're
kind of like ready to store that information away on your hard drive, your mental hard
drive, your brain.
So let's take a look at this here.
Objectives after completing this chapter, the student will be able to define matter,
element, and molecule.
There's three questions right off the quiz.
Define matter, define element, define molecule.
It's an objective.
I hope at the end of this chapter you can define those.
Notice the parts of an atom.
Define the valence shell of an atom and identify the unit for measuring current.
Draw the symbol used to represent current flow in a circuit.
Describe the difference between conductors and insulators and semiconductors.
Define difference of potential, electromotive force, and voltage.
Voltage.
Wasn't that one of the big four?
So again, if this was like church would be ringing bells or gong, you know, we'll talk
about projects later.
Some of you may want to build sound effects so that we could, you know, whenever we do
that stuff, or dim the lights, voltage.
Draw the symbol used to represent voltage.
Identify the unit used to measure voltage.
To measure voltage.
Define resistance, gong.
For the big four.
Identify characteristics of resistance, gong, in a circuit.
Identify the unit for measuring resistance and draw the symbol used to represent resistance
in a circuit.
Everything you are about to learn as it pertains to electricity and electronics is traceable
back to matter.
Do any of you here know anything about matter?
Do you know what matters?
Matter is anything that occupies space and has weight.
Does anybody know where we could find the absence of matter?
Does anybody know?
Can we create this condition here on planet Earth?
Vacuum.
And I'm not talking about the auric five pound upright.
I don't think that's what you're talking about, right?
What kind of vacuum are you talking about?
It's called industrial vacuum.
And in essence, what we're talking about is pumping all of the matter out of a vessel.
So that all is that's left inside is space, empty space.
It's used a lot, a lot of you that go into high tech careers, you're going to see this
process used in the manufacturing process because it allows us to only put into the
chamber what we want to be into the chamber.
Where can we find a large abundance of an absence of matter?
Space.
And you know the odd thing about it is that's why it's called space.
Because there's no matter.
There's no matter.
Now if you're in a spaceship traveling through space and you roll the window down and you
stick your butterfly net out and you pick up some cosmic debris in your butterfly net,
pretty odd thing to do, down a space suit if you're going to roll the window down in
the spaceship.
But if you find any cosmic debris in your net, that means that you have found matter.
Because if it's something and it occupies space and it has weight, therefore it's matter.
Have any of you heard of antimatter?
We will not be talking about that here in this program.
I used to think it was science fiction until I was talking about it in a lecture like this
and I had a student raise their hand and we're not going to talk about it because I don't
know anything, you know, the absence of matter, antimatter, the opposite of matter.
And he brought in an article the next week about a NASA project and these NASA teams
are all about funding.
So all these PhDs and all these scientists, it's all about getting money for them to continue
their research.
Well NASA was running out of money and there was a particular group that was doing research
and they were going to get their operation shut down.
So as soon as they all were basically put on notice, you all are no longer going to
have a job at NASA.
They're like, oh geez, you know, that's too bad, you know, that's really bad.
Well, why is it so bad?
Well, we just discovered a cloud of antimatter and we think it's headed this way, you know.
So right away, you know, NASA gives them more money to continue the research and somewhere
in my archives, I've actually got a picture of this antimatter cloud that, you know, I
mean who knows if it even exists, but obviously if antimatter collides with matter, they cancel
each other out.
So if there was antimatter cloud that inundated our solar system, we'd be gone.
You know, I don't know where we'd go, but this is what they say.
Enough said, we won't be talking about antimatter in this class.
We're more concerned about matter.
Now the basic building block of all matter that we're aware of, and this is really interesting,
is what's known as an element.
An element can be found on the periodic table.
I must not be a real professor.
If I was a real professor, I'd have one of those pull down charts that's got the periodic
table in all the squares, you know.
That's the sign of a true professor.
I don't have one of those.
I could probably call it up on my computer screen, but it wouldn't be the same of having
one of those pull down charts where you go with the pointer, right?
And you've all seen that.
You all know what I'm talking about, right?
Probably saw it back in elementary school.
Elements of the basic building block in nature cannot be reduced to a simpler substance by
chemical means.
And believe it or not, there are only about a hundred known elements in existence, period.
That means me, you, that desktop, the chair, a cow, a monkey, a sports car, an airplane,
were all made up of a hundred of the same ingredients, period.
Isn't that amazing?
When I was one of the things they really didn't know about going to the moon, were they going
to go to the moon and find some new element?
They went to the moon and they found the same stuff we got here on Earth.
So basically, the assumption is in the scientific community that really, the entire universe
is made up of about a hundred of the same ingredients.
I mean, I got more crap in my pantry at home, spices, seasonings, you know, I got all kinds
of stuff all over the place.
But the fundamental essence of it all, a hundred plus elements, period.
Everything's made up of those same hundred plus ingredients.
Now, we're really focused on the parts of an atom.
So when we have an element, the smallest particle that we could break that element down into
and have it retain its identity is an atom.
So I know you think I'm going all wacky like chemistry, onion, everything, okay?
Bear with me.
We have to understand the essence of matter so that we get electricity out of matter.
That's where we're going with this.
The first part of the atom you need to understand is called the nucleus and the nucleus is not
even really a part.
I misspoke that.
It's not a part, it's a place and that place is simply the center of the atom.
The first true subatomic particle that we're going to talk about is the proton.
Proton is a positively charged particle that's located in the nucleus, okay?
And I just said something that's very, very significant.
I just said the word positively charged.
For the first time in this program, we just spoke of something that has an electrical
characteristic, a positive charge.
So proton has a positive charge.
The other subatomic particle that's located in the nucleus of an atom is called the neutron.
And neutrons are uncharged particles, meaning no charge.
One of the ways that I remember it always is proton, positively charged.
Both start with the letter P. Neutron, no, no, no, no, no, neutrally charged, okay?
They're not positive or negative, they're uncharged, they're neutrally charged.
That's where they're called neutrons.
Electrons, well, that's the other subatomic particle.
And if one's charged positive and one is neutral, then therefore the electron must be negatively
charged particles.
The electron actually orbits the nucleus where the protons and the neutrons are located.
This is a very, very significant slide.
Remember earlier I shared with you a little bit about my background?
I wasn't the sharpest tool in the shed.
And as a matter of fact, when I was in the Navy on active duty, my uniform, the Navy,
even if you sail on a cruise ship, you have a symbol that identifies what division you're
part of.
And for me, I had on my arm my chevrons, you know, that signified, you know, my rank.
But then I had a helium atom on my arm.
And that helium atom was to signify matter.
And the helium atom with the electron orbiting around the outside was to signify electrons
orbiting the nucleus.
Why?
Because I was an electronic technician.
And I basically went for like three years of my career before I realized, why is there
like an atom on my arm, okay?
What does that mean?
What it means is the electrons orbiting the nucleus because I was a subject matter expert,
a technician on the behavior of electrons.
That's what you're all here to learn.
If you're here to learn about electronics, you're here to study the behavior of the electron.
And that's what we're really going to talk about.
Makes sense?
One of the things I do not want you to study while you're here in this program.
And I'm pretty open-minded.
If you want to go off and do some projects and stuff like that, I'm all about it.
One of the things I really don't want you doing is anything with the nucleus of the
atom, okay?
And if you plan on doing anything with the nucleus of the atom, give me fair warning.
And I think I'll stay in federal way that day, okay?
And then you can have at it and try to split the atom or do whatever it is you're going
to do.
But when you start playing around with the nucleus of the atom, bad things happen.
As electronics professionals, we're only going to play around with electrons.
As a matter of fact, we're only going to play around with certain electrons.
I'm going to share what those electrons are with you in a moment.
This is kind of sort of what it looks like, maybe.
This is an artist's depiction, and the scale is really, really off.
The proton is a very big particle.
The neutron is a very big particle.
So the nucleus, this is kind of working, okay?
This is kind of working for me.
The electron, though, is not the same physical size as the proton.
The electron would be like the spot of my laser pointer.
But in actuality, if this truly was the neutron and the proton, I don't think the spot of
my laser pointer would even be in the room anymore.
That's how far the orbit is around the nucleus.
I heard it once explained as like a cathedral.
If you had the size of a grapefruit in the center of the cathedral, the electrons orbiting
would actually be like on the outer walls.
It'd be, you know, really, really far out there.
So the scales here are off, but this gives you an idea of what's going on.
One thing I want you to understand also is that all matter, when in its neutral, natural
state, has an equal number of protons and electrons.
Protons are positively charged, electrons are negatively charged.
They're equal numbers, so they cancel each other out.
That means that matter is in a neutral, natural state.
Did that answer your question?
You had a balanced, so there's an equal number of electrons and protons in atoms until we
do something to it.
We're going to talk about that in a minute, too, because we're not just going to let everything
stay in a neutral, natural state.
If we did, we wouldn't have, we'd be out of jobs.
We wouldn't have current flow.
It'd be a drag.
A couple of the numbers that you need to familiarize yourself with.
And one of the things that I want to stress to you is that all of you are here taking
electronics courses.
You're here to learn the language of electricity and electronics.
That's really what it is.
It's like taking a second language.
I've actually had a lot of students that speak different languages, and English is a second
language, and they wonder if they could come in and do it, and say, yeah, you could come
in and do it.
Because you know what, what I'm talking about here is another language.
So one of the technical terms that we may use in the future is a number called atomic
number.
An atomic number simply is the number of protons in the nucleus of the atom.
And every one of those hundred plus elements that I talked to you about earlier has a unique
number of protons.
You don't have two different elements that have the same number of protons.
So the scientific community embraced this, and they said, you know what?
Why don't we just use the number of protons, and that's going to give it its position on
the periodic table.
Make sense?
Okay.
The next number I want you to familiarize yourself with is the atomic weight.
And the atomic weight deals with the mass of the atom.
It's weight.
It's physical weight.
And remember when I said that protons and neutrons were big, and they were contained
in the nucleus, and the electron was just like a little tiny subatomic particle orbiting
way outside.
Basically, to end up with atomic weight, all you do is count up the total number of protons
and neutrons in the nucleus.
Count that up.
That gives you the atomic weight.
Every weight of every element on the periodic table is unique.
And basically, the mass of the electron is so insignificant, we don't even take that
into account in determining the atomic weight.
Make sense?
Now, this is where things get interesting.
First term, shell.
This isn't the kind of shell you find by the seashore.
What we're talking about here for shells is simply an orbital path around the nucleus.
This is where the electrons orbit.
They form concentric circles around the nucleus, and they're filled in sequence.
Have any of you here been to a parking garage, like down at SeaTac Airport or Bellevue Square
or, you know, I don't know about you, and I'm, again, not the smartest guy, but normally
I want to park at, like, the first level like I find a space at.
So what I'll do is I'll go to the first level and I'll drive around, and if I can't find
a parking space, where do I go?
Up to the next level, okay?
And then I drive around, and if I can't find a space there, where do I go?
The next level, and I keep doing that.
This is how shells are filled in atomic structure.
When the first shell gets filled, then electrons start going out to the second shell, and then
the next shell, and then the next shell.
So our most complex atoms in existence have electrons in shells that are way out there,
because they have the highest number of electrons.
And the higher the number of electrons, the higher the number of protons, because remember
they have to be equal.
Make sense?
Now, the shell that most, should most concern you is this valence shell.
This is the outermost shell.
If it's a complex atom, it may be way out there.
If it's a simple atom, it's going to be real close to the nucleus.
And I'll talk to you in a minute why that's, it's important for two different reasons.
The number of electrons contained in the valence shell also refers to the term valence.
Now, this is the scheme that they came up with in naming the shells.
If we have a simple atom, let's say we've got an atom that contains one electron.
That one electron is going to be parked in the lowest level.
And we're not going to call it the lowest level, no, that'd be too easy.
We're not going to, we're not going to park it in what's called the first shell, because
that would be too easy.
You're here to attend college, okay, to get educated.
So we've got to not call this the first shell or the A shell.
We're going to call this innermost shell the K shell.
Why?
I don't know.
It helps us educated people justify our existence.
After the K shell comes the, this, this is the part that actually makes sense to me.
After K comes L, M, N, O, P, Q, so I did okay with the alphabet, so it kind of makes sense.
So what this means is the Q shell, the most complex element that we have found in the
universe contains electrons in the Q shell.
Does that make sense?
If it's a simpler element, an element with a lower atomic number, that means it's going
to have electrons maybe only in some of these shells.
But we have to fill a sequence first, fill this K shell before we bump an electron up
into the L shell.
When L gets filled, and some of you that have maybe taken chemistry and some physics classes
know there's a certain number, I don't want you to memorize that.
That's not going to help you become an electronics professional.
And just remember there is a limit of how many electrons you could park in a shell before
the electrons have to go into the outer shell.
Now why am I talking to you about all of this stuff?
Again, this was a question that plagued me for about three years since I was educated,
like why were they teaching me about all the subatomic stuff?
I'm not going to be some mad scientist, you know?
Why do I need to know about the periodic table?
Why do I need to know about subatomic structure?
You know, I want to learn how to use a multimeter to take voltage readings.
I want to know how to use an oscilloscope to take readings.
Why do I have to understand subatomic shrubber?
Two reasons you need to understand subatomic structure.
Number one is so you could identify the properties of materials that we use in electronics.
That's first and foremost.
Secondly, you need to understand where voltage comes from.
And we're going to talk about that in a minute.
First let's talk about some of these materials and their properties.
Conductors.
How many of you are familiar with conductors?
Conductors.
That's the guy that runs the train, right, that's the conductor.
Actually saw that the other night.
What's that?
Movie?
Unstoppable?
How many of you have seen the movie Unstoppable?
Train?
It was actually a pretty good movie.
You haven't seen that one?
Yeah, it was good.
Wasn't it?
Train?
Running out of control?
Based on true stories.
It was based on a true story, you know.
Let's set the throttle and jump off the train and switch the track and jump back on it.
It just didn't work out very well.
Anyway, that's not even what we're talking about.
Conductors.
We're not talking about train conductors.
We're talking about conductors, electrical conductors.
Materials that readily accept the flow of electrons or electricity, if you will.
Categorically, the textbook says they're materials that contain a large number of free electrons.
However, I want you to think of it in a different way.
When I speak of conductors, I am speaking of materials that have three or fewer electrons
in the valence shell.
And by the way, in this class, in this program, the only shell that you will ever work with
for safety reasons is the valence shell.
If you plan to experiment beyond the valence shell, again, let me know, and I'll probably
stay home that day, okay?
So it's only the valence shell.
So if you've got an element that has three or fewer electrons in the valence shell, it's
going to potentially be a good conductor.
Now, in order of precedence, the material that has the best conductivity or conductance
is that of silver.
Silver, believe it or not, that's the best, found in nature.
Out of all the elements, silver is the best.
Gold by copper, gold, aluminum, tungsten, iron, nichrome, okay?
Silver is the best.
If silver is the best, why when you buy a stereo, why when you buy audio-video equipment, do
they try to sell you gold-plated patch cords?
Okay?
We've got one response, they're money, yeah?
They could get more money out of you.
It's corrosion, it's, silver has a higher corrosive potential than gold.
Absolutely.
Absolutely.
And copper is a little bit more corrosive than gold, but not as much as silver.
So basically, gold is the least likely to oxidize and corrode.
So when we get copper wire and plate it with gold, we get a good conductor, because gold
is still a good conductor, but it won't oxidize.
If you're scuba diving in the Caribbean and you find a treasure chest full of gold that's
been sunken, hundreds of years underwater, and you dig it out of the sand and you open
it up underwater, salt water, hundreds of years, you open it up, you would know that
you found gold, because it would look as good as the day that that treasure chest fell off
the pirate ship.
If you found a treasure chest under the ocean in the Caribbean and it was filled with silver
and you pried it open, you'd be like, oh, what happened in there?
Because it's all oxidized.
Of course, there's still good silver in there, but the exterior would be oxidized.
So that is why we use gold-plated connectors.
Don't oxidize.
We live in an oxygen-rich environment, so if I could have gold-plated connector to connector
and I could mate the two, I'm going to get the best possible electrical connection that
I can.
Now, do you really need to go out and buy those gold-plated audio-video connectors?
It's actually kind of funny, because I've seen a lot of people go out and spend good
money on those, and then they plug it into the back of a dusty amplifier.
It would have been better for you to go out and get some technical-grade alcohol, clean
the male-female connectors, connect them, and you'd get a better electrical connection.
Now, in a perfect world, a totally clean gold to totally clean gold, clean, nice, no dust,
is going to give you a superior connection.
We actually learned a lot of this was developed in the space program, because think about
it, to basically send people to the moon and have them get back and have those electronic
circuit boards needed to be highly reliable.
This is where NASA started playing around with everything is interconnected.
You can't permanently wire everything up.
You have to have boards and sockets, and everything is interconnected like that.
NASA did a lot of research, and I said, hey, we played the stuff with gold.
We'll be golden, you know, and literally that started that whole trend in electronics.
A lot of the circuit boards and stuff that you buy, your computer motherboard, your video
card have gold plating on it, so they make that connection, and it's a highly reliable
connection.
Big thing I want you to remember, though, three or fewer electrons in a valence shell.
Insulators are materials that prevent the flow of electricity.
The textbook says they're stabilized by absorbing valence electrons.
The material found on planet Earth that has the highest insulative quality in nature is
mica.
Any of you know what mica is?
It's found in rock formations.
It's very fragile.
It's a good thermal insulator, and it's a good electrical insulator.
A lot of times it's found in quartz formations, and it's almost like paper, like you can kind
of peel.
There's one layer and another layer and another layer, but it's highly fragile.
That for thickness is the best insulator that we have found in nature.
That's why it's at the top of the list.
That's what we compare everything to.
Glass is high, but not as high as mica, followed by Teflon paper, wax paper, which is used
in the manufacturing of some of the electronic components.
Rubber, bake light.
I know what bake light is.
Bake light is like the handle on your toaster oven, and when you drop it, it chips it, and
you can't glue it back together.
It's not only a good electrical insulator, it's a good thermal insulator.
It's that black stuff that, again, you chip on your pots and pans, and you can't fix.
Isn't that the original form of plastic?
They started now?
Yes.
It is one of the original forms of plastic, if you will, that they used as a composite,
if you will.
Oils.
A lot of oils are used.
They used to use a lot of oils that had a lot of poison in them for electrical transformers,
but we kind of got out of that because oil is an insulator.
It's nice because oil will draw heat away from circuits.
If you had a circuit submerged in oil, if any, what do you call them, computer heads
here, PC files, you know.
One of the big problems we know with PCs are heat, the generation of heat in the processing.
So one of the big things is if you could super cool a computer, you'd get more performance
out of that computer.
So if we got the computer, don't try it again with my computers, but if we got it and submerged
it into a vat of oil, and then we cooled the oil and recirculated it, we could draw more
heat away from the circuit, and then we could start bumping up the speed of the computer
and in the industry, overdrive the chip.
Ask more of the chip than what it's rated for.
Yeah.
Porcelain.
And of course, air.
Air is an insulator, isn't it?
If you've driven under power lines, what's between the power lines?
Air.
I don't know if you've ever driven under or walked.
Do some walking, hiking under the BPA power lines down south, and on a day that's damp,
you could actually hear the zzzz, it's like, wow.
Air is the insulator, and I guess it ain't working too good right now.
Hope it doesn't arc to me.
There's also a category of materials that are called semi-conductors.
conductors are materials that could be altered to function as either a conductor
or an insulator. Let me go back, I left out one thing here. Insulators are
materials that have five or more electrons in the valence shell. Five or
more electrons in the valence shell. So conductors were three or fewer, insulators
five or more. Anybody want to take a wild guess what a semi-conductor might be?
One that could be altered to function as either a conductor or an insulator. If you
want to take a wild guess. Four, you all could have been scientists back in the
1940s. Because that's basically what they came to the conclusion. We know the
properties of conductors. We know the properties of insulators. What happens if
we start playing around with something that has four electrons in the valence
shell? We could get it maybe to swing both ways depending on how we want it to
behave at that moment in time. And as you know, semi-conductors are the
fundamental building block of diodes and transistors. Transistors are the
fundamental building block of computer microprocessors. It's all a
microprocessor is. Now, in essence, billions of transistors on something the
size of a postage stamp. Made of materials that have four electrons in the
valence shell. Those materials that you're going to study later on in the
program, not real important now for you to know, but I think you'll recognize one
of the names. Germanium? That's not geraniums, that's what grows in the
gardens. Germanium, it's an element. Carbon, that's an element. And the most
prevalent? Silicon. Silicon Valley. You've all heard of Silicon Valley? Have any of
you know where Silicon Valley is? Have you ever been there? Vast mountains of
silicon everywhere. Now, it's fabrication facilities, labs, okay? You're talking
about the bay area. Make sense? And what they did is they harnessed the power of
semi-conductors and made transformers, or transistors, excuse me, not
transformers. It's another, it's another line. Trust me, we'll enjoy that lecture
when we get to it. The other big thing I want to address with you is negative ion,
positive ion. Because in essence, this is where voltage comes from. This is where
voltage comes from. If I get this calculator here on the desktop, it's
just been sitting on the desktop all day. It's just your average every day
calculator. I assume that since it was sitting on the, on the desktop, minding
its own business, it's electrically in a neutral, natural state. Because this
calculator is made up of matter, which is made up of elements. Sitting here,
neutral, natural state. So if I get this now, and I start rubbing it, I start
rubbing it. What effect do you think that's going to have on the calculator?
I'm cleaning it. No, it's a different class. That program's down the hall. Go
out the double doors. Static electricity causes friction. The friction does what?
Creates charge. How? And why?
Through the resistance of the fabric going across the plaster.
Close. Somehow. Close, kind of.
The difference of the electrical potential, and that you're rubbing that
cloth on the class calculator, which creates charge on there. And then when you
touch it, you're less charged than the cloth.
Yeah, that's pretty good. That's pretty good. In essence, by me rubbing this and
applying friction, which is a form of energy, when I apply energy to matter, and
I rub this, there's a pretty good chance that I am going to knock some subatomic
particles. Which ones? Electrons, off of what shell?
Valence shell. If I rub this so hard that smoke starts coming out of it and it bursts
into flames, chances are I've gone in too far. But if I just rub the valence shells
and I knock some of those electrons from this onto this, now we've got a disparity.
Now no longer. If I've removed electrons from something that was neutral, natural,
and I've taken electrons from it, what is the predominant positive? Why?
Exactly. Now I'm left with more protons on this than I have electrons. It wasn't a
neutral natural state, so I started rubbing it. So that's exactly what I've done.
So I just made this a positive ion. I just made this a positive ion by removing electrons from it.
If this was also in a neutral natural state until I started monkeying with it,
now I rubbed electrons from the calculator onto the cloth. What does this mean for the cloth?
It's now negatively charged. Why is that? Because it contains more electrons than it had
when it was in its neutral natural state. Now you know what? When I do this, when I do this,
both of these items, I don't want to make it sound like they have consciousness or whatever,
but their whole freaking goal in life now is to get back into a neutral natural state.
They cannot wait until I put them together and the electrons could jump off the cloth
back onto the calculator and they could be at rest in a neutral natural state in a perfect world.
Does that make sense? What I just shared with you is how we generate electricity.
That's how we generate electricity. In order for us to generate electricity, we must apply
energy to matter. When we apply enough energy to matter, we could knock electrons off
the valence shell, gather them, and then say, hey, what? You want to get back to the positive?
Have I got a deal for you? Come, travel through my circuit, make this light bulb,
illuminate, and I'll give you a complete path back to your neutral natural state.
That's what we end up doing as a career, making sure electrons that were harnessed
are ready, able, and willing to do work for us, and then we make sure that they follow the correct
path and do something for us. We just don't let them complete the path. If you're just letting
them complete the path, that's called a short circuit. Okay? That's not a good thing. We'll
talk more about that in future chapters. We just want to make sure that the electrons follow the
path and complete that path. Makes sense? Very critical. Talked about two big things already,
the properties of materials we use in electronics, and also the property of how we create voltage or
electricity. There's one other thing here the book does not go into. There's a
we have conductors, we have insulators, we have semiconductors. There's a fourth property that's
floating around out there in science right now. Does anybody know what property I'm talking about?
Superconductor. Superconductor. Very good. Very good. A superconductor, all of these, whether
you're a conductor, whether you're an insulator, whether you're a semiconductor, you have one
property associated with you. Everything has that property associated with it. It's a property of
resistance. We're going to talk about it in a bit. There is a material that exists. It's called a
superconductor. It has no resistance. The problem is, does anybody know where it exists?
It is at low temperatures, so therefore where it's going to exist is in a laboratory. They don't
have it operating at room temperature. I can't bring you next door and give you a tour of my
superconductor that I have set up over on a bench over here. I could if I had a cryogenics plant,
and I was a research facility and playing around with it. But when they harness superconductivity,
it's really going to rewrite the textbooks on how we manage electricity and electronics.
You think Bill Gates got a lot of money? The dude that captures and harnesses superconductivity
at room temperature, it's going to be very, very wealthy. Very, very wealthy.
Make sense? By the way, does anybody know what material they're having the best luck with
as it pertains to superconductivity? What's that? Graphene, they're doing some stuff with that.
That's not the best results yet. Believe it or not, it is ceramic. Ceramic at room temperature
is an insulator. It's a great insulator. We use it as an electrical insulator,
but when they bring these ceramics to really, really cold extreme temperatures,
they take on conductive properties, and they conduct with no resistance. Pretty cool.
Ionization, that's the process I described. It's the process of gaining and losing electron,
and it's significant in current flow.
Okay, without ionization, you wouldn't have voltage. Without voltage, you would not have
current flow. Current, again, we should ring bells.
Current is the movement of electrons from negatively charged atoms to positively charged
atoms. The letter that we use to abbreviate current with is the capital letter i, capital letter i.
One of the terms we need to familiarize ourselves with when dealing with these
electrical properties is the term coulomb. We'll talk more about the coulomb next chapter,
but what a coulomb is is 6.24 times 10 to the 18th electrons. This is a big, huge number.
This is basically 6.24 and 16 zeros after that four. It's too big to fit in your calculator.
That's why we refer to it in this as an engineering notation. We'll talk more about
engineering notation again in future chapters, because we get you used to dealing with these
extreme numbers. In electronics, we deal with a lot of extreme numbers, and we represent it
with the capital letter c. Now, in ampere, named after André-Marie Ampere, French physicist,
one coulomb, that big number of electrons, 6.24 with 16 zeros after it, that number of electrons
moving past a single point in one second is called the ampere. Have you all familiar with the term
ampere before? If you've ever burnt out a fuse, you make sure you get the fuse that's the proper
ampere rating. If you pop your circuit breaker, you need to make sure when you're resetting it
that you're not overloading the circuit and exceeding the amperage rating of the circuit.
And what that is is physically a given number of electrons that you're forcing through a conductor
in one second's time. One coulomb per second is one ampere. 15 coulombs per second is 15 amperes.
We'll talk again more next chapter on that. Currents measure in ampere is that it's represented
by the capital letter a. So if you go out to your fuse box in your car and pull a fuse out,
it says 15a next to it, that stands for 15 amps. Universally accepted. Universally accepted.
Potential, the ability of a source to perform electrical work. What we're talking about here
with potential is voltage. Difference in potential causes electrons to move or flow in a circuit.
This is referred to as EMF or Electromotive Force or Voltage. EMF, Electromotive Force,
Voltage, Difference in Potential, they're all synonymous.
Voltage, ring bells, chimes, hit the gong, is the force that moves electrons in the circuit.
It's the pressure or pump that moves electrons, represented by the capital letter e or the
capital letter v. Whether you use e or v, here the textbook uses e, you could use v if you want,
as long as you know what we're talking about. It's universally accepted. The unit of measure is called
the Volt. Resistance, the opposition to the flow of electrons, the degree of resistance depends on
size, shape, and temperature, and it's measured in ohms. Named after George Simon Ohm, represented
by the Greek letter omega. One of the things I want you to familiarize yourself with is,
you know what has resistance? Everything, everything except superconductors. And superconductors
only exist in the laboratory right now. Hopefully when you buy an extension cord,
that extension cord has a low amount of resistance. Okay? Hopefully when you buy new spark plug wires
for your car and they're insulated, hopefully the outside of the spark plug wires has a high
amount of resistance. Make sense? Conductors have low resistance to current flow. That's why
they're called conductors. They have many free electrons to transfer the energy. Insulators
have high resistance to current flow, very few electrons. In summary, tonight we talked about
matter. We talked about elements, the fundamental building block in nature. We talked about atomic
structure, specifically subatomic particles and a place, right? Nucleus is not a particle, it's a
place, which that place contains the protons, the neutrons, and the electrons. Protons are
positively charged, neutrons are neutrally charged, and electrons, well those are the other ones,
they're negatively charged. We talked about atomic number, number of protons in an atom. Atomic
weight, number of protons, and number of neutrons in an atom. We talked about shell. These are the
orbital arrangements of the electrons, starting with the K shell, going all the way up to the Q
shell. We talked about ionization, the process of taking things out of a neutral natural state.
We talked about current. Current is the flow of electrons from negative to positive. Why?
Because it wants to get back into a neutral natural state. We talked about the coulomb,
6.24 times 10 to the 18th electrons. It's a number of electrons, like a dozen eggs,
a bushel of apples, a gallon of gasoline.
We talked about the ampere. The ampere is one coulomb per second. We talked about electronic
or electric current that is measured in the ampere. And then finally we talked about potential or
electromotive force. What we're talking about there is difference in potential or voltage.
Does anybody have any questions on anything that I covered in a lecture for chapter one?
Going once. Going twice.
What's that?
Yes, these slides are on the website. The audio recording is on the website,
and eventually we're going to get the video uploaded as well.
But the content will remain the same.
New Google site. Any other questions? Going once, going twice, going, going.
The new Google site. The last one that's listed there, the HTTPS sites, google.com,
LWTC electronics. I've got that turned on. Anybody with the address should be able to get in there.
We haven't uploaded this material to it yet, but it should be there.
So I'm like messed up. Is that what you're saying? All right. I messed up. Cool. Cool.
That's why you got the job as TA. You're here to keep me honest. Any other questions? Once, twice?
I honestly don't know. I mean, it's pretty far down. It is a conductor, of course.
It's real close on a periodic table. It's amazingly close to silver.
And that's why actually in solder, we used to contain lead, but because lead is lead,
and it's bad, they realized it was really, really bad. So we pulled it out of solder,
but it was used to join in complete electrical circuits. So it's pretty high.
I don't know its actual conductivity value, but it's pretty high.
And once, going twice, going, going. Go on. We're black.
The next questions that I have for ELEC 110, Chapter 1, you'll be answering for me on a quiz.
But don't worry. Well, you'll have another week or so before we take the quiz. I'll coordinate
with the class lead on that. Any other questions about protocol? Anything else we're doing here?
All right. I'm going to go ahead and cut you loose. We don't
know. Okay. Last week, wrapping up lecture, we're talking about electrical insulators.
We're talking about conductors, things of this nature, right? I dug out of my archives here.
Remember, I talked to you about mica? mica? I found my stash, my private stash of mica.
Please be very careful passing this around. It actually kind of flakes off, so you can
just handle it, look at it. This is found in nature. It's found in rock formations.
And this is the best insulator found in nature. This is a washer, an insulator washer that's
been made out of mica. Okay, so we'll pass these things around so you can see. But these are very
fragile. Don't try to bend it. You'll break it. It's almost like a real thin piece of glass,
if you will. So this is mica in the raw, and this is a processed piece that could be used as an
electrical insulator. So cool stuff. So anybody have any questions on anything else before we get
started here? Chapter number two. Okay, just to get us kind of ramped up from where we left off
last week. Really started our discussions last week talking about the fundamental properties
of electricity. And that discussion really started off with a discussion about matter.
Matter is everything. If there is no matter, the absence of matter is called space. We could
recreate the absence of matter here on planet Earth by using an industrial vacuum chamber.
That's where we pump all the gases out of the chamber, and we're left with nothing inside.
Industrial vacuum is used a lot in industry, in the manufacturing process, so that they could
remove everything from it and only introduce those materials that they want to be inside the
chamber. Remember that discussion? The next thing we talked about, which is very, very critical,
are the properties, the fundamental physics properties, if you will, of materials that are
used in electrical and electronics applications. The most popular that we talked about is the
conductor. The conductor is a material that has three or fewer valence electrons, electrons in
the valence shell. That means basically we talked about it like a parking garage. There's room for
electrons to park in this valence shell, therefore it's going to make it a good conductor. Materials
that have five or more electrons in the valence shell are good insulators, like that piece of
mica that we're passing around right now. If you looked at that, you'd see, again, more than five
electrons in the valence shell. That means if you're a free electron, you're not going to have any
place to park on that piece of mica. We also talked about semiconductor materials. Those are materials
that have four electrons in the valence shell, and for those of you that continue on in this program,
ELEC 120, that's right where we're going to pick up the discussion, back to fundamental properties
of physics as it pertains to materials. If any of you were in the classroom the other night last
week, I gave that lecture to ELEC 120, and we were talking about these fundamental properties,
subatomic structure, because that discussion was all about solid state materials, silicon,
germanium that we use in the manufacturing of transistors and integrated circuits.
The other big thing we talked about is, in essence, the beginning, the creation of electricity.
When we have matter and we impart energy on matter, we could knock an electron off
that valence shell. When we knock an electron off that valence shell, we end up with what's known as
a positive ion, a positive ion, because remember in nature, matter is typically in a neutral state.
That means it has an equal number of protons and an equal number of electrons. Remember that?
That's how we end up with the atomic weight. Atomic weight or atomic number? Which one is it?
A is weight, B is number on the quiz. C is both. D is none of the above. Which one's it going to be?
The number of protons is number. So that number, whatever number of protons we have,
we also have the same number of electrons. That's what puts it in a neutral natural state.
So when I impart energy on matter and I knock an electron off, now I have more protons that have
a positive charge than I have electrons in the atom that makes it a positive ion. In essence,
what I just did is created electricity. That's what electricity is. Electricity is also playing
energy to matter, knocking an electron off, gathering those electrons and then saying,
hey electrons, have I got a deal for you? You want to get back to your parent atom
and get it into a neutral natural state? Come this way. Go through this circuit. Do a little bit
of work for me and then I'll give you a path back to neutrality. And the electrons, they do this.
So part of your careers in the electronics industry is going to be simply managing
the behavior of electrons, making sure the electrons do what they're supposed to do.
I guess that's why they call this electronics, electronics, the study of the behavior of the
electron. So this is all about. The other thing we talked about last week briefly was the coulomb,
a unit of measure. A coulomb is like a gallon of gas, a dozen eggs, a bushel of apples.
A coulomb is 6.24 times 10 to the 18th electrons. It's a big, huge, herken number of electrons.
There was a guy by the name of Charles de Coulomb. He was counting electrons for a living and then he
died. And then he said, hey, anybody here want to continue on Chuck's work? Anyone? Anyone? All
right, we'll just call it even. We'll call the number that he came up with, 6.24 times 10 to
the 18th. We'll call that a coulomb. One coulomb per second is the ampere that was that was put
together by a guy by the name of Charles. Charles ampere? No, André ampere. Another Frenchman
or beret. André Marie ampere. And you know what? Universally that's accepted. See, the amazing
thing, I enjoy travel, travel all around the world. People speak different languages. We use
different coins, different monetary values. When it comes to current worldwide, the ampere
is the accepted value that we use, no matter where you go. So those of you that are learning
or if you have English as a second language and you struggle with this, we're all learning
a new language. It's the language of electronics. And the word we're going to study tonight
is current. Current. And you already know kind of a little bit about current based on our lecture
last week. Well, we're going to pull back to curtains and study a little bit more tonight.
After completing this chapter, you're going to be able to state two laws of electrostatic charges.
I'm going to give you a heads up. Anytime you see the word law, you should like sit up straight
and take note. Because if it's a law, the type of laws we're talking about here are not laws that
we could go to Olympia and have repealed. They're not talking about laws that we could go to the
Supreme Court and have overturned. That actually would be kind of fun, wouldn't it? Go to Washington,
D.C. Students from Lake Washington Technical College in Kirkland, Washington protested today
outside the Capitol to have the laws of physics repealed. We can't. These are laws of physics.
Okay? So these electrostatic charge laws are kind of critical. We're going to be able to define
coulomb. Identify the unit used to measure current flow. Define the relationship of amps,
coulombs, and time through formula. Describe how current flows in a circuit. Describe how electrons
travel in a conductor. Define and use scientific notation. And identify commonly used prefixes
for powers of ten. Some of you may be familiar with this law. You've probably heard it before.
The first law of electrostatic charges are like charges repel each other.
Have all of you heard that one before? Okay? The other thing that you're probably familiar
with is like opposites attract. Right? Opposites attract. That's not only in relationships. That's
actually the laws of electrostatic charges. Opposites attract is actually the second law
of electrostatic charges. So if I got a negative and a negative, they're going to oppose each other.
If I have a positive and a positive, they're going to oppose each other. If I got a negative and a
positive, pow, they're going to be attracted to each other.
Yep, very similar. That's not electrostatic. That's magnetism. It's a different property,
but the same thing. North's going to be attracted to south. You've got two north poles. They're not
going to be attracted. They're actually going to push back on each other. Two south poles, the same
thing. So we're actually going to study that in future chapters. But this is the law of electrostatic,
electromagnetic. So just keep those two separate. Coulomb. Coulomb is the unit adopted for measuring
charges. In last week in lecture, I gave you the number 6.24 x 10 to the 18th. I figure I'd
wait a week before I actually showed you what that number looks like. I mean, it's one thing for me
to say up on the board at 6.24, then 16 zeros after. But this is really what the number looks like.
Okay? It's really what the number looks like. One of the reasons that we need to use this form of
notation is that this number right here will not fit in your calculator. It won't fit in your
calculator unless you enter it in this form. And I'll show you. By the end of lecture, I'll show
you how to make sure you know how to enter it in that form. It's kind of funny because if you had
your neighbor down the street or whatever and you found out that they were going to college
in an accounting program, right? If they're going to go to school to become an accountant,
you'd probably say, wow, that person must be really good with numbers. Okay? Tell you what,
if you're Bill Gates accountant, you're not dealing with a number like this. Okay? But yeah,
regularly on a daily basis in the study of electronics, we're going to be dealing with
numbers like this. So if you're struggling with this form of notation, we'll work with you.
But don't be like me. When I was in school initially like this, I looked at this number and I looked
at this stuff and, ah, man, I don't know, that's too complex. It's like, you know, 6.24 times 10
to the 18th. That's a number like Mr. Spock would use or something on a Starship Enterprise. And
I'm a more down-to-earth guy, so I'm going to keep it basic, you know? And in very short order,
I realized you can't keep it basic in electronics because we're going to be dealing with these
extreme numbers. So we have to use this form of notation. So you see how we came up with this 10,
6.24 times 10 to the 18th? The decimal point here means there's 18 places past it. So if we
went ahead and actually counted here, all right, that's like us moving the decimal place from here
all the way up to here. So if we went ahead and count, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. So 6 decimal point 2, 4 times 10 to the 18th. That means there's
18 places past the decimal point. In this particular case, since I have
0.24, that means there's going to be 16 zeros after it, right? 16, 17, 18. 16 zeros after that. Does
that make sense? Everybody see how I did that? All right. There's our first law of electrostatic
charges, negative and a negative, positive and a positive, negative and a positive, uh-huh,
uh-huh. Because remember, in the beginning, everything was in a neutral, natural state anyway,
right? So originally, everything was like harmonious, balanced. When we apply energy to matter, we
knock an electron off that valence shell, and all is that valence shell, that electron that we
knocked off has in mind is getting back and putting that atom in a neutral, natural state.
So if you put an electron in the same room with a positive ion, they're going to seek
each other out. They want to achieve balance and harmony. Makes sense?
Current. Current. And every time I use this word here, we should like ring bells, chimes,
hit a gong, something like that. Because this is like a holy word in electronics. There's four
properties that you really need to be infatuated with. And when I say infatuated with, I'm not
talking about just as a student, I'm talking about later on when you continue on with your career.
The worst day you have in this industry is a paid electronics professional. The problem will be
solved by understanding and knowing the behavior of voltage, current, resistance and power, period.
Do I sound like I'm oversimplifying it? I'm not. It gets that basic. If they've got an
electrical problem with the space shuttle and they can't, you know, they can't hit the button and
have it blast off, it's because voltage, current, resistance or power isn't doing what it's supposed
to be doing. So if you know everything about those four parameters on the space shuttle,
you could get in and look at those four parameters and quickly find where the problem is.
So today we're talking about current. We should ring bells, hit chimes, hit a gong,
or something because current is one of the big four properties. Now the textbook talks about
current as being the drift of electrons from an area of negative charge to an area of positive
charge. I don't like this definition, the drift of electrons. It makes it look like
I'm an electron and I'm drifting, I'm floating. Okay?
An electron is more like if I'm negative charge and there's like positive ions out in the freaking
hall, I'm going to be like, I'm going to be trying to get over there. Why? Because I want to fill
those holes. I want to fill the void that was created when energy was imparted on matter. Does
that make sense? So that's really the behavior of current. As a matter of fact, there's a kind of
mad dash. I bet you didn't think I had it in me, huh? It gets better than that. You know how quickly
electrons are going to go over there if you can complete the path at the speed of light,
at the speed of light. If we allow electrons to complete the path,
it's going to travel at the speed of light. So I don't call that the drift
of electrons, negative to positive. Now, Andre Marie Ampere came up with this term that he called
the Ampere, named it after himself. These dudes didn't have egos. You kidding? They didn't have egos.
Andre Marie Ampere invented a unit of measure called the Smith. Now, the Ampere. The Ampere is
the amount of current in a conductor when one coulomb of charge moves past the point in one
second. This is kind of emotional. This is your first real formula. It's your first real formula.
The relationship between Ampere's and coulombs per second can be as expressed as i, which is current,
is equal to q charge measured in coulombs divided by t time measured in seconds. So what we're saying
here is one amp or ampere is equal to one coulomb per second. Now, be careful with this, because I
could ask you a question about number of electrons. Is number of electrons coulombs? Number of electrons
is number of electrons. Coulomb is 6.24 times 10 to the 18th electrons. So this formula only works
if you're using coulombs. What happens if I have half a coulomb per second? It's not a trick question.
If I have half a coulomb per second, what's my current going to be? Half an amp. If I have
quarter a coulomb per second, what's it going to be? Quarter of an amp. If I have two coulombs per
second, this is a trick question. No, just kidding. Two coulombs per second. That means I'm going to have
two amps. So typically for household current in your home, we talked about this last week,
what was that number? What's your typical utility connection from the power company to your home?
That's the voltage. What's the typical box? Typically about 200 amps is a typical residential
connection. You know, you buy a home, you're going to see that it's typically 200 amp connection
from the power pole or if you have underground service to your box, that big gray box that's in
your house, 200 amps. From that box, the circuits in your home get distributed to circuits that are
typically either 15 amps or in some cases 20 amps. And for some of your appliances,
they'll be a little bit higher in some cases. If you have an electric hot water heater or
things like that, I've got a hot tub. It requires more than 15 amps, more than 20 amps. I've got a
high current connection going to that. So if you've got 15 amp outlet in your home, that means
that outlet is capable of handling how many coulombs per second? 15. 15. I could also ask you,
how many electrons per second can I handle? Then you'd have to get 6.24 times 10 to 18
times 15, and that's how many electrons it would be, physically, that that's capable
of supporting. That's why it's so critical that all of these components, when they're manufactured
and they're given their specifications, that you don't exceed those specifications. Because if you
try fitting more electrons through than it's physically capable of handling, you're going to
start an electrical fire. Okay, so everything has ratings associated with the current ratings,
and this is why, physically, it can't handle any more electrons. If you try pumping, you know,
if you've got a garden hose and connected it to a fire engine, okay, and turn the pumps on high,
what do you think's going to happen to that garden hose? It's probably going to blow up,
it's probably going to explode, right? It can't handle that volume. That's why firemen have like
big hoses, okay? Because they have a higher volume of water that they try to put, you know,
from the truck onto the fire. That's why they're firefighters, fire people.
Make sense? The other thing I want to share with you about formulas, okay?
If there's shortcuts that I could teach you and you could remember, I'm all about that.
This is college, so whenever I give you a formula, I'm just going to give it as formula and assume
that all of you are like college students that have paid your dues and are here for the right
reasons. So I'm not going to show you every possible variation of the formula. I'm going to
expect you to know how to do it on your own. But I don't expect you to know how to do it on your
own because all of you don't have a comprehensive algebra background yet. So I'm going to show
you a couple shortcuts here, a way to cheat. What I want you to do is start off with drawing a triangle.
I'm going to draw a simple triangle.
Then inside the triangle, I want you to draw a t.
The one formula that you know, I want you to plug into this triangle. So i, in this particular
case, i is equal to q over t. Does everybody see how I did that? i is equal to q divided by t.
So that's the first formula that I gave you. i is equal to q over t. Now on a quiz or an exam,
or simply when you're hanging out together working with each other in the lab,
what happens if I gave you coulombs and I gave you current?
Then what we could do is simply cover up the letter t and say t is equal to q over
i. So I did that. So t is equal to q over i. That's the other algebraic manipulation of this.
If I asked you on a quiz if I said if I gave you current and I gave you time and I want you to
figure out how many coulombs, what the value of coulombs would be, then we simply cover up the q
and then it's going to be i times t. See the i is next to the t, so it's going to be i times t.
So that's going to be our other variation. q is equal to i times t. So with that one formula
that I gave you, there's three basic algebraic manipulations that we could have, and this is
all of them. So do you have to memorize these? No. Remember, do the triangle, put the t in the
center, and then lay that one formula out, and then now you have all the algebraic variations
of that formula. And you know what? You need to know how to do this, because I could ask you.
I'll be honest with you. Everything right now is fair game. I could ask you to solve for current.
You should be able to do it. I could ask you to solve for time. You should be able to do it.
I should ask you to be able to solve for coulombs, and you should be able to do it.
I should be able to give you a number of electrons, right? You have 30 gazillion electrons.
How many coulombs is that? That gives you this value. Then you could figure out the rest. Does
that make sense? So it's a stepping stone. But don't get hung up on what you don't know.
Focus always on what you do know. And the one thing to remember is one amp is one coulomb per
second. i is equal to q over t. And then if you lay that out, it gives you all the other variations.
Does that make sense? Hold. An all-female progressive rock band from Seattle, Washington.
Hold. That's a joke. Is hold even still around? No? No? No. When did they disband? Where did they go?
She's doing her own thing. Dad, it's where I understand she's doing her own thing.
It's a reference. What Beavis and Butthead do America, right? There's a reference to whole. Not
this whole, but the other whole. Remember, they were... No, seriously. They were going...
Remember Beavis and Butthead do America? They're looking for their TV, or the TV
broke, and they stole one, and whatever they're doing. But they were going to go to Washington,
like DC. But when they heard about Washington, they were like, Washington, that's cool. That's
like where Seattle is. We could go see whole. Anyway, that's required viewing for all of you.
Beavis and Butthead do America. That's going to help you understand. Anyway, no, I'm not talking
about a different type of whole. Whole that I'm talking about here is the absence of an electron.
If I have an atom, and I apply energy to matter, and I knock that electron loose,
what do I leave behind? A whole. So a whole is nothing more than the absence of an electron.
The reason I want to point this out to you is that here at Lake Washington Technical College,
every other technical and community college in Washington State, in the country, the U.S.
military, all branches of the U.S. military, technical schools, a lot of universities all
embrace what we embrace, and that is electron flow. We call one amp 6.24 times 10 to the 18th
electrons traveling per second. That's what we call one amp, right?
Engineers, scientists embrace what's called whole flow. They think that the holes are flowing
to get filled by the electrons. I don't want any of you to lose sleep over this.
Whether 6.24 times 10 to the 18th electrons travel in that direction per second, that's an amp,
or at 6.24 times 10 to the 18th holes that travel in that direction per second, that's going to be
an amp. But whole is the absence of the electron. And the reason I'm pointing this out to you is
I know all of you this weekend, as soon as you get a little bit of time off, you're probably
going to go to the library and pick up some electronic books, start reading. I don't want
you to call me a liar, and I want you to open up that book and say, hold on. This book shows
that current flows positive to negative. That Joe Greenock over there at that Lake Wash,
he doesn't know what he's talking about. He said that current flows negative to positive.
Current does flow negative to positive. Electron flow. Current also flows positive to negative.
Whole flow. Are any of you going to go home and lose sleep over this? Be honest with me.
Let me know, because I did. Honestly, when I was in school, I got the same lecture I'm giving you
right now, and I'm like, oh no, I didn't raise my hand, but then I went home and I'm like scratching
head. What the heck was he talking about? You know, and I like months for months, I freaking
tried to add, it's not that difficult of a concept. You just got to hit the I believe button. Joe says
6.24 times 78T electrons per second equals one amp, so be it. We do want to talk about
whole briefly so you can differentiate between electron flow and whole flow, and also to prepare
you for what you are about to receive in the future. Because again, if you sat in on my lecture
last week on ELEC 120, guess what? We started talking about whole flow again, because whole
flow is significant in the study of semiconductor devices, solid state devices. If you want to
understand how a transistor really works, you have to embrace whole flow. So we are going to
talk about it more here at Lake Washington, but you don't need to beat yourself to death on it.
Question? Well, you got to realize that the whole itself, though, is the absence.
But if you're talking about matter that exists, and it's the absence of the electron,
that we're really talking about a positive ion, and a positive ion does have mass,
because you got all your protons, you got all your neutrons, and of course that's how we determine
atomic weight. Very good answer. A, the atomic weight number of protons and neutrons. So whole
is the movement of an electron from one atom to the next, creating the appearance of a positive
charge moving in the opposite direction. So that's what we call whole flow. If you had a piece of
copper, which we know copper is a good abundant conductor, this is kind of how the electron path,
how it would work. Negative to positive, kind of copper atom, it would jump over here to copper
atom, jump over here to copper atom. Make sense? Drifting along at the speed of light.
This here we see, again, a conductor. We've got electron flow left to right,
current flow left to right, whole flow right to left. Make sense?
Okay. I want to show you something, how this really works, because the way they're making this
look, and I think you guys are all buying this, right? Because, again, you kind of got to believe
me, right? But this is kind of like the free electron is kind of like hopping from copper atom
to copper atom, because there's three or fewer electrons in a valence shell, right? It's kind of
hopping along, hopping along just another copper atom, you know? You ever jump across a stream,
right? It's kind of what they make it look like here, right? Everybody at this table here, can you
just back up here? Nobody has a coffee or anything on here, okay? Can you put your hand on the end
of the table just like this, okay? Okay, let me know how quickly you feel this.
That is how current flows through a conductor. That's how current flows through a conductor.
The speed of light, instantaneous, instantaneous. If I've got a negative here and I've got a positive
there, pow, instantly that is going to be felt on the other side. That's how current flows through
a conductor. So it's not this. Got to have your tongue out when you're doing it too, right?
It doesn't work like that. It's instantaneous. The speed of light, which is important,
186,000 miles per second. The speed of light is 186,000 miles per second.
Or for those of you on the metric system, 300 million meters per second.
300 million meters per second. Or for those of you that keep track of all things nautical,
161,000 nautical miles per second. And I got a couple of chuckles out there. It's kind of,
well, Joe's ex-Navy, he would probably know that. No, I'll tell you what. If you know those three
numbers, 186,000 miles per second, 300 million meters per second, 161,000 nautical miles per
second. If you know those three numbers, you could probably get about eight or nine questions
right on your FCC license exam. Because it's how RF energy transmits as well. If you're working on a
radar, you want to get your radar endorsement to be able to work on a radar, the only radar in the
world that I am familiar with that operates in statute miles is the radar that's operated by
the police. If you're on a Washington state ferry and they're looking at a radar, that radar is
calibrated for nautical miles. So all the math that takes place internal is 161,000 nautical miles
per second. If you go to work for the Federal Aviation Administration and you work at Seattle
Traycon that keeps track of all the aircraft arriving to Seattle and departing Seattle,
the radar that they're looking at is calibrated in nautical miles. And the aircraft also travel
speed-wise in knots. In knots, which is nautical miles calibration standard. So that's why those
numbers are very important. That's how fast current travels, that's how fast radio frequency
energy travels at the speed of light or close to the speed of light. There's actually some
atmospheric anomalies that kind of slow it up a little bit, but generally speaking it's a speed
of light, which is also important to realize. That's why it's so great you got me as an instructor
because you could learn from all of my goofy mistakes. Back when I was in the Navy, the only
way that I could get a raise, the only way that I could increase rank was obviously not getting in
trouble for a period of time, which is actually another funny story. I'll show that one with you
in a second. I forgot all about it. But anyway, the other thing is by taking professional examinations
twice a year. And I remember one of the exams, you would have thought I would have been ramped
up with this stuff. I got to this whole section of the exam once when I was trying to go up and rank
and they started talking about the behavior of antennas in outer space.
And I was like, I'm a submarine guy. I have no freaking clue how this antenna is going to behave
in outer space. What the heck are they talking about? The Navy's got like people in outer space
and I just got myself into a tailspin and I just I couldn't even answer anything
instead of looking at the obvious. How do antennas behave in outer space?
Perfectly. Theoretically, perfectly. That's what they were looking at. So I got all those
questions wrong because I could just, they're talking about going to freaking outer space.
I'm not going outer space. I'm going to live beneath the sea. So more on that, on keeping
out of trouble. Can't make this stuff up. I was looking at a copy of my medical record.
I have a copy of my military medical record at home and I was looking through it and I came upon
on a page. I got into a slight altercation and actually the medical record
reveals 25 year old Caucasian reported to sick call reports being worked over by two bouncers
and then it goes into how I slept well and I woke up somewhat sore and basically I reported
the sick call and it was I had a crushed my cheekbone got broken and one eye was pointing one way
and the other eye was pointing the other way and finally they said yeah you got to go get that
looked at but right in there print reports being worked over by two bouncers called my son over
I said check this out it's kind of cool I should have that frame put that in my office my medical
record you know but anyway I was a good sailor. Voltage source and again we should almost ring
bells chimes hit gongs when we're talking about voltage source and I hope you don't think that
I'm over exaggerating this these first few chapters are what we're talking about are the
fundamentals you have to understand this stuff a hundred percent now you need at least a 70
percent to pass this class if I were truly the pope of electronics I'd say no you don't move on to
the next module the next chapter until you prove a hundred percent because this is how critical
this information is voltage source what we're talking about here is a power supply
it supplies electrons from one end of the conductor and it removes electrons from the
other end of the conductor it can be thought of for those of you that like using analogies
fluid systems it could be like a pump what does a pump do it sucks from one end it pushes out from
the other end right this is what a voltage source does it basically supplies electrons from one end
and then sucks them back from the other end that has to be taking place or it's not a valid voltage
source so a battery is a voltage source we're going to talk more about batteries of future
chapters right provides electrons on the negative end of the battery and it collects those electrons
of the positive end of the battery that's what makes it a battery it's what makes it a voltage
source and we need a viable voltage source in order for us to have a viable circuit
well finally we're going to talk about scientific notation but we're not actually what i want to
talk to all of you about tonight is what's known as engineering notation
anybody here really comfortable using scientific notation if you're really comfortable using
scientific notation i guess you keep using it but i would encourage you instead to use
engineering notation the difference is scientific notation can be times 10
to the first power second third fourth fifth sixth seventh they can be anything you follow what i'm
saying can you dig it engineering notation is always going to be in groups of three
it's always going to be in groups of three which lends itself very well to what we're doing here
in electronics let me show you
let's start off with a decimal point
oops that is there's the decimal point okay so if i put something to the left of the decimal
point this is going to be my base 10 this is going to be my ones column so this number here
could be anywhere from zero to nine if i get nine and i add one to it nine plus one equals
10 so i've got to go to my tens column so this is my tens column this is my ones column can you
dig it this is the part that i did well in school too the number line okay if i get up to the
number 99 and i add one to 99 now i go i increment to the hundreds column okay so we're familiar
ones tens hundreds cool okay so those are going to be my basic units of measure this could be
pounds ounces volts amps miles whatever now if i go here to my thousands column one thousand column
basically what i'm doing now is this is times 10 to the third times 10 to the third everything
in here will be times 10 to the third this could be one times 10 to the third 22 times 10 to the
third 943 times 10 to the third makes sense the reason that i'm so infatuated with having you
put it in engineering notation is by 10 to the third we're going to call this value here in the
metric system what what's thousands in in metric kilo very good kilo so what we're going to do is
we're going to call this small letter k kilo so instead of saying 1000 i'll say 1k instead of
saying 943 thousand i'll say 943 kilo kilo pounds kilo ounces kilo miles kilo volts kilo ohms make
sense kilo miles there's a new one for you well metrics it's in metrics but if you put it into
engineering groups of three then it's going to fit directly into those prefixes those metric prefixes
so three more places past the decimal point one two three this is times 10 to the sixth we're going
to call this mega mega in an actuality it's like millions right one million ten millions hundred
millions mega 10 to the ninth what's that giga very good capital letter g giga
when i first got into this industry i'm dating myself i don't know why i say that make myself
feel old this is as far like as we had gone in the electronics industry general electronics
giga wow and i'll be honest with you where i used to work in electronic intelligence
the only people that could that could afford to play up here in giga values were superpowers
it was either us or the soviets and we knew what we had so if i detected something that was in
giga hertz it had to be the soviets okay now giga commonplace after school today you could
probably stop at fred meyer pick up a laptop computer that's got a you know 80 gigabyte drive in it
for 49 that's actually too much money 49 bucks you could get a
times 10 to the 12th terra
terra also happens to be a barista down in federal way that's kind of got it going on if you know
what i mean i don't i don't even know what i mean i don't even know what that is terra
when i first started teaching here 20 years ago at like washington technical college
i can't even remember i think i might have had like an 80 meg hard drive or something
i remember getting super jazzed by getting the sunday seattle times and i saw an ad in the paper
that i could get like a 250 megabyte hard drive for less than a dollar per megabyte and i'm like
you gotta be kidding me i could get less than you know less than a dollar per megabyte of storage
i'm gonna go on and get one of those you know so i went on and paid my 250 bucks or whatever
now you're getting a terabyte hard drive for 49 dollars now they have two terabyte hard drives
they could get for 99 dollars so this is have i made my point about the numbers we're going to work
with in high tech industry i mean the numbers are extreme they're extreme so again if you use
engineering notation and put it into groups of three and most of you and your calculators have
a mode that you could put it into engineering motet notation so ultimately the the answer is
going to be given given to you in either times 10 to the third 10 to the sixth 10 to the ninth 10 to
the 12th if you don't know how to do that you might want to look at your owner's manual if you're
ready through your owner's manual away do a google search on your on on your model it'll come up with
a pdf of it okay you want to make sure you know how to access those modes in your calculator
because again we're going to be using some extreme numbers but you know what i'm not done
i've yet to begin we're about halfway done we're also going to be dealing with numbers that are
smaller than one so when i go back one two three places
anybody know what we call these times 10 to the negative third three places to the right of the
decimal plates milley and actually if any of you come from a machining background or whatever
like thousandths of an inch this would be a tenth of an inch right this would be hundredths of an
inch this would be thousandths of an inch and use the term mill right how thick is that plastic
three mil three milley okay so we're going to call this small letter m for milley m i l l i milley
three more places past the decimal point gives me times 10 to the negative sixth anybody know what
we call this micro very good micro micro is kind of kind of weird too it's a greek symbol
kind of looks like this it's kind of like a backwards u it's actually the greek symbol called
mu mu dirty jobs dirty jobs really he does that micro micro micro for our friends at home yeah
micro he actually participated in a fundraiser here in the fall of like washington technical
college via satellite actually the producer from that show dirty jobs is here and they
as a fundraiser for a college foundation but micro was live via satellite speaking directly
with all those that went to breakfast here at lake washington technical college i slept in that morning
i was hoping hoping they were going to tivo the event so i could watch it at my leisure but nobody
t-voted three more places past the decimal point times 10 to the negative ninth
yep nano very good small letter m small letter m nano
any of you have heard about nano technology this is kind of like where nano technology is playing
around with now three more places past the decimal point times 10 to the negative 12
pico small letter p pico
suffice to say i could go further there's a couple places past this but it's beyond the
scope of what we're talking about right now
but as students at lake washington technical college you on a regular basis are going to
be dealing with numbers times 10 than a negative 12 to times 10 to the positive 12 sometimes in
the same problem so like i said earlier even if you're bill gates accountant
even if you're the irs itself anybody here not filed their taxes yet
two of us three be honest four
it's actually funny i was with uh with friends on uh on saturday we stopped at starbucks for a cup
of coffee and my friend saw this woman that she thought she recognized that she knew and you can't
make this stuff up um you know it's like she's like you know you look like a good friend of mine
blah blah blah and you know do you work do you work for quests no i don't work for quests well
you know you know i work for the irs really excuse me ma'am but you look lovely today
can i buy you a pastry to go with that cup of coffee and you don't want to take those people off
too finely brought down al capone wasn't it right the irs
anyway we're going to be dealing with numbers like this so we have to make sure we get it right
so in most of your calculators you'll have a key ee a key ee and you could enter that whatever
you do do not enter it as as it appears here on the uh don't go three hit the times key 10
to the third power you're actually going to end up a decimal place off with that you have to enter
it the ee key exponential notation any questions on that all right um
there's no harm in using your imagination when you're when you're dealing with an electoral system
in equating it to a fluid system because let's be brutally honest you can't see electricity
coursing through wires you can't see it our five senses are very very limited so sometimes analogies
really really help us out so for those of you that understand fluid systems you know it all
rolls downhill and you know pressure and pumps and that kind of stuff you could use the same
analogies to figure out what's taking place inside an electoral circuit one of the things
that i do because i just love seattle is i'll use the treat that the seattle freeway system
to sometimes explain the behavior of current in a circuit i5 405 520 and we'll use those as
analogies of how current behaves how traffic behaves on a friday before a three-day holiday weekend
and it's sunny out and raining in the convergence zone and we'll use those analogies to kind of
figure out what's taking place in a circuit so this here this analogy shows us the pump this
would act like our voltage source right it's sucking and then discharging right so this is our
source of electrons and this is where it's drawing the electron through for the pump
the current flows through the plumbing the electrons flow through the circuit the only
thing that i would have done differently if i drew this illustration i can't take credit for this
i simply pulled it out of the text is the load this would have been nice if they had like a
water wheel right here so as the water runs by it turns the wheel because that's what a load does
a load converts one form of energy to another form of energy an electrical load converts
electric energy into light energy or electric energy into motion or or some other form does
that make sense so you can use this if you care to since this chapter is talking about current
typically in the study of electronics electronics not electrical but electronics
we're typically only going to be using values associated with milli times ten to the negative
third milli amps which don't be fooled milli amps could kill you there's enough even though it's
it's thousands of an amp it's still enough to kill you more than enough to kill you
and also we're going to be dealing with micro amps typically as a student here in the electronics
program like washington technical college for those of you that go into the electrical trades at all
you're going to be dealing with amps and lots of them we had a student that just got
hired by bondable power administration bpa he's going to be working substations i don't even
know how many amps you're dealing with out of substation what makes a substation a substation
lots of amps i would imagine okay i never had an interest of working with that many amps
since milli amps could kill you why would i want to work with more than more than enough to kill me
in summary we talked about the laws of electrostatic charges the first law is that like charges
oppose each other the second law is unlike charges attract each other a coulomb is six
point two four times ten to the 18th electrons electric current is the flow not the drift the
flow of electrons in a specified direction measured in amps conceived by the dude by the name of
andre marie amp here and andre marie amp here stated that one amp is equal to one coulomb per
second that's the relationship between current electrical charge and time formula we talked
about holes moving holes moving the opposite direction of electrons electrons travel negative
the positive holes travel positive to negative we talked about scientific notation negative
exponents specifically milli micro nano and pico and we talked about positive exponents
specifically kilo mega giga and terra and terra also happens to be a
in that's kind of got it outstanding if you know what i mean i don't even know what i mean
we're going to talk about milli prefix typical these are the values of current that we'll see
in electronic circuit and also micro times ten to the negative six these are also values
of current we'll typically see inside an electronic circuit make sense anybody have any
questions anything that we covered in chapter two chapter two all right let's go ahead take
about a 15 minute break and at 645 we'll go ahead and kick things off again
okay chapter three voltage chapter three voltage after completing this chapter you're going to be
able to identify the six most common voltage sources describe six different methods of producing
electricity define cell and a battery describe the difference between primary and secondary cells
describe how cells and batteries are rated identify ways to connect cells or batteries to
increase current or voltage output or both define voltage rise and voltage drop and identify the
two types of grounds associated with electrical circuits this this kind of makes me laugh you
know the big buzzword now is alternative energy right alternative energy and um
really worldwide we consume electricity that's the form that we've pretty much chosen electronics
electricity you know i don't think there's any places that are installing oil lamps
you know new hotel in the caribbean we light our place with oil lamps no we use electricity
and there are six methods of producing electricity period so when i hear about alternative energy i
kind of sit up i'm like well have they come up with a seventh method no as long as i have been
in this industry there have been six methods there are only six methods if you come up with a seventh
now maybe you're on to something those six methods are friction magnetism chemicals light
heat and pressure period the first one we're going to talk about is friction
probably the most familiar is the vandagraph generator how many of you are here familiar with
the vandagraph generator um let me try that again uh how many of you here are familiar with with
lightning storms that's probably the best example of friction producing electricity
guy by the name of ben franklin figured that out by flying a kite in an electrical storm
one of our brilliant forefathers it's amazing it didn't get uh electrocuted in the in the process
so lightning is a form of friction caused by atmospheric friction if you will um
and that produces lightning another example is electrostatic discharge when you walk across
a carpet or you move if you're wearing clothes just that movement you could generate static
electricity tens of thousands of volts could be generated by seeing you simply wearing clothes
okay the alternative is not wearing clothes you wouldn't generate static electricity by doing so but
of course the world would be a different place
the vandagraph generator some of you have maybe seen in a museum before i've got one in the back
room it's out of commission right now but there's a big sphere on the top of it and then what it is
is a belt pulls electrons off the bottom brings it up to the top so the sphere becomes charged
and what we could do with that is if you were insulated and you put yourself at that electrical
potential you've maybe seen the pictures where people's hair standing straight out on end that
effect could be created with a vandagraph generator friction not really the best best method of
producing electricity you know i'm not going to hire tens of thousands of people to walk around
on carpets and then you know touch a touch of you know of a conductor and power cities that way it
just doesn't make sense on the other hand if there was a method of somehow harnessing lightning
now that would be something that would be something i don't know how many of you are from the seattle
area northwest uh originally your whole life uh i don't know if you've ever had the opportunity
to travel like to the east coast the midwest monster storms tropics monster storms storms that even
jet airliners can't get above you know 60 000 foot thunderstorms um just amazing i remember a few
years ago i was flying commercially down to the caribbean and um on the way back this monster
storm outside and even the pilot was talking about it he's like you know in my 30 years of flying i
have never seen a storm this big and he just looked out and the whole thing was just glowing
constantly glowing it wasn't like lightning flash lightning flash was just constantly sitting there
just like throbbing glowing was pretty frightening so if you could somehow harness that lightning
that would almost constitute a form of alternative energy
magnetism is the most common method of producing electrical energy this is how we produce electricity
using something called a generator that generator could be powered by steam
that steam could be generated from nuclear power coal water wind gas diesel it doesn't
matter how you rotate the shaft the goal is you got to rotate the shaft
it's actually very devastating the news from uh japan was watching the news this morning and i guess
they upgraded it to a level seven accident now which is on par with chernobyl actually the amount
of radioactivity that that puts out could exceed chernobyl if they don't get it figured out
um it's really too bad i'm not necessarily i don't know if you want to call me a proponent of
nuclear i mean i i worked on nuclear submarines for you know eight and a half years of my life
and uh it's pretty cool i mean it's hot because it generates steam you know what i'm saying it's
pretty pretty uh innovative technology because you know how often we i you know i commute and i got
a i got to go to the back gas pumps about twice a week with my car and my car birds premium
um height um high compression engine i got to burn premium in it you're talking about 50 bucks
pop just fill up my car for me to commute you know how many times i saw my nuclear submarine refueled
just kept going and going and going and going and going so you get a lot of use out of nuclear
power commercial nuclear power plant um basically what they do is they refuel the reactor started up
run it at full throttle for 18 months 100 flat out for 18 months then they shut it down refuel
it most nuclear power plants have multiple reactors so when they're refueling one they got another one
that's up and running and then just back and forth or so in some cases three reactors
so it was actually getting quite a bit of momentum in the green movement a lot of the the the folks in
the green movement were like no nukes no nukes and they realized that it's pretty clean energy
yeah you got to worry about the nuclear waste afterwards but it's really a devastating uh you
know not only for the folks in japan um but also really for uh you know energy energy efficiency
and um non-dependency uh fossil fuel burning uh so hopefully they could get a handle on it
i mean nuclear power all forms of energy are inherently dangerous you know i mean
my my fuel tank splits open on my car and i drive home and i burst into flames that'll
kill me just as dead as radiation you know what i'm saying so it's a matter of mitigating those
risks but i want you to keep that in mind this is why again alternative energy
you know i've been to holland before they got freaking windmills over windmills
they were harnessing wind energy you know now we wind turbines you know all you're doing is
rotating the shaft and you're turning a generator as opposed to grinding your grain with power from
the wind so is it really alternative energy no it's just a different spin on it which is interesting
because i've known this stuff since like puberty and i always in the back of my mind was thinking
about like energy in different forms because i was always getting yelled up on my parents you know
shut the door shut off the lights what do you think you live in a barn you know this type of
stuff so i was yeah at a very young gauge i was thinking wow you know i what one of my duties as
a child was cutting the grass and uh he used to amaze me the small amount of gas i could i was
always hoping i'd run out of gas so like i don't have to i couldn't finish the lawn why i ran out
of gas you know the thing would never run out of gas there was this little tiny tank and that motor
would just keep you know the engine would keep going and going and going and going and going
there's a way of harnessing that motor to a generator and that could like i could leave the
lights on i could leave the doors open i'd get my parents off my back you know at a young age i
was thinking about alternative energy and obviously i didn't understand all the formulas
associated with it so no you can't necessarily power a home with a small three and a half horsepower
brakes and strutting engine but with a ten horsepower you could do it and if you've got a
backup generator that's a good enough size generator power home anyway that's how we harness
magnetism the generator could be configured to produce either direct current direct current is
the flow of electrons in only one direction negative the positive period negative the positive
or alternating current alternating in current is actually current that goes back and forth back
and forth what we what comes out of the outlets here in the school and at your home is alternating
current the electrons never really go anywhere but they're getting shaken back and forth back
and forth back and forth that's the harness that's the energy that we harness so we could have a
generator connected to a shaft that produces either dc or ac dc generators are not that prevalent
they're not that prevalent really ac is used predominantly throughout the industry because
of it's a higher level of efficiency in transmitting the power
this is the schematic symbol for an ac generator so if you saw this on a schematic
you would say ah this means an ac power source ac generator
chemical chemical the most common is a cell chemical means is the second most popular method
of producing electrical energy a chemical cell what we're talking about here is batteries
the original chemical cell consisted of two metals copper and zinc these were the old
school batteries remember the kind that if you left them in your device too long they'd start to
like ooze and ruin your portable electronic device those were just standard carbon or um
yeah zinc cells copper zinc cells
typically many cells can be connected to form a battery when we use the term battery
we're actually talking about something that's made of multiple cells and part of why i'm telling
you this is that you're all here to learn a second language and that second language is electronics
so if you were going to go to fred my where you're going i'm going to fred meyer to get me some
batteries if you said that to me i'm going to assume that you're going to get batteries and
batteries are multiple cells that are put together where you're going i'm going to fred
meyer to get me some batteries what do you need batteries for for this here flashlight
that battery doesn't take that flashlight doesn't take batteries that flashlight takes
cells and cells are the typical size batteries that we've come to know and love triple a
double a c am i personal favor the d size cell d size means it's bigger since it's bigger it means
it's got more chemical in it more chemical means it's gonna last longer if you had a d
size battery and you connected it to your remote control it looks stupid but it would last forever
okay i put triple a batteries in my remote and like they last for like longer than my tv lasts
you know i just had a i just had some cells go out in a remote and i looked they were the original
cells of the remote i'm like man i've had this thing for freaking 14 years it's got the original
goofy brand batteries that came with it you know so typically many cells can be connected to create
what's known as a battery now it's schematic diagrams when you see this symbol right here you
can assume that this is a cell the short line is the negative lead the long line is the positive
lead on a schematic diagram if you put a short one a long one a short one and a long one together
we could make the assumption that this is a battery the other assumption that you could
make on a schematic diagram is when you see this assume 1.5 volts because most cells triple a
double a c and d all produce 1.5 volts dc
so if we saw this what can we assume
1.5 plus 1.5 is 3 so normally on a schematic diagram sometimes they'll draw two of these
side by side sometimes they'll draw three but they won't draw any more than three
so anytime you see two or more assume assume that it's either the value here or right next to this
i could write 12v and if i write 12v well it's a 12 volt battery pack and if you split that battery pack
open you would find that it's actually made up of multiple cells that are wired together internal
to that battery pack make sense
light
light photovoltaic cell harnesses light
a single cell can produce a very small voltage so therefore many cells must be linked together
to produce a usable voltage and current these are primarily used in satellites
because satellites would look stupid if they had like an extension cord connected to them
you know you'd be like what the heck is that going up into the sky you know well it's an
extension cord for you know communication satellite so we can't do that
cost is high but it's declining
what i suspect is going to happen with this photovoltaic basically to make a solar panel
it uses the same technology that is used to make microchips so it's pretty costly process
what i suspect to see and you're not going to find us on any textbook
what i suspect you're going to see is a marriage between photovoltaic
and nanotechnology and when those two merge together you're going to be able to go to
Sherwin Williams and get paint for your house and they're going to say sir would you like the
photovoltaic additive today for 1995 sure go ahead and a lot of photovoltaic additive and the
fact that your paint on your house is outside and it's in daylight part of the time it's going to
be producing voltage now we're not quite there yet but i suspect that that's where we're going to be
they do have the technology now that there are companies that basically could spit out photovoltaic
film almost like Reynolds wrap so you could you know go out buy a roll of photovoltaic and roll
it out and connect your your connections and you're producing electricity so the cost is coming
down on this stuff and think about it free voltage from the sun i mean how cool is that i mean it
really is here in western washington well you know you probably have to pressure wash it twice
so you're to keep the moss from growing on your panels i got moss growing on my car i'm getting
in the other day and i'm like what the heck is it moss growing on it but other areas of the country
they're doing us they're doing us was in arizona uh flagstaff several years ago and i checked into
the hotel late at night and um got up in the morning and opened my wind and opened my curtain
the hotel room i was on an upper floor and i was shocked number one it snowed out the night before
and it was like six inches snow out there i'm like holy crap this arizona what's your snow doing out
there it's flagstaff it's you know you're in the mountains the other thing that shocked me is wow look
at this across the street was a solar farm and it was all photovoltaic panels connected directly
to the power grid and these panels would all track the sun and and you know basically supplying
energy to the power grid so in some areas of the country uh they're already doing this
when i run out tonight by solar panels for your home probably not but again it's free energy free
voltage so keep your eye on this technology because uh i'd love to be an investor in the company that
gets that photovoltaic nanotechnology harnessed you know just add a little pinch of it to your paint
or whatever and paint whatever he just turned it into a solar panel science fiction now guarantee
you within the next few years we're going to be seeing that technology it's one of those solar
panels work uh look like and the problem is uh this is on a metal backing but basically it's
glass it's glass it's pretty fragile you know you want to have it permanently mounted um
still for out of space satellite it's the best option pointed towards the sun the sun comes out
every day actually if you're an outer space it never goes out because you know you're not rotating
if you're a stationary satellite just looking at it unlimited electrical resources it was actually
interesting i was at a conference i spoke at a conference a month ago that was like a month
ago today in milwaukee wisconsin it was at the green energy summit i wasn't invited guest speaker
and one of the other speakers was very uh it was very interesting he had one of our first
satellites a mock-up of it and when they were developing the satellite it was this was in response
to the russians uh launching spotnik and it was the whole thing with the space race and basically
you know he who gets the satellite in space first and goes to space first is going to rule
dominate the earth you know so this is all stuff that was going down the 1950s they um
in a push to get our satellite up there in response to the russian satellite um
um basically what they had was a battery operated satellite launch it goes up beep beep beep beep
and that's literally all this thing did it was a beacon just beeping in space and then as an after
thought though the engineers were like let's put this on it this here is a photovoltaic cell
let's put this on it so that when the battery dies it'll continue to beep and they're like
what are you doing it's a stupid this is stupid this is no this is no you know this is not viable
technology solar panel photovoltaic cell this doesn't make any sense well they finally convinced
them to put it on well guess what happened after the battery died photovoltaic kicked on and then
it kept going and going and going and going and I think finally it was like interfering with some
other communication technology that developed they finally had to shut the thing off so that
was proof of concept that photovoltaics really work and of course it's become mainstream ever since
this is a cool way now it's a hot way actually producing voltage
we could use heat to produce voltage with what's called a thermo couple thermo couple
these are two dissimilar wires twisted together when I say dissimilar I don't mean one blue wire
and one red wire I'm talking about two dissimilar metals and they're not actually twisted together
they're actually welded together so you get the two dissimilar metals
and then you'll weld them together where they're welded together when you heat that joint
because they're dissimilar metals it's going to produce a voltage voltage produced is directly
proportional to the amount of heat applied these are going to be used in thermometers
if you've had it seen a digital thermometer typically that's going to be a thermo couple
because what it does is you apply heat it produces a voltage the voltage gets converted
to an equivalency of either Fahrenheit or centigrade and then you read it out real
simple way of doing it also called a pyrometer pyrometer had a student in this class several
years ago whose father owned a company locally I forgot the name of the company but they basically
produced thermal couple sensors and one of the big products that they were developing was
specifically for the racing industry and what it was is about the size of my laser pointer
it was nice stainless steel and I had a little probe on the end and that was the thermal couple
and what was so popular in the race industry if you I don't know how many of you aren't a racing
or whatever you know you take like NASCAR for example and ideally what you want to do with
one of those race cars is set it up so that you distribute the weight evenly on every tire
equally across the tire and if you could do that obviously you've got the most contact with the
road it's going to give you the most handling on the track it's going to give you the best
performance generally speaking there are some exceptions to that on road course versus whatever
but basically you want full contact with all your tires on the track make sense
also understanding with NASCAR rear wheel drive right you're going to have a lot more friction
on your rear wheels so what happens is when that race car pulls in and they pull the tires off
then they could sit there after the after they get the car out of the pits
with their thermal couple probe and then measure across the tire outside inside or outside middle
inside for my left rear my right rear take the same readings my front tire take the same readings
my other front tire same readings so you should see consistency between the two fronts across
temperature wise too that means you've got the car set up so that the tires are in full contact
with the road so it's really a poor man's alignment tool so he gave me one of these
it's kind of cool because it's the OEM it's just stainless it doesn't have any
decal or sticker on it I mean they're the factory that built it and then sold in some racing
companies so they can put their name on it and or you know snap on and charge you know an arm and
leg for the thing so he gave me one of these things so I actually did some experimentation
since I am a commuter I I did that a couple times in my drive home I want that I was wondering
what the alignment on my car was so sure enough you know I drive home I pull off the exit hot
federal way pull over the side of the road get out my fluke meter with this thing plugged in
take temperature readings look for consistency I've basically been tweaking alignment my vehicles
using nothing more than that temperature gauge pretty cool pretty cool thermal couple
simply applying heat to the device produces voltage that's simple apply heat it'll produce
voltage this is what the schematic symbol for one looks like
again understanding that these are going to be dissimilar metals two dissimilar metals
and then you weld this together the bead
so are they not actually
actually that because they're in contact with each other it will produce
where would you take the other tips yeah so simply by putting the the wires together they
are going to be in contact with each other so you are going to get some reaction but
these thermal couple probes are actually welded the tips are welded
believe it or not another method of producing voltage is simply by the use of pressure this
is called the piezoelectric effect piezoelectric effect voltage is going to be very small
so it must be amplified in order for it to be useful
but just a pressure change on a crystal will produce a voltage this is used for crystal
microphones phonograph pickups right and precision oscillators as well as some sensors
pressure sensors you could get some really inexpensive pressure sensors now that are
calibrated for barometric pressure standard barometric pressure so as the earth's pressure
the atmospheric pressure changes on it the voltage will change you couple couple that
with a weather station or couple that with actually you could use a fur altimeter if you're
sending a rocket up and you want to know how high your rocket goes you know what your base pressure
is as you go up an altitude the pressure decreases so you can have an inexpensive little sensor that
keeps track of your pressure also these are used in a lot of engine sensors now right you
could monitor all types of different pressures your oil pressure your pressure your cooling system
on board an aircraft your hydraulic pressure is all a little sensor that voltage gets amplified
sent into a computer and then you could look at all this virtual instrumentation
simply doing it by applying pressure to a crystal
this is what the schematic symbol looks like for piezoelectric crystal
now we're going to talk about some different types of batteries
battery of course is a combination of two or more cells
now we have two different choices of cells one is called a primary cell the other is called a
secondary cell let's first talk about primary cells primary cells are cells that cannot be
recharged one time use these are like most of the cells that you and I buy right when you're
done using them you recycle them don't throw them in the landfill right you recycle them
bring them to the hazmat place and then they'll turn it in and get money and make your community
more profitable based on you turning in your dead batteries some of the stuff you don't want
going to the landfill although they've gotten better with the choice of chemicals that they're
using but primary cells once you once you use them you throw them away this is designed after
what's known as the La Clanche cell or dry cell also referred to as the carbon zinc battery
carbon zinc battery this is the old school battery that we were talking about earlier
I got a couple old timers in here remember that's all we had these are the only types of batteries
that used to exist and then I believe was in the 1970s they came out with alkaline cells
that's when alkaline became somewhat mainstream started to become mainstream these alkaline cells
were still pretty expensive as compared to the carbon zinc batteries I remember Radio Shack
because again I was a big electronics guy so I was like hanging out at Radio Shack like looking
at all the parts and stuff and Radio Shack used to have a battery of the month club and you got a
little card and you'd go in with the card and you'd pick out the battery that you wanted and then
they'd punch your card you got a free battery it was a carbon zinc battery but it got you in the
store kind of a cool thing alkaline cells really really good alkaline cells would work a lot better
with a lot of electronic equipment when it came into being
the latest cell and my personal favorite is the lithium cell these are the high end lithium batteries
that Energizer produces they cost like
16 bucks for eight batteries they're very very pricey but these lithium batteries
will produce a voltage longer than any of these other types of primary cells they also have a
longer shelf life I'll bring in a package we could look at it I just I bought some last week
and I think it's the the expiration date on them is like 2022 some crazy time in the future
we won't even need batteries like that we'll be flying to work in jet packs and stuff
we won't even need a lithium batteries and the other thing that these are real great at is working
at a variety of different temperatures from extreme cold which really kills batteries big time
slows down that chemical reaction to extreme heat
they've kind of known about lithium batteries for a while lithium cells for a while
on my airplane there's something that's called an ELT emergency locate transmitter
in the event of crashing there's a g-switch that triggers triggers a transmitter to start
transmitting out a beacon that gives your position away so search aircraft actually they used to
have satellites that looked for that signal but now they've long story they've switched those
satellites off they've gone to some different frequencies now and but it would transmit so
when this thing worked it had to work it's a safety device even like on a ship that goes down they
have these e-perm systems that transmit to the satellite you want that when you got when it has
to work you need the thing to work so this has always been the choice for those types of applications
the lithium cell i was really really jazzed and excited when i saw these come on the market for
a consumer based product because the lithium the lithium batteries before were unique you know to
the manufacturer would put it together and you'd have to buy the replacement from them
because like the f a a requires every 24 months you've got to replace that that cell whether you've
used it or not so for them to come out the sizes that i'm aware of they have triple a and they
have double a size have any of you here used any of those if you use them highly recommend it if
you're going on your dream vacation if you're doing photography and you want something for your
flash and you want that flash to keep going off and you don't have to worry about it if you have a
if you're going hiking i use it in my gps i use a bat i have a backup gps um you know that i use
whenever i'm i'm going off the grid or anything i've got a pack i've got a pack that i bought
energizer will sell you a pack that you could use to recharge your cell phone have you seen those
things it's like a little pack and it comes with those lithium batteries and it's got a little cord
so like if you're off the grid and you got to recharge your battery it comes with that style
you know your micro usb or mini usb plug or you know kiesta everything now is micro usb that's
kind of the standard for new newer cell phones but you put those lithium batteries in it you plug
it in it'll give you another charge so if any of you do any backcountry stuff or anything like that i
highly recommend you look into them it's a wise investment a very wise investment it's the best
primary cell that money will buy
this is kind of you got the diagrams in your book kind of a cutaway view of a standard carbon
zinc cell another cutaway view there cutaway view of a nine volt battery is this really a nine volt
battery is it really a battery yes it is it's made up of multiple cells that have been put together
each cell is capable of 1.5 volt so they put multiple cells together to give them nine volts
why nine volts actually this nine volt battery is also synonymous what was what was called a
transistor battery back in the day there's no transistors in it why was it called a transistor
battery because this is the type of battery that your transistor radio would take growing up in
connecticut i used to have a little small eight transistor radio used to go to the beach and i
used to tune in my little radio you know playing you know playing music listen to new york radio
stations playing all the top 40 hits and everything eight transistor radio took a nine volt battery or
transistor battery this was typically the battery that i would get as a free battery at the battery
of the month club for radio shack why my assumption was it's got nine volts the other ones have 1.5
volts i'm getting more for my punch my free battery than than a 1.5 volt battery so this
was typically the bad boy that i always used to get for the purpose of experimenting secondary
cells or cells that cannot be recharged you're all familiar with this type of cell the lead acid
battery or wet cell which is in your car right now
these batteries are not just used for automotive applications these wet cells these lead acid
cells are also used for backup power supplies by the phone company for your landline they're also
used at cellular sites for backup power in the event that power is interrupted to the
cell sites automatically they'll switch over to battery backup they're typically lead acid cells
absolutely and they use those for solar systems now because they're the cheapest secondary cell
that's really on the market there's other technology that's more efficient that's more better
okay but it costs more so if you just want to let's say you live out in the desert and you want
want to run lights by day and harness the energy by day and you need a lot of solar panels and
you're going to need a lot of secondary cells the cheapest secondary cells that you could buy
our lead acid cells my submarine had a whole bank of lead acid cells located in the center of the
submarine down in the keel the very lowest portion of the boat and it was the called ironically the
battery well and in the battery well were batteries that were basically six feet tall
and they were about this big around and they were individual cells and it took a crane to be able
to lower these things in and move them all in and then they had wooden shims wax and
pregnated maple shims were all put in between these and it was all one giant bank and they were all
wired up lead acid on a daily basis an electrician would strip all the metal off of their uniform if
they had a belt on or anything metal and typically what they had is a special jumpsuit that they put
on it had all acid burns in it and what they would do is they'd have to climb down in the battery well
and they'd have to check the gravity the specific gravity this is the electrolyte fluid inside
and basically when we charge your battery what are we putting into a battery
who said electrons electrons that's really what we're doing when we charge your battery
we're putting free electrons we're storing it in an electrolyte solution our electrons matter
absolutely they're not very dense but they still are matter when you charge your battery what you
do is you increase the specific gravity of that fluid that electrolyte fluid
so what the electricians would do on a daily basis is they had a clipboard and they had a
grid that showed all the locations of the battery they would go down in and they would
check the specific gravity do you know what i'm talking about with specific gravity specific gravity
is a comparison of the density of pure water h2o at room temperature standard temperature
the specific gravity of h2o pure water at room temperature standard temperature is one
1.000000 it's one it's what we compare everything else to
now if i have pure water and i start to get some salt and i dissolve salt into the water
what am i going to do the specific gravity i'm going to raise it i'm going to increase the density
of the fluid and by taking a specific gravity reading i'm going to show that it's more dense
that shows me that i've done what i've put matter into the solution
if i dissolve sugar into it same thing if i pump electrons into it what am i going to do
same thing i'm going to increase the density of it i use specific gravity i i brew my own beer
and i use specific gravity to tell me what the alcohol content is
in the brewing process i basically impart a lot of sugars into the beer and i take that reading
the more sugars i put into the beer the specific gravity increases the density increases make
sense then what i do is i get yeast i put the yeast into that solution and the yeast consumes the
sugar converting it into co2 and alcohol so after the yeast has done its job i expect to see that
specific gravity decrease because alcohol is less dense than water and then i take a read
my first reading compare it to my last reading that gives me my alcohol content of what's inside the
beer for a battery your battery in your car has six cells if you buy a hydrometer and you test
those cells you should get consistency across all of those cells if you don't
if this cell is good this cell is good this cell is a little bit lower this good good good
the cell being a little bit lower you're probably developing an internal short in that cell
need to replace your battery you can't just replace the individual cells you have to replace
the whole entire battery so back on the submarine they were really concerned about that on a daily
basis they sent somebody down in the battery well to take those readings because if they saw a cell
that started to develop an internal short or problem conceivably it could take all of that
energy and dissipate that energy through that one bad cell that's bad news because oh by the way
you know why we had a battery battery bank if our nuclear reactor shut down or we had a problem
we could get to the surface when we get to the surface we could start up a diesel generator
so from that transit from the deep up to the surface we needed to be on battery power
if you can't get the diesel started while you're on the surface or actually at periscope depth
because we had a snorkel they could just stick up where it's an induction system for the diesel
run the diesel we had a generator connected where we could keep not as much power as we'd have to
nuclear power but to keep all vital systems up and operational
actually i had a real scare once we were someplace we weren't supposed to be
like someplace we were not supposed to be typically where we always went with my submarine
and it was a half it was a national holiday for this country so all of their you know they'd
take their submarines and drive them through red square and their tanks and their missile
launchers and everything and you know we had nothing better to do so instead of like hey you
know we're watching the soviets they're having a holiday let's us have a holiday because on the
fourth of july we're going to be watching the soviets and they're not going to take into account
our holiday you know the captain didn't think it was a very good idea that i had now as a matter
of fact mr grinnock i think what we're going to do is we're going to do some drilling today
you know and it's firefighting whatever well we did it we did a drill an exercise
that involves scrambling the reactor sounds ominous doesn't it scram the reactor oh no don't
scram the reactor scrambling the reactor is actually a good thing scrambling the reactor is
when you shut the reactor down you have control rods you move the control rods in you neutralize
the the reaction the nuclear reaction this is actually what they did too in japan after the
earthquake as soon as there was seismic activity pow they shut those reactors down scram the reactors
the problem that they had afterwards was with the tsunami damaging i suspect it was their intake
their seawater intake that for used for cooling and they couldn't dissipate all that heat that had
already been generated and then it became a you know an avalanche so to speak of circumstances
anyway we're somewhere we're supposed we're not supposed to be and it was quiet
so the captain figures we're going to do some nuclear drill scram the reactor pow scram the
reactor normal procedure as we start to come up to periscope depth make sure that no we're not
going to hit anybody up on the surface come up raise the snorkel mast start the diesel generator
well they try starting the diesel generator which is common commonplace wouldn't start
wouldn't start and what had happened is there was this multi pin connector that for whatever
reason disintegrated in the back of the of the diesel control panel so it's kind of like well
that's going to take two days to put back together you know so we're on battery power to be honest
with you we knew it was a drill and we were all real sloppy rigging for reduced electrical that's
where we shut down on non-vital systems and we knew it was a drill so we were very slow in doing it
we expended over half of our battery energy in that period of time so now all of a sudden the
reactor shut down we can't start the diesel generator we've just consumed 50 of our battery
power because we were screwing around kind of dragging our feet with this exercise so we realized
what was happening and basically the decision was made restart the reactor well they try restarting
the reactor and the reactor won't start and we've consumed all of our battery power so now
we went to this like super super rig for reduced electrical where there's like you know emergency
lighting and all the environmental systems are down so the air all of a sudden is almost
unbreathable and it's it's it's in excess of 120 degrees and it's it's humid and it's just miserable
can't get the reactor started and in my job surveillance i was down to one receiver i shut
all my sophisticated stuff down i'm down to one receiver you can't make the story up it's like
holy crap here comes the fleet it's like what are you talking about here comes the freaking
soviet fleet headed right towards us like you gotta be kidding so it got really really hairy
because this is the type of thing that like world war three could start over what's a submarine doing
in our harbor you know violating our sovereign territory and all of this stuff you know we just
we couldn't get get caught so truth be told they were able to get the reactor started they
had to kind of amend amend their procedures and come to find out it was actually a reactor control
switch had failed it was a series of circumstances we called that day anybody that served on the boat
in that era affectionately known as black tuesday because things were really really bad and i had
it good i mean my space normally where i worked i had a wear like foul weather jacket to stay warm
because of all the air conditioning of course all the air conditioning was down
but i tell you what the guys in the engineering spaces i mean they were stripped down to their
underwear and no shirts and they're just sweat and port sweat point i mean it's temperature skyrocketed
you know 150 160 degrees back there in the engineering spaces you're trying to troubleshoot
something but anyway it all worked out good in the end but that's the necessity of backup battery
now a lot of you may be saying well i'm never going to work on a nuclear submarine or a ship
or whatever no you might go to work as a biomedical electronics tech at a hospital
guess what hospitals have backup battery banks you might go to work for the federal aviation
administration federal aviation administration down in auburn washington at the mountain region
air route traffic control center i don't know if any of you are aware of that facility if you've
go to the like the muckleshoot casino down there it's like right across the street it's a big building
fences around it garb guards all kinds of stuff like that that's where they control all the air
traffic in the northwestern united states from western montana to the pacific ocean from the
canadian border all the way to uh northern california if you're an airplane in flight you're talking
to somebody in auburn washington they lose the power at that facility guess what the whole
northwestern united states aircraft are flying blind so they were kind of smart about this they
put in a battery backup system so as soon as the power ac crashes this these batteries have power
inverters and that brings it back up online so they don't miss a beat once the batteries are up
online then they have diesel generators and another building on the property that will go
ahead and kick in and they have huge huge fuel tanks so they could power that for a very very
long period of time if any of you have ever heard of the news of the past a lot of times if they
have a glitch like an air traffic control system and switching over to backup power that's actually
what what the problem is is going from ac to that battery backup if that if it if it doesn't happen
seamlessly all of those systems go down you all know with computers you got to reboot computers
so you have aircraft flying blind without air traffic control for a period of time
so it could be somewhat of a inconvenience safety concern so a lot of you are going to see this
actually one of the most reliable systems and this is uh i don't know how many of you still
just have an old-fashioned power um old-fashioned telephone lying to your home pots it is called
and basically what that is is an old school just two wires coming to your home most of us now are
on broadband and voice over ip and all this kind of crap the old school telephones were the most
reliable you could have a power outage you could have earthquake whatever and you pick that phone
up and you're still going to get a dial tone because that dial tone is being generated by backup
battery banks at the central office and that's powering the phone system so you know i've
experienced a lot of blackouts in my life where the power would go out and i never lost that dial
tone on the phone now you know how many of you are like with comcast you know i mean what was i
thinking when i went to actually believe it or not i'm not i'm not just talking to talk i'm walking
to walk before i came to work today i actually called quest i want to get an old school line back
into my house because i'm looking at my phone bill my freaking phone bill i don't like paying like
70 bucks a month for you know call or id and call waiting and the only people that call me
are people that i don't want calling me okay so why am i paying 70 bucks a month to have
something that i don't want and i don't want to shut the line off because i have some other uses
for that line so i called quest and i'm like it's kind of unusual request you have any of the
old school lines that you know i could still have you know yeah yeah yeah and how much 13 dollars and
50 cents a month plus tax i'm like that's what i want can you port my existing number out back
to it yeah no problem so i'm gonna get that scheduled 1350 a month no you can't no long
distance or anything but i don't want it for that i want it for that 911 i want it i don't know why
i'm gonna disconnect the ringer because again the only people people that want to call me to call
my cell number you know but i still need that if you have an alarm system at your home you need it
if you've got a satellite tv box for updates and pay per view you need it so it could call into the
mother ship on a daily basis so battery backups are still out there so i don't think you're not
going to go to work in the industry and never see a battery backup now you're all familiar with
lead acid nickel cadmium nicad how many of you are familiar with nicad batteries nicad have been out
for for a long period of time nicad's had a nasty habit of generating what was called a memory
and what that memory was in essence is uh if any of you have ever had your arm or leg in a cast
and you don't use it basically the muscles forget how to fully exercise your range of motion you
got to go through through some therapy to get your arm working again right kind of the same thing
with a nicad a nicad if you didn't fully discharge it and then fully charge it it would only think
that its range was in this narrow margin of performance so the problem with nicads with
like cam corridors and cell phones where as soon as that voltage started to drop a little bit you
start to get the low battery indicator and to preserve the electronic integrity of what you
were doing it would shut off then you'd get it sticking in your charger charge it back up and
what would happen it would only get used to operating in this little room right here some of
the manufacturers got smart and they put a little button on there and they could connect it to a load
and drag it down all the way and then recharge it all the way i've gotten because i understand this
stuff i've gotten exceptional exceptional use out of out of nicad batteries when my kids were
growing up my first video camera back in the 1980s i had one of those big vhs units don't laugh it was
vhs at least it wasn't beta should have been beta beta was better but that's another story for another
day but it was one of these big herken vhs you know and it took this big 12 volt battery pack
and i went to replace it and i was looking at some different vendors and they're looking at me
and they couldn't believe that it was the original battery pack it's like we don't even carry
replacements for those anymore you know how long have you had this uh since the beginning
well you know how could this be it's because i understood how to take care of nicads what i did
is i made myself a dummy load and when the battery got low you know i mean obviously if it was a
birthday party or something that i wanted a video i could recharge the battery but at least on a regular
basis i would discharge it all the way and then charge it all the way and by the way with nickel
cadmium cells when i say charge it all the way that doesn't mean slapping on your quick charger
like if you've got a cordless drill at home a makita i got a quick charger for it worst thing
you could do mine still works being all those quick chargers work they actually have a temperature
sensor in the battery pack when the battery starts to get hot it must be full so it cuts the battery
off that's not a full charge the only true method of charging an icad properly is a timed charge
a trickle charge where you're trickling in a note amount of current and then you bring it gradually
up to that 100% now slam it and then the thing gets hot and then shuts off some of the early ones
once it would stop charging it would cut it off right and then what would happen when the battery
cooled down it started charging again and then would get hot and shut down so you ended up with
this cycle and these were the real cheap chargers and those would just eat these nicads so if you
know about nicads nicads weren't that bad they really weren't the next thing was uh nickel metal
hydride nickel metal hydride that was the next evolutionary process rechargeable battery secondary
cells a lot of us had them years ago and our cell phones worked very very well less prone to that
memory condition with all these secondary batteries though is it a limited unlimited number of charges
and discharges and recharges no every rechargeable battery when it's brand new you only get so many
cycles out of it they're not going to last forever even if you take good care of them and then now
lithium ion lithium ion if you've got a newer cell phone probably came with lithium ion that's
really the best that's out there now i don't know i was just i don't know i was thinking about that
the other day because i've and i've actually gotten new battery put aside that i've never charged it
still in the package so um i don't know i've been keeping my eyes open in the store for that style
pack and i'm sure it's available on the internet but what am i going to have to pay for it you know
the other thing though too check this out because you know i'm not the smartest guy but i kind of
understand some of this stuff some of those cases you could actually cut them open and you could
replace the cells yourself you know and then re bond the plastic back together and i've done that
on several things myself as i've reconditioned put in new packs i had a i had some i forgot what the
heck it was it took nycad batteries and then what i did is i cut it open and it was just standard
nycad battery usually doesn't have the label on it but the sizes were the same and then what i did
is i went to a harbor freight tools and i bought nickel metal hydride rechargeable cells and i put
the pack back together soldered it up good to go good to go so in some some cases you could do that
a lot of high performance things too even like jet aircraft if you're down drive past bowing field
you see a lear jet sitting out there believe it or not what they're typically going to use is not
the lead acid they're actually going to have nycad packs so when they start the engines on the jet
they're starting it off a nycad and those are very very expensive so it's kind of amazing
you're a multi-millionaire flying around in a lear jet a lot of times you know what those guys will
ask for they want a starter pack to be brought over with a little tug and there's a cart with a
bunch of batteries on it a lot of acid batteries and then you plug that into the aircraft and then
what they'll do is they'll they'll use that so they don't have to put a charge discharge cycle in
their night nycads in their precious lear jet it's like man if you could afford a freaking lear jet
you can afford a new freaking nycad you know but i used to work part you're the funnest job i ever
had i worked part-time at an airport canada kept those guys always used to amaze me and a lot of
them wouldn't a lot of them would tip you you know you bring that pack over whatever here you go go
go buy yourself a good lunch here son oh thank you sir you know i didn't mind somebody's dude so
man i'm saving you money you're not even tossing me a bone come on man the heck next time i'm gonna
park you out there this is the cutaway view of a lead acid cell now connecting cells and batteries
connecting cells and batteries we have series aiding this this chart here is is erroneous
um let me draw this on the board here what we're talking about here series aiding means
negative positive i can assume that this is what voltage
1.5 volts so if i connect it to another cell
i can assume that this is 1.5 volts and if i go ahead and even connect the third cell down here
i can assume that this is 1.5 volts what am i up to right here what's my total voltage
from this point to this point okay very good 4.5 volts everybody see that
everybody see that so what i'm doing here is by series in series aiding i am increasing the
electrical pressure that's available to me the amount of current that's available here
is going to stay the same because this is what we call a series configuration and current will
always stay the same in a series configuration so by connecting up batteries or cells like this
i could get a higher voltage but current will remain the same does that make sense
now down below it talks about series opposing series opposing would be like
okay i got a negative and a positive here
y'all agree with that
then i'm going to connect the positive and a negative here
so i've got 1.5 volts here and how many volts do i have here
minus 1.5 volts so what's my voltage across zero so
my slide which is politically correct says it has little practical value it's actually stupid
this is like you know you're you're putting a battery in backwards why come my flashlight no
work and you take them out you realize you're putting one of the cells backwards has little
practical value this one's adding 1.5 volts this one's taking 1.5 volts away you're putting
a negative and a negative here current's not going to want to flow again it has little practical
value yeah challenging electronic students when they're going through a theory course like this
it really is because i could draw like five or six of these and then you got it let's see plus
1.5 plus 1.5 minus 1.5 minus so we are going to give you some problems like that that have
voltages because quite frankly when you do get into sophisticated electronic equipment
you're going to see that there are some voltages that are being added to a circuit and some that
are being taken away from a circuit so from a math standpoint a theory standpoint it does have value
in studying it in parallel and again this is a this is a typo here these should not be equal
signs this should be total current is equal to i1 plus i2 plus i3 let me show you this one
actually let me just go to the next slide and i'll show you on the slide this is what we were
talking about or this is what i was talking about i don't know if we're talking about it it's what i'm
talking about one point uh this is three volts three volts and three volts is equal to how much
across this six volts can you dig it all right so here we got three volts and three volts which is
equal to six volts connected in parallel with six volts why why come why come i do this why would
i possibly what is the advantage of this over this what's that is the voltage increased
you said to increase the voltage in the current is the voltage increased
no i still get how much electrical pressure am i getting out of the circuit six volts
what's that increase the capacity tell me more about that i like that
very good batteries are measured in in amp hours how much current
over a period of time can they provide us with so let's look at this scenario for a
minute let's say that we all have a sailboat wouldn't it be nice if we all had a sailboat
we could sail off to the sunset let's sail up to the sand one islands and hang out up there
okay i've got a six volt it's an unusual sailboat i've got a six volt anchor light
so when i find a nice cove up in the sand wands and i drop my anchor by coast guard regulations
i'm required at night to turn on a light that says i'm anchored and it's a six volt light
the problem is this configuration here will only last for six hours
and then the light gets dimmer and dimmer and dimmer until it goes out
and shortly after it goes out the fog rolls in and here comes along a washington state ferry
and it runs us down and it ruins ruins all of our fun that we're having on our sailboat in sand
one islands so i'm a pretty smart guy what i did is i went out and i got another battery pack
and i i put it in parallel with the original battery pack the original battery pack lasted
for how many hours how many is this going to last for for the same size load it's going to last
twice as long how's about them apples
that's how it works so basically he or she who has the most batteries in parallel is going to
last the longest playing it simple it was actually kind of a funny story
um going to sea for extended periods of time under the water there are very few things i mean even
reading material books how many books can you bring with you what can you do so back in the day
the only the only form of media for me basically for music was cassette tapes
so i had my little i didn't even have a sony walkman i eventually upgraded to a sony walkman
but originally i had some you know off brand cassette player and actually that was a big
advancement because prior to that you needed the big cassette player put the cassette in headphones
you know no eight track i'm talking strictly the cassettes we this was high tech cassettes
so i bought something that looked like a walkman but of course walkman is a trademark of sony
corporation and this was some off brand so it was so funny too because uh you know everything
that we did was super secret you couldn't tell anybody we couldn't even tell our spouses that
we were going so all of a sudden you see a guy in uniform you know at the at the exchange
you know buying like you know five tubes of toothpaste and seven bars of soap and you
know a hundred packs of batteries and he's in uniform with his unit you know on his ball cap
and you know it's kind of like ah you're stocking up you guys are going to see you know so you didn't
have to be like an intelligence expert to figure out who's coming and going so anyway we're going
to go to see and it was going to be like a seven month operation that doesn't mean that we'd be
totally in communicato or away from civilized uh you know shopping or whatever but for at least
a minimum of 90 days we're going to be underwater so i go out and my my cassette player took
double a batteries so i bought a bunch of these double a batteries well come to find out that this
thing was such a piece of crap that i could want i could listen to 1.5 sides of a cassette tape
before the batteries would die and i'm like i'm not a math expert but i'm like i'm going to run out
of batteries like really quick so after i used up all my double a batteries and i still want
that to listen to music because again you're living with 120 other people in a steel tube 285
feet long 28 foot diameter when you could put those headset on and you could kind of zone out
that was you know a little piece of piece of tranquility you could have so i'm like well i'm
a smart guy i got electronics background how tough can this be so i cracked the thing off i figured
out what voltage i could wire in externally so then what i did is um uh every every division on
the submarine had different consumable products they were responsible for stocking because you
didn't have a store so actually for my division it was pens pads paper so if you were a nuclear
reactor guy you'd come to me and say hey joe you know can i need some pens look screw you
you know but i'd give you the pens or the paper whatever you need well ironically the division
that was responsible for first um uh providing batteries ironically were the electricians so
when i went back and i said you know i need some batteries what do you guys got well you know we
got these sizes here and they were the you know the big d size and they were military you know olive
drab green big batteries and i'm like yeah give me like eight of them you know so i got these eight
batteries and i wind them all up wired them all up combination series parallel and then i got
electrical tape and i like this big freaking brick you know and so i got this this nice little
portable cassette player that i paid you know an exorbitant amount of money for and then i got this
big brick i'm like so it was truly a portable device you know so anyway it worked and it worked
fine and then i got so used to carrying this thing around that it was like months later we're in port
and i'm still carrying this brick and i even with a handle on it it was and it kept working and i'm
like why am i doing this this thing is stupid i finally i actually cut it off and i threw it
over the side of the boat it's probably sitting in the bottom of the Thames river in connecticut
still but the moral of the story is that portable cassette recorder operated off of 1.5 volt cells
did it not what was the difference when i added the brick to it those are 1.5 volt cells right
capacity physically more chemical physically more capacity higher amp hour rating and it
kept going and going and going and going and going so this is one of the principles for a lot of
you that may pursue alternative energy whatever that means basically it's the efficiency of your
cells how many cells do you have how much energy can you store actually had a student that is a
project he owns the property in central washington and um living off the grid had a backup generator
also put in some photovoltaic cells and as a project he basically did the math and figured out
like on the shortest day of the year how many appliances am i going to want to run in my little
cabin and will i have enough electrical energy to make it through the night and that's basically
what his target was and he says i need this much storage capacity and that's what he used as a target
actually increased that i think by about 20 percent and then in the summer how many how many hours
could he use photovoltaic to charge that and then what's the minimum amount of time that he needs to
run his generator to get those batteries up to that full capacity charge so if you understand
the math behind this let me tell you your commodity out there because a lot of people
don't have a freaking clue they don't they don't when i was on a cruise a couple weeks ago on
vacation i met a uh i'm trying to i'm trying to get on better terms with this guy and actually
we've been corresponding via email he owns a 52 foot yacht in miami and an airplane high-performance
aircraft and um he likes taking his his yacht down to the bahamas in dropping anchor and he
doesn't like running the generator so we had a whole discussion about energy management photovoltaic
what's the minimum amount of time that you could run your generator can you add batteries to augment
the system and i mean this guy he's a couple masters degree highly intelligent and he didn't
have a clue of what i was talking about so if you understand this let me tell you
you got it going on when it comes to this type of stuff makes sense
voltage rise is the energy we put into a circuit voltage drop is the energy that we take out of
the circuit if you will is given up as the electrons encounter resistance to the circuit
so voltage rise would be like your batteries voltage drop is what you're powering
and you know what they should always be equal to each other if you've got a five-volt battery pack
and you're powering a radio that radio should be consuming five volts five volt voltage rise five
volt voltage drop makes sense should never end up with energy left over if you are that's what we
call a malfunction you've got a malfunction you've got voltage not going from the source to the load
the voltage rise that the power company provides my house with is 240 volts a c
my voltage drop for my home is 240 volts a c if it was 239 that means a volt is being dropped
somewhere underground or in the overhead it's not supposed to be getting dropped there question
voltage rise
yeah that's your question is more related to power i'm talking simply voltage i'm talking simply
voltage so that if i've got and i'm keeping it real simplistic and you need to understand it in a
simplistic manner if this calculator takes three volts dc the three volts dc is going to be my
voltage drop right if i want this thing to operate properly i need to give it a voltage rise of
three volts so that's all i'm saying voltage rise is the power is the elect the voltage pressure
you apply to it the voltage drop is the pressure that gets consumed by the load and they should
always be equal if they're not wherever the missing voltages that's a problem
if you're consuming less than what the power company's providing you with you've got a problem
because that missing voltage has got to be somewhere and where you find it that's the problem
make sense okay we'll talk more about that concept but right now i just want you to understand
voltage rise equals voltage drop
ground ground this is an interesting concept and if you hear ever driven over snow qualmi pass
how do you know you're going over snow qualmi pass it's not a trick question
how do you know you're going over the pass there's a sign on the side of the road that says
snow qualmi pass
i try to keep it basic here now that sign also says snow qualmi pass and there's another bit
of information there elevation elevation above what north bend seattle above where
sea level you guys are all smart you guys are one of my smartest classes here in a while
high tide or low tide average you know what we call that
msl mean sea level mean sea level so one of the things that al gore is talking about like sea
level rising that's what he's talking about so his big concern is all the expense of changing all
the signs elevation now obviously it's going to cause a lot of problems if mean sea level if
the polar ice caps melt and sea level rises it's going to be a lot of flooding and devastation
okay especially during hurricanes and high tide events and tsunamis and everything else
so we use the height of the ocean mean sea level as a reference for all of our height measurements
it's actually really important when i fly my airplane it's one of the first things instruments
i calibrate when i get in is the altimeter and that shows me how high i am above sea level
it's kind of important i flew my airplane friday night i went across the top of c-tac airport
i had airplanes taken off and arriving and i'm flying through there in my small plane
you kind of think it's important that i know what else to do what i'm at
yeah and as a matter of fact they check back with you when you establish radio communications
they say you know hold maintain 1500 forces kilo what's your current altitude 1500 roger we got
you at 1500 you're cleared through our airspace because they want to make sure you're not off
it's important to me so that's how we calibrate if you're in hiking driving even boating mean sea
level is kind of critical isn't it high tide low tide if you're at low tide you hit a freaking rock
it's kind of important you have the right charge and you understand low tide
mean mean no mean me and mean which is average so when we started playing around with electricity
we had to come up with a methodology if you will to what's what's what can we compare what's a
benchmark of something that's in a neutral natural state
earth why because this is where we be okay this is where we're standing so literally what we got
is a ground rod an eight foot ground rod drive it into the earth and say you know what you connected
you're connected to ground and you're connected to zero potential it's not positive it's not
negative it's neutral why because it's driven into the freaking ground so what happens is
the idea kind of caught on so the power company out at the power pole or your transformer if you
have underground they got a rod and they drove it into the ground they said you know what we're
going to sell you 240 volts ac in reference to ground at your home at your load you should get
240 volts in reference to ground the electrical generating plant where they generate the electricity
they drove a ground rod in and they reference that voltage to ground so we use it as a reference to
all of our voltages which are really quite critical i'm kind of making fun of this in a in a in a
goofy way but in all honesty it's actually really really critical like right now at my home i've got
the electrical connection coming from the power company in reference to hopefully ground i get my
telephone line soon to be replaced kicking at old school and that needs to be referenced to
ground i've got a satellite receiver that has the antenna up on the roof that antenna needs to
be referenced to ground the satellite receiver also plugs into the electrical outlet that should
be referenced at ground and it also needs to be plugged into the telephone connection that should
be referenced at ground actually when i had con cast installed in my home it was over the summer
i had time off i was watching these dudes install it and because i teach electronics i'd always like
to say hey dude what's going on man how long you've been with comcast these people treat you okay
what's the deal what's your educational background what's going down you know how are you doing that
if i could learn something from you somebody that doesn't installs all day long i'm gonna pick your
brain and see what i can learn anyway see this dude hooking his freaking contraption up to my
my my faucet i'm like what are you doing he said i'm connecting this to ground we got a reference
at the ground i'm like hold on cease and desist what are you doing well i got to connect this to
ground i says my freaking water connection well yeah but this is you know water pipe is a good
ground no you see that right there driven into the ground that's a ground rod okay that's the
same ground rod that the power company's providing me with the ground it's the same ground that everything
else in the house is connected to so why are you going to connect it to this faucet coming out all
you don't know if it's pvc inside he really got an attitude and i'm like no boom cease and desist
i got a supervisor out there and i had assigned paperwork modified install modified install
customer request i want ground and i wrote that right in there me want ground to be connected to
ground rod you know so they all really got an attitude and stuff you know but it's kind of like
no i mean it really needs to happen because especially too this is back in the day when
you had a computer modem you could have that modem you could have your computer power supply you
could have all these things and if they're not all connected to ground they could develop a difference
in potential and if they develop a difference in potential you know how that's going to manifest
itself with highly sophisticated electronic systems not necessarily sparks of fire could be gremlins
it could just be real wacky behavior all of a sudden your satellite receiver starts rebooting
itself all of a sudden your computer reboots itself all of a sudden your modem kicks you out
so when they started doing all of this interbuilding networking and everything it became a real big
issue to make sure that ground was really ground years ago when they built this building uh well
actually they renovated this building behind here they pulled up the concrete they drilled down into
the earth and they put in this huge ground for the school to make sure it wasn't just a standard
ground rod this was like drilled way down into into the earth you know you can see like the
core and stuff and i'm just kidding but it was it was it was pretty far down in this is actually
one of the problems they have like in arizona because of the sand and in the desert and it's
we have good ground here because it's like all wet but in arizona they have some problems so
i think there's some uh code variants down there where they're like actually connecting
like rebar in the concrete you know foundation and such and they do some different stuff down there
i'm not totally familiar with it but some of those dry climates they have to do it john
it was and they were actually adding chemicals to almost create like a p and an n type material
there so current would only have one way to travel through that like a giant diode buried in the
ground behind here so i wish i'd take a picture it's like i know you know you're not believing me
but it was like a drilling rig out there it's like black gold texas tea we're going to hollywood
anyway the other type of electrical ground is electrical ground and this provides a common
reference point we use this electrical ground because the 747 taking off would look stupid
with a big reel spool wired trailing behind it okay it just wouldn't look right so for pure
aesthetic purposes we can't do this so we use what's called electrical ground your car uses
electrical ground airplanes use electrical ground ships use electrical ground and what that in
essence means is a chassis ground now most of our home appliances use both we ground the chassis
the electrical ground to earth ground so that if you have a three prong plug one of those plugs
that round plug is ground and that's connected to the chassis
so be aware of this in the lab you're going to have some problems with ground
because you don't understand what i'm talking about some of the equipment that we have in the
lab is isolated from ground so when you connect the negative lead like on a power supply you think
you're connecting ground as a chat you're not that negative if you have a dc power supply in the
lab you have a positive you have a negative they're isolated from ground they have nothing to do with
earth ground so in some cases you could create a ground loop in there and they get wacky results
with your equipment most commercial consumer industrial products are for the purposes of
electrical safety that chassis will be a ground and that's connected also to earth ground question
electrical ground can vary from whatever you want
absolutely absolutely and that's one of the things that could be a real problem
is you might think you get into a piece of equipment and say oh wow look at this big metal
look at this big um if this was inside this is actually a dc power supply like we use in the lab
okay this in the back here is a heat sink if this was installed inside some big piece of
equipment like a radar system you see this metal you assume that oh this metal here that's that's
that's ground that must be ground because it's metal right and all of a sudden you know you put
your hand on there you lean into it and you get electrocuted this in some cases could be electrically
isolated from ground this could be connected to some big high power transmitter tube for the purpose
of dissipating energy and it could actually have like that mica that i passed round earlier
it could have a big sheet of that mica there electrically insulating it from the rest of
the chassis or frame of the piece of equipment and that's taken out many a good technician
so never assume never assume generally yes some of the worst shocking experiences i've ever had
were working on a lot of tube circuits because sometimes those tube circuits were notorious
for too prong old school tube amplifier you plug it in too prong and you didn't have that
electrical ground in there all of a sudden you you go up against the chassis and you're getting
getting zapped by 300 volts make sense all right we talked about current flow of electrons
in a specified direction happens at the speed of light voltage and there's only six different
methods of producing voltage friction magnetism chemicals light heat and pressure we talked about
voltage rise that's the energy that we put into a circuit voltage drop is the voltage we get out
of the circuit voltage rise and voltage drop should equal each other if they don't you got a problem
am i being silly am i keeping it basic yeah but you know what i have fixed in my career dozens
of problems that that was the symptom and the symptom is the equipment doesn't work right what's
the first thing that i do check the voltage coming in if the voltage coming in isn't good
it's not going to work right then you got to find out where the missing voltages maybe it's a brown
out maybe it's a brown out maybe the power company they're having a problem with with with generating
power and giving you know the feed but those two always need to equal each other we also talked
about ground earth ground is a freaking rod driven into the earth why the earth well it's where we
stand it's where we live it is what it is neutral natural state and we talked about electrical
ground which is typically the chassis could be the airframe of an airplane which is actually kind of
odd it's kind of odd when they talk about an airplane because what's Boeing building now
787 what's that thing made out of aluminum composite think about this one by using the
chassis of your automobile as ground you know how much wiring it saves on your car
go ahead make a stab at it you know how much how much wiring it saves on your car
saves half the wiring if your car was made out of composites and it was not a conductive material
you would have double the amount of wires on your car because we use the chassis as an electrical
connection make sense okay i've got a question for you and i'm going to ask you about this uh in
our next lecture and i want you to discuss this in teams and as a class since there are six different
methods of producing voltage i am going to design a deep space probe to boldly go where no man has
gone before so this deep space probe is going to probe deep space that's why it's called deep space
probe what method should i use to power this thing in outer space so that it keeps going
and going and going and sending data back to earth through a high power transmitter so we could we
could monitor its journey from afar i want you to think about this i want you to discuss it as teams
in next week when we lecture on e-lc 110 i'm going to expect an answer from unit better b
and the right answer they're all hell's going to break loose any questions question
um
radiating something absolutely
sounds like you got some good ideas that are worth pursuing
enough said we've got somebody in here that's thinking that's cool question how do you measure
ground it is measured in ohms um what you do is you have to it's a comparative process of what
you assume is a good ground and um you're basically comparing your ground unknown ground to that good
ground but there's an assumption may made that by getting an eight foot long rod in in driving it in
that that is providing you with an adequate adequate ground you need something else to compare it to
in order for your assessment to be accurate what are you measuring it in reference to
okay well you're doing from an electrical outlet if i wanted to verify that this is a good ground
um in actuality what i need to do here is i could measure ground against my neutral
those two should be connected back at that box okay so between the hot lead and ground
in between the hot lead and neutral i should end up with the same difference in potential
then going with a multimeter to that box i should get that same difference in potential across the
two and that basically is letting me know that the ground and the neutral for that particular
circuit are valid but for you to compare a good earth ground to a not so good earth ground
i don't know how you'd go about that other than you you've got to you've got to basically know
that one of them is is good and that's actually one of the things about ground too that um i don't
any of you are aware a lot of am radio stations are located in swamp lands it's the best place
that you could put an am radio station because in a swampy area you get a really good ground
so you get a really good ground plane and because the frequencies that you radiate at
it's going to ensure much better transmission of that rf signal a second choice is also a field
a pasture where cows graze and urinate and keep everything nice and moist okay and healthy
that's why even in new york city grown up in connectica all the new york city radio stations
wabc wnbc wcbs all of their transmitters were located in new jersey the meadowlands
okay if there's any giant fans here through all their transmitters were located why because it was
a marshy location fm transmitters different if you're in new york city where do you want to
put an fm transmitter top of the empire state building why because it's the highest it doesn't
have as much to do you still need a good ground but it's not as essential as that low frequency
transmitters so ground is important folks we're going to talk more about it we can have a course
in ground we honestly could five credit class and just talk about ground testing processes um
you know some of the some of the different things that that we've encountered with ground
50 years ago 30 years ago 20 years ago ground wasn't that big of a deal ground right now is very
very big because a difference equates to a difference in potential and even a small difference in
voltage could create could create a circuit it caused that circuit to go here's your final technical
term for the night cattywampus all right all right it's all i got folks have a good
okay let's get started chapter four chapter four
just kind of as a review to get us up to speed with
what we've talked about thus far we talked about the fundamental physics of electricity
where does electricity come from and uh what subatomic properties mean to both materials
the type of materials that we use in harnessing electricity and electronics and also how materials
are affected when we apply energy to them when we apply energy to matter we could
knock some electrons free from the valence shell when we knock those electrons free from
the valence shell that represents potential energy right because we could uh we could direct
those free electrons through a circuit and make them do some work for us right
so we call that flow of electrons current current the flow of electrons in a specified
direction and that specified direction is negative to positive and every 6.24 times 10 to the 18th
electrons equals one coulomb one coulomb per second equals one ampere
so we talked about current already the next thing we're going to talk about tonight
chapter four is resistance or as the french would say resistance right i mean resistance
and this is kind of easy to remember one of the questions that i'm going to ask you in the future
in lecture is going to be what has resistance and the answer is easy everything has resistance
everything some things have more resistance than others but basically everything has resistance
there's only one thing that i'm aware of that doesn't have resistance and it only exists in a
laboratory what am i talking about superconductor superconductor superconductivity is the utilization
of materials that have no resistance zero resistance so once we get that stuff up and running once
science masters that they're going to be dealing with materials that have no resistance
that's going to revolutionize the industry because right now it's something we just got
to deal with and there's a lot of losses associated with it the power companies would love to get a
whole superconductivity at room temperature they'd love to harness that question
do modern computers have superconductors no no it is not feasible right now for any
everyday use it only exists in a laboratory at extremely cold temperatures the use of a cryogen
cryogenics and believe it or not i shared with you right what what material are they having the
best luck with ceramics who would have thunk ceramics ceramic a great insulator at room temperature
but at these extremely cold temperatures some of these ceramics take on superconductive properties
anyway we're not going to talk anymore about that i'd love to but we just don't have time
what we've got to do is embark on our journey here chapter four resistance
after completing this chapter you're going to be able to define resistance and explain its
effect in a circuit determine the tolerance range of a resistor identify carbon composition
wire wound and film resistors identify potentiometers and rheostats describe how a variable
resistor operates decode a resistor's value using a color code or alphanumeric code
identify the three types of resistor circuits and calculate out total resistance in series
parallel and series parallel circuits resistance is the opposition to electron flow in a circuit
what has resistance everything except superconductors everything everything has resistance
if you went out and bought a new extension cord over the weekend even though you paid a lot of
money and it's a really good high quality extension cord still has resistance if you went out and bought
cable for your speakers you're rewiring your house and you're putting in some new speakers
and you went out and got some of that monster cable cost your fortune still has resistance
everything has resistance it's expressed by the symbol r
it's measured in ohms ohms discovered by a guy by the name of john ohms
abbreviated with the greek symbol omega the greek greek symbol omega
and although everything has resistance the amount of resistance varies from material
to material silver is the best meaning it has the least found in nature so if we if you went out
the periodic table and played around with it and tried to find what materials on the periodic table
you could find and which one had the least resistance it would be silver copper is the most common
meaning it's really the cheapest even though it's expensive in the grand scheme of things that's why
you got these people like cannibalizing stuff taking stuff apart to steal the freaking wire
what took the cake was did you hear down in Tacoma a couple months ago they've got the uh
that drawbridge that go down down by downtown Tacoma the big ships go underneath
the cannibal they just got in there one night and they tore it all up the control panel it's
gonna i don't know it's like millions of dollars to rebuild this thing and they just stole all the
wire out of it gutted it and i just started turning into a recycling place yeah i got all this wire
sure you know how much you're kidding
huh that's nuts
for legitimate people that's nuts
now washington or oregon washington washington huh
gold doesn't tarnish so although gold is not as good a conductor as silver by plating it
by plating copper with gold then you get the best of both worlds you have something that
doesn't tarnish because the problem with silver if any of you have any silver jewelry or silver
wear about the same time you're done polishing it you need to polish it again because being exposed
to oxygen oxidizes it gold that doesn't happen no oxidation means you get a superior connection
when you use it as a termination on an electrical connector resistance is affected by temperature
it is affected by temperature typically resistance has a positive temperature coefficient we call it
positive temperature coefficient meaning as temperature increases the amount of resistance
in a conductor increases which is a problem if you have an extension cord and it starts to get hot
the extension cord is going to possess more resistance if it possesses more resistance that
means less current makes it to your load and the extension cord is going to get even hotter if it
gets even hotter its resistance is going to increase more limiting the amount of current even more
that's going so that's where you end up with a vicious cycle you let that go on long enough you
end up with an electrical fire so keep that in mind if you've got an extension cord or a cable
that's getting warm getting hot it's a problem it's also affected by size size does matter
when it comes to conductors basically the individual that has the thickest conductor
will have the least amount of resistance so earlier in lecture when i said about connecting
up your speakers using that monster cable if you really are using monster cable and that
cable is really thick the thicker it is the least resistance it has the more energy you transfer
from the source to the load from your amplifier to the speaker and that's a good thing so generally
speaking you want to use the thickest conductor that you can afford or of course adhere to standard
manufacturing processes and there's tables that you could find that show specifically
what is required electrical code dictates that
in your home the majority of circuits in your home are 15 amp circuits they can handle up the
15 amps standard electric code code dictates that you need to use at least 14 gauge wire for those
circuits for 20 amp circuits you have some 20 amp circuits in your in your house maybe in your
kitchen or out in your garage your workroom your utility room electrical code dictates that you
have 12 gauge wire minimum that means that the wire is thick enough to support the flow of 20 amps
of current resistivity is the resistance of a material to current flow resistivity is going to
be different for different materials even good conductors have different levels of resistivity
here is a table that shows us the resistivity and what we use as a benchmark is the resistivity of
silver there's a lot of things in science that we we do like this one we were talking about last
week remember i talked about specific gravity remember specific gravity specific gravity
is a benchmark that we use with fluids and we compare everything to the specific gravity
of pure water h2o at room temperature typically 65 degrees standard temperature
and we say that it has a specific gravity of 1.000
in dealing with conductors we use resistivity which compares resistivity to that to the best known
conductor that we have found in nature which is silver so we say that resistivity has a or excuse
resistivity of 1.000 copper 1.0625 lead 1.370 gold 1.5
and you can see the rest of the table there this compares all resistivity of all materials so silver
has the least resistance it's the best so therefore it has a resistivity we use as a benchmark of 1.000
so do you understand the difference between resistivity and resistance
resistance is measured in ohms resistivity compares everything to silver
conductance the ability of a material to pass electrons conductance
it's expressed as the capital letter g and believe it or not i'm not making this up
the unit that we measure this in is called the mo mho its ohms felt backwards and that's not by a
mistake basically the dude that came up with this said i'm going to spell ohm backwards take the
reciprocal of resistance and call it the mo and see if that makes the textbooks well it made the
textbooks but it's not the unit of measure that we've adopted for measuring resistance
it is the unit we measure conductance with it's abbreviated with the greek symbol
it should be an upside down omega i don't know why it gives me like an orthodox cross
but since that orthodox cross appeared on my slide i'm not inclined to remove it if you
know what i mean it's it may be a sign but all this should be as an upside down omega
a guide by the name of seamans came up with this have any of you heard of seamans before seamans
corporation well this was like great great great granddad seamans and he made the textbooks by
playing around with electrical properties and the rest of that company of course is history
and what seamans said i guess he was in a big argument with ohm back in the day
ohm said we should measure the materials all for their resistance seamans said no we
shouldn't we should measure it all for their conductance
resistance is measured in ohms seamans is like uh conductance is measured in
mose it's ohms spelt backwards well how do you calculate it well it's real simple what you do
here is you take the reciprocal of resistance one over resistance equals conductance i mean i
guess the guy said this to his face with a straight face so what do you say the answer
is you know i say the answer is a thousand ohms well one divided by a thousand well that's how
many mose i think it is and actually since it's thousands of ohms taking the reciprocal of it
means that most of our answers will actually be in millie mose millie mose or micro mose
you can't make this stuff up it used to be that i put out in lecture you will never see a
conductivity meter anytime i put out any absolutes in lecture somebody feels compelled to prove the
prof wrong so i stated you will never see a conductivity meter and then almost immediately
i had a student of my class raise their hand it said i use one every day at work really i've
never seen one in my life where do you work and the individual worked actually at a water treatment
facility a water treatment facility and what they use the conductivity meter for
or literally is to see how much stuff is left over in the water after they treat the water
because i don't know if any of you realize this is water a conductor or is it an insulator
very good very good pure water h2o pure water
basically is an insulator current will not pass through pure water
so if i'm in my hot tub filled with pure water my neighbor's wife comes over and joins me
and my wife comes home this is why you look comfortable in there would you like a piece of
toast and throws a toaster oven that's plugged in provided the tub was filled with pure water
h2o it wouldn't be a shocking experience but due to the fact that my water chemistry actually if
i get in the tub there's going to be salts and oils from my body that are going to contaminate that
and immediately take that pure water into the conductive realm
so again the conductivity meter that my former student was using was to measure the conductivity
of the water the more stuff you have in the water the more conductive it's going to be
i had a terrible bout of um bronchitis several years ago the flu with bronchitis
was terrible the verge of pneumonia was coughing fever felt miserable got up went to the doctor
it's in the middle of winter you know how dry our air gets in our homes in the middle of winter
he recommended i go and get one of those humidifiers fill it up with water plug it in makes humidity
puts humidity in the air
so i stopped that wall green picked one up brought it home it didn't even have an on off switch
you know it's just a tank of water you put the thing on you plug it in and it puts humidity
into the air how tough can this be so i mustered every ounce of courage that i had because i really
felt like i was dying filled the thing up with water climbed under my covers and i'm looking at
the thing sitting over on my uh on my uh nightstand and it's just sitting there so i look at the clock
and i continue to watch it nothing's happening i'm like you've got to be kidding me okay this
thing's busted or worse yet i got to read the owner's manual on something that doesn't even
have an on off switch so i go ahead and i open the owner's manual i'm reading it and stuff
and they say right in there if you plug this in and it doesn't produce steam
in a certain number of minutes i think it was five minutes your your water may be too soft
and add no more than an eighth of a teaspoon of salt to the two and a half gallons in the tank
any more than this could corrode the electrodes blah blah blah blah blah blah so i'm like you know
i'll read the instructions i'll follow the instructions but i don't think an eighth of
a teaspoon of salt in two and a half gallons is going to make much of a difference
so i got an eighth of a teaspoon which is a pinch i mean that's just a pinch of salt
put it in there plug the thing in got back under the covers by the time i was tucked in under the
covers i look over to think steams steams pouring out of it that small amount of impurity was enough
to make that water conductive because those don't boil the water what they physically do their
electrodes and they flash it to steam so its operation is contingent on having water that
has some impurities in it that being said what does this say about our water tap water here in
western washington really good water what's that really where where where do you where are you that
you don't think the water is that good all right they're getting a little slew out there don't they
also depends on which side of red in here generally speaking though here yeah generally speaking here
in western washington in the northwest in general we have pretty good water um if any of you've ever
lived in southern california i mean i'm by i was buying bottled water back there before bottled
water was in vogue you know i was buying bottled water because it tasted like it it didn't have
a taste to it that was super hard yeah um in the midwest i mean you know i stayed with a cousin of
mine that lives in missouri once and you know get the water softener you got like stalactites and
stalagmites in the shower you know because all the minerals that are you know i mean it's just
crazy stuff it's very hard on plumbing i grew up in the east coast actually an artesian well well
water until the city came in and finally you know put but water was perfect so to some areas of
country that are really bad but keep that in mind pure water h2o is an insulator so we have to add
some impurities to it to be able to convert it now everything has resistance but we in electricity
and electronics have a component that is designed to have this property of resistance and amazingly
enough you know what they call it the resistor so a resistor is a specific device designed to
possess the property of resistance it's designed to have resistance it's designed to possess a specific
value of resistance that's predictable comes in two different classifications one is a fixed value
meaning what you see is what you get and the other is a variable value variable meaning we can adjust it
variety of shapes and sizes to meet specific circuit space and operating requirements
so there are all kinds of resistors on the market
these components all have a tolerance associated with them
them tolerance is the amount that the resistor may vary and still be acceptable
the larger the tolerance typically the cheaper it is to manufacture
now believe it or not in electronic components we could have values of tolerances that go
anywhere from plus or minus 20 percent 10 percent five two one percent but 20 percent
can you imagine that everybody get their taxes in on time how do you think that would go over here
irs uh you know i did my taxes and i think they're accurate within 20 percent i think that'd go over
pretty big what about if your employer said you know here's your paycheck on friday but
uh plus or minus 20 percent we're not really sure if it's accurate plus or minus 20 and if you're on
the plus side cool but if you're on the negative 20 it's no either plus plus 20 or minus 20 but
it's a difference yeah it well i don't even know if it's a difference of 40 percent is it i guess it
would be yeah but the way we say it so we're allowed plus 20 or minus 20 but it's a difference
yeah you know if you had a if you've got a hundred ohm resistor keep the math simple right
that means that that resistor out of the package could be anywhere from 80 to 120 ohms
and it's still okay you got what you paid for so it's kind of wacky thing here because
i make you follow all these procedures and policies here dot your eyes cross your t's make sure your
paperwork is accurate you're answering to your team lead the class lead we have all this protocol
here and everything i expect your answers to be very very accurate but when you get over here to
the lab when you get out into industry you're going to find that you're working with components that
have tolerances up to plus or minus 20 percent very very frustrating it's actually one of the
challenges that i had in this industry because in here everything we talk about is theoretical
perfect in industry it's a plus or minus 20 percent and it's okay it's okay
so keep that in mind when you're when you're working with any of these components
some of the different types of resistors we have molded carbon resistors that are made out of
carbon that is molded it's the most commonly used it's inexpensive and it's manufactured in
standard resistor values by standard resistor values what i'm talking about you know like how
tires come in different sizes you know you i mean i'm sure you could if you wanted to go take a
machine class and then make your own wheels on a lathe or whatever on a milling machine down here
you could make your own wheel whatever size you want knock yourself out you could make your own
wheel can you find a tire that's going to fit your wheel probably the first thing that you would do
is look and see what standard tire values are and then make a wheel if you're going to make a custom
wheel that fits standard tire sizes because you're going to end up making a wheel that you can't even
find a tire for it makes sense so resistors are the same thing when we say they come in standard
sizes they come in standard sizes don't expect to go out and find a 103.5 ohm resistor
don't expect to find that on the market you could go buy a package of resistors that are
100 ohm resistors that are plus or minus 10% and start going through and see if you could find one
that's 103.5 but an engineer is never going to specify and say i want 103.5 ohm resistor in the
circuit they'll say i want 100 ohm resistor standard sizes another type of resistor manufacturing
process comes up with what's called a wire wound resistor these are used in high current circuits
and they are made out of wire that is wound because we know that wire has resistance so
if i get a certain amount of wire in one turn then i can make another turn and get
twice the amount and it's literally how it works
the resistance of these varies from a fraction of an ohm to several thousand ohms question
it could change over time it could typically it's going to stay pretty close to what it was
but again since these heat up things could change in the composition of it and alter its
characteristics but that's not a big factor to worry about there's a lot more components
in electronics that are a lot more sensitive than resistors good question
yeah um the question is do tolerances add up is there a cumulative effect yes
i worked um as a contract employee for a biomedical company before i came to tea chair
at lake washington you know 20 plus years ago and this um unmentioned biomedical company i was
working on this product and it was pretty expensive motherboard and um
every component this board kicked my butt i could fix these boards pretty much you know
a lot of them were common problems i'd look at the symptoms you know kind of hold it to
my forehead let me guess resistors you know our r 22 needs to be replaced i'd replace it
fired up the thing works okay i had this one board that i couldn't fix i just could not fix it
and when i looked and evaluated the integrity of every component every component was within
tolerances but when you put it all together one tolerance was pulling it this way another
tolerance was pulling it that way when you put it all together the board would not work it was
an anomaly because everything individually functioned and i kind of got in trouble over it
it was kind of like my ego like i'm not going to let no stink and board kick my butt and um
believe it or not this company had it figured out where every circuit board a technician was allowed
allotted basically 0.65 hours to troubleshoot it so what i would do is if i was given a big
production run to do on racks what i would go through is fix all the easy problems first
and then go to the next easiest problems and work my way so that when i was done i had all
the real difficult problems left and then i'd look and see how much time i had left statistically
see a lot of a lot of you i don't even think realize that this is how you're
met you're measured when you get to industry they know exactly how long it takes to fix this board
okay so if it takes you if it's 0.65 hours and it takes you three hours you're gonna have a
discussion with the boss you're in the wrong profession you're in the wrong so anyway i knocked
out all my boards and i ended up with like four days left so i could go take breaks for four days
goof off and still end up statistically ahead of the game but i want that to fix this board i ended
up screwing around with this board for two and a half two and a half days and then finally you
know my boss saw that you know i'm all i don't have a lot of boards i'm on what are you doing
i'm working on this board since kicking my butt you know i've been working on it two and a half
day two and a half days you know got the thing through to cross the freaking floor we're not
paying you to screw with that and i never was able to fix it but what it was again were tolerances
pulling in different directions so sometimes you could have something that individually
everything is functional you put it together as integrated as a system just doesn't work why
because of what you said tyler's just pulling in different directions
you know it's probably more common than we think
but yeah generally speaking it's it's uncommon one of the and that's why i'm not mentioning the
name of this company one of the things that they did is the majority of boards that were rejected
were because of this capacitor that they use 20 percent tolerance capacitors and the circuit would
not tolerate that it had to be right in the zone so what i would do is i would go to stores and i'd
get a bin of capacitors i'd sit there and then i would test every one and basically sort from
20 percent tolerance to like a five percent tolerance and keep those capacitors so when i
ran into that problem i would just unsotter that cap with the new cap in
wrote it you know employees wrote a beneficial suggestion that a company saying you know why
don't we just buy five percent tolerance capacitors and all these things wouldn't have to be reworked
you know you don't know what you're talking about you know just do your own job or whatever
instead of looking at the big peter i think it was like in a production manager i think his brother
in law sold cheap capacitors for a living or something and he was buying them by the semi load
or it just made no sense it just made apps it is a biome is a well-known biomedical company
it's kind of like why are you doing this why not just use a tight tolerance component to begin with
and avoid somebody having to solder and unsotter and you know repair these boards it's costing them
a ton of money but what do i know film resistors are becoming increasingly popular there's three
different types carbon film metal film and tin oxide film and by film what we mean is a manufacturing
process that lays down a thin film of this material on a substrate and then that becomes the resistive
material so it's um some of the manufacturing processes actually are on par with manufacturing
solid state semiconductor devices surface mount resistors ideal for small circuit applications
available in both thick and thin film if you're working with surface mount resistors and you
have a package open and you sneeze they're gone so don't sneeze near a package of open because
these are tiny these are some of these are almost the size of a head of a pin tiny tiny components
that's what goes into making your cell phones and digital watches and tv's on your wrist that you
could watch and all of that kind of stuff we also have variable resistors variable resistors allow
resistance to vary both linear and logarithmically linear and logarithmically when i say linear do
you know what i'm talking about linear linear means a straight line so if i if i have something on a
linear scale if i adjust if i adjust it a little bit i get a little bit of response if i go to 100
percent i get 100 percent if i go to 50 percent i get half if i go to 25 percent i get a quarter
make sense that's linear it's a straight line logarithmically is on a curve it's on a logarithmic
curve so if i turn a little bit i'm not necessarily it's it's it the whole response is on a curve
so anybody know why we would want to have a control that is not linear that intentionally puts
things on a curve for us very good logarithmic is used for audio
applications because audio is not linear audio is not linear audio some of you may be aware is
measured in decibels and that's on a logarithmic scale so if you want to control something that is
non-linear you need to use a control that's non-linear and audio is that example so that's
why we have this logarithmic control one of the things if you're shopping for these variable
resistors you may also see it say audio on the box because it's for use with audio so volume control
on a radio on a stereo would be a logarithmic control because it's controlling something that is
non-linear and what we're trying to do is get somewhat of a linear response out of it right
when you turn the volume all the way up to a hundred percent you expect to get a hundred percent
when you turn to fifty percent you expect to get fifty percent but since audio is not a linear
we need to use a logarithmic control to get a linear type response make sense
these variable resistors when they're configured as a potentiometer potentiometer
or pot also known as pot a pot when we configure it to control voltage we call it a potentiometer
and i'll show you how we do that in a second but i want you first to hit the i believe button
what type of a device do we use to control voltage variable resistor do we use to control voltage
the answer is potentiometer when we use a variable resistor to control current we call it a rheostat
we call it a rheostat
and basically the way that this thing works
what i just illustrated here on the board is a resistor right and what i've got here
is i've got terminal a and i've got terminal b when i put my meter across terminal a and b
what am i going to what am i going to measure the resistance the resistance between a and
b the total resistance you all agree with me with that okay so if i go ahead now and connect this
up to a circuit
this is the negative terminal this is the positive terminal okay current is going to want to flow
in a counterclockwise direction here and it's going to flow through this resistor
and when it encounters this resistance it's going to limit how much current flows through this circuit
do you agree with me with that okay
so if i go ahead now this is a this is a fixed resistor if i go ahead and turn this into a
variable resistor a variable resistor has a third lead on it
and i'll label this this
terminal c so i have between a and b is my total resistance and then i have
c and what this is is a wiper arm this is a wiper arm and physically what it's going to do is move
up and down and come in contact with either more resistive material or less resistive material
it all depends on your perspective if i have this adjusted right now smack dab in the middle
how much resistance do i have between a and c
half how much resistance do i have between c and b half if i adjusted just just barely touch it just
a little bit now i'm 49 percent on one side 51 on the other tweak it more i'm 40 60 right
80 20 90 10 99 1
so i'm i'm moving this wiper arm coming in contact with a different amount of
resistive material i'll agree with that does that make sense okay now in this particular
configuration i could move this wiper arm up and down all day long am i going to have any effect
on current flowing through the circuit why
it's just flowing between point a and point c excuse me point a and point b point c is
effectively not even part of the path so i can move that wiper arm hey look mom
right nothing's going to change nothing's going to happen
now what if
what if i break this connection here
and come and move this and connect to point c directly
now what's going to happen when i move that wiper arm
what's that total resistance is going to change in the circuit absolutely if i adjust this thing
all the way to the end right here i may have what 100 percent
well if i move it all the way here and it's not in contact with any any resistance 100
percent current flow zero resistance or as close to zero as i could get
when i move the wiper arm all the way to the bottom here now i get 100 percent resistance
minimum current flow so literally when i'm adjusting this wiper arm here i'm adjusting
the amount of you said current in the circuit so i've got this configured right now is what
a real stat a real stat so when i'm using only two terminals of a three terminal device i've
got it configured as a real stat when i adjust my wiper arm i'm literally adjusting the total
amount of resistance and that total amount of resistance is going to affect the total amount
of current flowing in that circuit makes sense i'm going to disconnect this
reconnect this and let's assume that i'm going to have make another connection over here
and this is going to be a voltmeter
i'm going to connect a voltmeter between a and c and i'm going to connect a voltmeter
another voltmeter why because they're cheap right between b and c
when i have this adjusted smack dab in the middle what voltage am i going to get across this
voltmeter half i like you you keep it a basic half that's why i want you to keep it you know
i asked that question i see somebody going for their calculator you know it's i haven't given
you any numbers you can't calculate this one if i've got it set smack dab in the middle i'm
going to get half my voltage here which means i'm going to get my other half voltage down the bottom
okay so if this is 10 volts i get five volts here and five volts here
as soon as i begin to move that wiper arm slightly now i'm that 51 49 60 40 but i'm not
talking about resistance now i'm talking about what voltage so when i connect all three i could
use this as a voltage divider a hundred percent of the voltage it gets applied between a and b gets
divided proportionally between the wiper arm and the outer terminals
when i have it configured like this and i'm dividing voltage or controlling voltage we call that a
potentiometer this is how the volume control on your stereo is connected
this is basically what you're doing and that voltage that voltage that you're controlling
is going typically to a transistor and it's telling that transistor here's more voltage i want you
to amplify more and make the music louder or turn it down and make the music softer i'm going to give
you less voltage to the amplifier the transistor this is how it works so keep that in mind that's
how that's how we say we're either controlling current or or voltage could i use a potentiometer
as a real stat how would i do that
only connect two of the terminals so if you go to radio shack and say do you have any real stats
here that would be a fun question i should give you that as an out of class assignment everybody
go to radio shack and ask if you got any real stats and they'd probably scratch their head and bring
you know but we have some potentiometers you could use a potentiometer as a real stat you only
need to connect to the terminals if you went out and bought special ordered a real stat and it came
in the box and it said real stat could you use a real stat as a potentiometer if it only came
with two terminals now you need that third terminal to be able to divide the voltage make sense
okay resistor identification there's a couple different methods that we use to identify resistors
does anybody know the easiest method of identifying resistors
i love it now the easiest method is when they put the value right on the outside of it with numbers
and letters i always sucker people in with that one because everybody knows resistor color code
now the easiest method is is really when they use numbers and letters and they just say if it's like
a 1000 ohm resistor you know one k ohm it's right in there in black and white you read it you're
good to go another method that they use is alpha numeric code and for a lot of these resistors you're
going to have to like a secret agent use a decoder ring or decoder chart to figure out exactly what
the code means the third easiest method is the color code and of course you can't have a successful
career in electronics unless you understand the color code first thing we're going to take a look
at here is the alpha numeric code if you looked at a small resistor and it had an rn 60d 5 1 1 2 f
on it and you came up to me and you said hey joe what kind of a component is this i would probably
hold my head and say i have no freaking idea what you're going to have to do is you're going to have
to call up this code and decipher it if you work at a company this is one of the things
this is a very difficult judge tough job i got i got to train all of you generically but what
happens is when you go to your specific industries you're going to see some of the same components
day in and day out day in because you're going to get used to your company's product line
but here it's very difficult i'm teaching you generic electronics and there's a lot of different
schemes that are you know that they use this is one of them so the rn 60 identifies the
resistor style what what is it carbon comp wire wound film the d are its temperature characteristics
how does this behave and they'll normally include some tables or charts in there to say
you know for every five degrees rise in Fahrenheit this is how many ohms it's going to change so
it's going to be its temperature characteristics question yes yeah no don't memorize this the
point of this is that you're dead in water unless you get the code the five one one two that shows
the resistance value the five one one the two represents the number of zeros at the end so this
would be five one one zero zero putting that most common terms be fifty one point one k ohms
fifty one thousand one hundred ohms and the tolerance would be f
i don't know if that's good bad you're gonna have to look it up and see what it equates to five percent
two percent ten percent twenty percent i don't know but that's how you would decode that if you saw
that on the side of the resistor if you saw colors on the side of the resistor well there they are
you've got this in your book the way the color code works you have your first band second band
third band fourth band if you have a resistor that's well first thing you want to do is hold it
so that one of the bands is closest to the edge you normally want to put that closest on the left
and then read it like a book if i had a resistor and i held it in my hand and it was orange white
red gold orange on the color code equals the number three white is the number nine
red is the number two so that means i'm going to add two zeros after the three nine three nine zero
zero and gold means it's a five percent tolerance putting that most common terms means this would be
a three thousand nine hundred ohm resistor or three point nine k ohm resistor five percent
question i hate the word memorization question is we have to memorize it you gotta know it
but you've got to know it and to be honest with you a lot of job interviews they're gonna ask you
to do that the best thing though i'm not going to go out of my way i'm going to be honest with you
i'm not going to go out of my way on a quiz to hammer you on it you're not going to fail this
quiz because you don't know the resistor color code one of the big things with the resistor
color code is simply your experience doing your labs you're going to you're going to come to learn
this and the more you work with it you're going to understand it and you're going to remember it
but i don't want to make flash cards other programs do that you know we could give you
flash cards and identify this resistor i could keep you occupied and entertained for but then when
you're all said and done you know you're ready to go get a job and identify resistors for a living
not a lot of money in that so this is just something that you need to learn you need to know you need
to be able to decode it make sense i'll let you study the acronyms at your own leisure in a group
form see i'm ex-navy and we had some acronyms that basically if i repeated here i would be
handcuffed and dragged off and start with bad boys that was one of them that's a lot of you
you know so i'll let you discuss some of these amongst yourselves and they they do work it's
actually funny because having interviewed potential faculty member i'll of course always throw in
there identify this resistor and you see some man making charts and you know i've never once given
anybody a resistor you know what size of this resistor oh that's a 1.2 k 5 percent resistor
you know actually if somebody identified i'd probably you know you're a freak you're a freak of
nature yeah but it is something that again through experience you're going to get used to
and when you're prototyping a circuit you're going to say i'm looking for a 1.5 k ohm resistor you
know and you find it you plug it in your circuit and you move on so resistors and circuits
resistors are typically configured in a circuit in one of three different ways
either series parallel or compound and to be honest with you i hate to let the cat out of the bag
put the cart before the horse but you know what in the entire world of electronics and the entire
entire universe of electronics there's only three types of circuits and here you are week number three
learning about them it's that simple the most complex circuit you ever work on in your life
will be one of these three it's either going to be a series circuit a parallel circuit or it's called
a compound circuit or a combination yeah the first circuit we're going to talk about is a series
circuit and the simple thing to remember with a series circuit is resistance is additive
resistance is additive so the formula that we need to remember
and this is not accurate this should have an equal sign right here there's an error in this formula
should be rt total resistance is equal to resistor one plus resistor two plus resistor three plus
etc etc etc if you got 5000 resistors in a circuit you're gonna have 5000 resistances to add up
it's cumulative
so in this particular circumstance all is we have to do is pick a point in the circuit and start to
count we'll start right here at the negative terminal the first resistor I encounter has
30 ohms of resistance 30 plus 20 is equal to 50 plus 10 is equal to 60 that completes the circuit
in this circuit there are a total of 60 ohms of resistance does that make sense
sounds real basic doesn't it it's all fun and games until you have a bad battery connection
right here there's some corrosion that adds some resistance you got a bad solder joint right here
it adds a little bit more resistance so in in in a theory class like this how many ohms of
resistance are they supposed to be in a circuit 60 you get in there and measure it with your meter
and you get 67 ohms then you realize you have tolerance of these resistors did you take that
into account yeah but that only accounts for a small percentage based on that then all of a
sudden you realize why i've got corrosion in the circuit or i've got a bad solder joint in the circuit
so that's where there's a disconnect sometimes between the world of theory that we live in
here in a classroom a lecture environment and the world of reality in the lab that's why i want to
see all of you getting in the lab doing your lab assignments because you're basically going to
start scratching your head saying hey i thought joe i kind of believed what joe was saying in a
lecture but it isn't quite working like that it's going to work like i say but there's going to be
also a lot of variables that take place in the lab and in the real world as i said before that's
the toughest thing that i had when i got out into industry i went through a bunch of theory
schools when i started seeing things for real i was like wow this doesn't make sense is this good
can this possibly be good this doesn't look like a good reading and it's not what the book says
how could this be you know so that's the only way you're getting that is experience
any questions on series resistance
parallel this is my favorite slide of the entire
entire quarter because like watch i'm going to hit the key and the formula is going to fly in from
the side oh it's not cool you ever see how people like abuse powerpoint use too much animation this
is just right all right and i'm going to do it one more time it's the last time i'm going to do the
entire quarter the last slide that i have that's animated is this slide okay you ready oh
just kidding one more time
now in order for us to calculate out the total resistance in parallel this is kind of different
this is this is kind of odd right what we're going to do is this reciprocal formula
the reciprocal of resistor one plus the reciprocal of resistor two plus the reciprocal of resistor
three on and on and on what that sounds awful familiar to me what is the reciprocal of resistance
conductivity remember that one over r equals conductivity
so what we're saying here is by adding up all of the conductivities of all of these branches to
a parallel network then taking the reciprocal of that we end up with total resistance
so this is kind of like a bar trick how can you add resistors to a circuit
and yet make the resistance of the circuit less the answer is add them in parallel because that's
exactly what we're doing here it's exactly what we're doing think of this as the seattle
traffic system seattle traffic system okay this is a uh it's a friday afternoon before a three-day
weekend and these are all the people that are in seattle and they want to get the bell view
and they've got multiple paths to take how do you get from seattle to bell view
five twenty how else i-90 how else up and around the north end of the lake
or down around the south end of the lake so basically we have four let's say let's just
talk about three for the case of our example here if you're in seattle i'm a big commuter so i
like these analogies they really work well for me they work all too well for me if i'm in seattle
and i want to get the bell view and it's a friday three-day weekend what path is probably going
to be the best for me to take and why what's that no if i'm in seattle and i want to go to bell
view three-day weekend which is the best path for me to take and why why most lines it's going to
move the most traffic it's got the least amount of resistance after i-90 what would be my second
choice before the toll the toll will quickly make this number three choice at least for me i'm a
tightwad i'll take the ferry to vancouver and drive down around before i get a boat five twenty
five twenty has fewer lanes it's got more resistance it doesn't move the same amount of traffic
and then finally the other option is driving around the north end of the south end of the lake
not an easy way of doing it a lot more traffic less flow so comparing that now to this we could
say that i-90 is like the equivalent of 10 ohms of resistance because even though i-90 it's a super
interstate highway and it's got multiple lanes does it still have resistance oh yeah oh yeah if it
didn't have resistance there would never be any brake lights on it this would be like five twenty
would be like twice the amount of resistance meaning it moves half the amount of traffic
and then the north end of the lake three times the amount of resistance meaning even less traffic
does that make sense so every one of these is a viable current path every one of those routes
is a viable traffic path let's say for example that bill gates he really wanted a give back
and he loves the people of the puja sound region and he wants to build another bridge across lake
washington and he he he is so into it he's even going to let the bridge like come off of his property
okay and because he's building the bridge it's going to be called the bill gates memorial bridge
when he builds that bridge across lake washington what's it going to do to this flow here what's
it going to do it's going to it's going to make the overall circuit have less
resistance because he built another viable path is the path he builds going to be perfect
is it still going to have resistance yes but is it going to have an overall effect on increasing
the flow in the seattle metropolitan area of traffic absolutely so that's how we can add
resistances on this circuit yet lower the overall resistance of the total circuit
and that's why we have to use this formula we're actually adding up the conductivity
we end up with the total conductivity for the circuit take the reciprocal of that that gives us
the total total resistance for the circuit makes sense okay now i'm going to give you some thumb
rules thumb rules
the first thumb rule that i want to give you it's very very important when you're analyzing a
circuit like this the total resistance of the circuit will always be less than the value of least
resistance if not you made a mistake plain and simple
absolutely and if you come up with something other than that you're done screwed up plain and simple
so the total resistance of a parallel network will always be less than the value of least
resistance and your assumption is correct in this circuit it's got to be less than 10 ohms
the other thumb rule that i'm going to give you is if the values of resistance are all equal
you simply count up the number of resistors take the resistance and divide it by that number
as an example if this is if our three is 30 ohms our two is 30 ohms and our one is 30 ohms
30 divided by how many resistors equals
30 divided by 3 equals 10 the answer to this is going to be
10 ohms that's a thumb rule so if i've got four 100 ohm resistors in parallel 100 ohms divided
by four equals 25 if i have two 50 ohm resistors in parallel with each other
250 ohm resistors 25 50 divided by 2 25 so that's a thumb rule only if the values are equal
so a lot of times in the lab you may be looking for a certain value of resistance
i need 20 ohms of resistance or you could put two tens in series with each other
or you could put two forties in parallel with each other
there's a couple different ways of doing it it's one of the reasons we're teaching about this stuff
make sense
okay
the number of resistors only if they're equal it's only works if they're equal
it's a thumb rule
if you don't need to use the thumb rule it's just another tool in your toolbox
to make it easier for you if you doubt me well you could always use that formula
there is another formula i want to show you it's not in the book but i want you to know it
learn it
this is called the product over some formula
product over some this only works if we have two resistors in parallel with each other
period two resistors in parallel with each other period
so this literally is the product over some the product is r1 multiplied by r2 r1 times r2
divided by r1 plus r2 the product over the sum
this works if you only have two resistors in parallel with each other
if you've got two or more resistors you have to use this formula here
i just drew it a little bit differently but that's basically the same formula
the reciprocal of r1 which is the conductance of r1 plus the conductance of r2 plus the sum of
the conductances total conductance the reciprocal one over the total conductance equals the total
resistance so this formula works for two or more resistors in parallel this one here works for
two resistors in parallel period
the reason i want you to start using this is because in the future we're going to take
this formula and we're going to adapt this formula for some other use
so it's better that you just learn it now and it's another tool in your toolbox
product over sum easy enough to remember product over sum
when we execute the math on this formula here the reciprocal of r1 plus r2 plus r3
we had those conductances up take the reciprocal of it we end up with 5.405 ohms is that answer
sound right why does it sound right it's less than 10 works for me
and that's like at r3 you consider rn as well no our rn would be like r4 5 r22 r447
r to the nth degree means to the nth degree that this formula works to infinity if we keep adding
resistors in parallel we just keep adding the reciprocal of that resistance on it that's what
we mean by that so they drew it like this plus one r to the nth i did it etc etc etc
this is a complex circuit now again i know you want to do the math you want to get it right
that's cool okay i want to keep things real i want to keep things basic
the first thing that i notice in this circuit is that these two resistors are in parallel with each
other so this is an actual ideal situation for us to use this product over some formula
50 times 25 divided by 50 plus 25
why don't we just do it right now you got your calculators let's do it
just do it
but i want to do it in stages here for those folks at home
this is how i'm going to start off with the formula
now what i'm going to do is substitute in my numbers i what is that 50 and 25
so it's going to be 50 times 25 divided by 50 plus 25 okay i know that this is going to 50 plus 25
i could do that in my head right that's 75 okay but the 50 plus 25 50 excuse me times 25 equals
1250
so 1250 divided by 75 equals
16.67 ohms so does everybody see how i did that isn't that a cool formula
oh it's cool i like that formula i don't know why because the answer is always like
come out i don't know i like that formula you could do the same thing down here and you're
going to get the same results so i know that i've got and the way i want you to look at these
parallel circuits the way that i want you to think of these parallel circuits is how much
resistance is there between between this point here and that's actually called a node a node
are where two or more wires are joined together how much resistance is there between node a and node b
so to lay this out mathematically
the way that i would actually calculate out this whole problem
is rt for this circuit total resistance is going to be equal to the resistance of resistor one
plus the resistance between node a and b plus the resistance of resistor
three
four four thank you
why this is a dry erase board so r1 plus rab plus r4
now before i could solve for this i'm going to have to calculate out what
rab is equal to rab is going to be equal to
r2 times r3 divided by r2 plus r3 you agree with that
so then it's just a matter of me we already did this this is 16.67 ohms
plus 30 ohms plus 20 ohms gives me my total amount of resistance in the circuit
so i highly recommend until you really got a handle on this you lay it all out like this
although so many formulas whatever i don't look at them as formulas these are tools
these are tools yeah they're formulas but they're tools to solve the problem to unlock the key to the problem
use the right tool
you get the right results use the wrong tool on your car you strip the knot
use the right tool you get about the results that you desire make sense
when you first see a problem like this though one of the things that i'm going to stress
in this program is that you keep it real what's the what was this total resistance
going to be between these between this a and b it's going to be less than 25 so i've got 30 ohms
here and 20 ohms there 30 plus 20 is 15 and less than 25 what do i know my answer is going to be
less than what less than 75 if you could do that in your mind looking at this stuff i want
you on my team i'll be honest with you i want you on my team those are the people that i want
if i give you this problem and immediately you're with the calculator and you know you're
i don't mind if you use the calculator but if you're turning it upside down your you know
sideways and you know no what i want out of all of you is to look at this i got 30 ohms here i got
20 that's 50 50 and 25 less than 25 my answer is going to be less than 75 ohms do not try to take
my quizzes doing that if you do you'll probably be very successful with a lot of my quizzes i could
take most of my quizzes not even use a calculator and get them all right well it has something to
do with the fact that i wrote my quizzes but what i want you to do is that thumb rule as a litmus
test at the end or even before you calculate it i should get less than 75 ohms as an answer
my answer should be less than 75 ohms i came up with 66.7 ohms does that sound about right
if you come up with an answer of what's the total resistance in a circuit 1250
well that's not less than 75 houston we got a problem there's probably a math error
if i were pope of electronics i would require you to all get a hundred percent on all of these
quizzes because if you use the right tool you get the right results make sense
in summary we talked about resistance what has resistance everything everything
we talked about specific devices that are designed to possess the property of resistance
it's known as a resistor can you imagine some dude wakes up every day and like you know instead
of it's off to make the donuts it's off to design the resistors there are engineers in the world that
design resistors for a living huh talk about a career path resistivity that property that we
compare the resistivity of everything to that of silver silver the best conductor found in nature
conductivity conductivity the reciprocal of resistance measured in mose or typically millimose
resistor identification for fixed value variable values we talked about fixed resistors variable
resistors that could be configured as potentiometers if they're used to control
voltage real stats if they're used to control current if i'm using three leads i'm using it to
control voltage if i'm using two leads i'm using it to control current and then finally we talked
about certain configurations first was a series configuration in a series configuration how do
i determine total resistance simply add it up it's additive in a parallel circuit
how do i determine total resistance add up the reciprocal sounds like i'm adding up the conductivity
of the paths in a compound circuit what do i got to do both thumb rules for parallel circuits total
resistance will always equal less than the value of least and if i have like resistor same size
then i could simply take that number take the value divide it by the number of resistors that
i have and that will give me the total resistance any questions out of this chapter
in parallel you got to divide it out so if i've got four one hundred ohm resistors it's a hundred
ohms a hundred ohms a hundred ohms hundred ohms 100 divided by how many resistors for 100 divided
by 4 equals 25 i should have approximately 25 ohms across that circuit all right let's go ahead
and take a about a 10 little 12 minute break and we'll start up at about 10 after
chapter five ohms law
again we should like hit a gong ring a bell ring some chimes
ohms law
ohms law has more of an effect on being able to predict the behavior of electricity than
really anything else so anybody know how predictable the behavior of electricity is
percentage wise we're talking about tolerance is last chapter anybody know how accurate we
could predict the behavior 100 it's bold statement it's absolutely correct 100 you use ohms law you
could predict with 100 accuracy what's going to take place inside a circuit it's pretty powerful
it's pretty powerful tool especially when you're going to be paid to go out into industry and fix
broken electronic equipment get this tool working for you you got something
after completing this chapter you're going to be able to identify the three basic parts of a circuit
identify three types of circuit configurations describe how current flow can be varied in a
circuit state ohms law with reference to current voltage and resistance solve problems using ohms
law for current resistance voltage in series parallel in series parallel circuits describe how
the total flow differs between series and parallel circuits describe how the total voltage drops
differs between series and parallel circuits describe how the total resistance differs between
series and parallel circuits state and apply kerfs current and voltage laws and verify answers using
Ohm's law with Kerchoff's law.
First of all, electric circuits.
The path that current follows is called an electric circuit.
All circuits consist of, and this is important, and it sounds really basic and it sounds very
simplistic, but I'll tell you what.
Doing this helped me on my worst day of my career as an electronics professional because
it's so easy to get turned around and lose track of what the problem is, and if you could
get back to basics, you're always going to do well.
The basics are all electric circuits must consist of a voltage source, a load, and a
conductor.
The voltage source is the source of your electric energy.
It could be any of those six different types that we talked about last week.
The load is what converts one form of energy into another form of energy.
An example of an electric load would be a light bulb, a motor, a heater.
It converts electric energy into light, heat, motion.
A conductor, a conductor, electrical conductor transfers the energy, the electric energy,
the current from the source to the load.
You have to have those three parts of a circuit, or it's not a circuit.
I'm going to add two other optional parts that are not in the book.
The other optional device, most circuits have them, not all do, is a controlling device.
A simple example of a controlling device is a switch.
A simple example of a complex controlling device is a microprocessor with 1.9 billion
transistors on it.
You see, that's where we're going in this course, by the way, from one switch to 1.9
billion switches in a microprocessor.
Controlling device is used to control the flow of current in the circuit.
The fifth optional device that you could have inside a circuit is a protective device.
An easy example of this is a fuse, a circuit breaker, a fusible link, a thermal circuit
breaker.
These are all examples of protective devices.
On my worst day of my career as an electronics professional, it involved a nuclear submarine,
someplace we weren't supposed to be, and it involved, unfortunately, my equipment that
I was responsible for.
There were three of us that were responsible for that system, big system, $16 million system,
and that was like a $1982 expensive.
The system was sold to the Navy, and it was designed with what was called graceful degradation.
That means bits and pieces could fail, and the whole system would keep up and running.
That's what the vendor told the Navy when the Navy bought the system.
Here we are someplace we're not supposed to be, doing stuff we weren't supposed to
be doing, and it was showtime for my equipment to do its thing.
It didn't work right.
It didn't work at all.
As a matter of fact, it was totally down, 100%.
And the captain, like, Mr. Greenock, how can this be?
The system was designed with graceful degradation, it should never be 100% down.
Well, Skipper, it's like this, it's totally busted.
I don't care what you gotta do, I want you to fix it.
Now we literally worked on that system non-stop, three days in a row, stayed up, popping no-dos,
drinking coffee, just working on it, working on it, working on it.
Two other guys might, they finally gave up, they're like, we just cannot fix this, it's
not fixable.
It just cannot, we can't bring it back from the dead.
Me, I went back to these basics.
It's an electronic system, it's made up of nothing but circuits.
Circuits have a voltage source, they have a load, you have inter-connected with conductors,
have controlling devices, and have protective devices.
It's something not doing what it's supposed to be doing.
It's gotta be, that's what's causing the problem.
It's narrowing it down.
And I stuck with the problem, I ended up fixing the problem, save the day, whoop-de-doo, I
basically did my job and fixed the equipment.
But I had to take a couple steps back and say, here's a $16 million system, fills half
a room with equipment racks, none of it works.
Can I verify the voltage sources for everything?
Can I narrow it down and say, this stuff's not working, but this stuff is working?
Can I look at the loads, what's not working, what's not converting electric energy into
the form of energy that we need to be getting out of it?
So if you know all of these systems, then you're gonna be an effective troubleshooter,
but always go back to basics.
Okay, God forbid you get out of class tonight, go out to your car, out in the North Parking
lot, turn the key, and you've got an electrical problem.
If you do have an electrical problem, approach it like this.
Do I have a good source?
Is my load functional?
Is it the interconnects?
Can I prove that the interconnects are viable?
Is it a controlling device?
And to be honest with you, in this day and age, most of the problems we encounter are
controlling devices.
Okay, it's not a simple switch, toggle switch, that was easy to troubleshoot.
I do a lot of traveling, I forgot what brand car it was.
I got the rental car, I flew in, it was on the East Coast, and I'm there late at night
and I got in and I'm like, I couldn't figure out where to put the key.
Where do I put the key to start the car?
There was no place to put the key, and I'm looking at it, you know, I got a little flashlight
and I'm looking, there's no place to put the key.
I didn't need a place to put the key.
The fact that the key was on my person was good enough for the car.
Just hit the start button, ooh, it started.
Alright, so the controlling device there was the FOB, RFID talking to the computer saying
this is a valid operator to be inside the car to operate it.
Kind of a complex controlling device, but a controlling device nonetheless.
And of course protective devices, and sometimes wacky stuff is done with protective devices.
I was working on my Tivo about a month ago, I had problems with my Tivo, and I've got
an older Tivo, it's a direct Tivo, so it's got two dual receivers, I could record two
shows and watch another show.
It's non-HD, because I don't have HD, I don't want to pay for HD, I'm a cheapskate, okay?
Feed my nice plasma screen, high resolution plasma screen with my basic signal, it's great.
It's great, it's all good.
My Tivo crapped out, okay?
So all the Tivo's got a hard drive in there.
So I got a new hard drive, I configured that and everything, and I was just through putting
it together, and something happened, and I heard a pop, and all of a sudden Tivo wouldn't
fire up anymore.
And I'm like, oh man, if this thing is dead, I don't want to go out and buy a new direct
TV DVR, and I got, it's a higher, I'm grandfathered into paying the older Tivo value, and plus
quite frankly, I don't know if any Tivo users here, Tivo's the bomb.
It truly is, because it could do word searches and all kinds of additional stuff that a normal
DVR will not necessarily do for you.
So I want that to bring this thing back from the dead, and I'm like, what the heck, I was
pretty ticked off, because I already wasted a whole weekend screwing with this thing.
So I'm looking through the circuit for something obvious, and I find this device, and basically
it's got shrink wrap, black shrink wrap over it, two leads coming out of it, and I measure
across it, and I'm getting it open.
I mean, I just got in there with the thing unplugged, and I'm poking around, and what
the heck is this?
So anyway, I unsodder it, and I inspect it, and with an exacto knife, I cut the heat
shrink out.
You know what it is?
It's a fuse.
It's a fuse, and the manufacturer tried to disguise and get by putting a piece of heat
shrink around it, and sticking it on the circuit board, and that's what was burned out.
I found a suitable replacement that I had at home, and my tin can, soldered it back in
place, fired it up, I was good to go.
Tivo's been working nonstop ever since.
Okay?
And that's a hidden.
A lot of companies do that type of stuff, so that if you don't know, if you're not the
authorized service center, you don't know to get in there and even check that.
I've seen some companies that will encapsulate a fuse, inside silicon or epoxy, you don't
even know what's in there.
So keep your eye open for all these basic parts of the circuit.
I know this sounds basic, and I'm beating it to death, but I tell you, you will deceive
me in the future when you get in the lab, and it's going to be like, I can't fix this.
The problem's too complex.
It's never a complex problem.
It's usually a real simple problem.
Very rarely.
All of you are here.
You want to get into advanced electronics and work on sophisticated equipment.
The problems with sophisticated equipment are always very, very simple.
Okay?
You've got to follow this protocol, though.
So use this as a checklist.
This is a series circuit.
We talked about series circuits already.
The most important thing for you to remember about a series circuit is that current is
constant in a series circuit.
The most important thing to remember is that current is constant in a series circuit, meaning
I've got a resistor here, a resistor here, a resistor here.
These three resistors cumulatively add up to the total amount of resistance in the circuit.
This electrical pressure here encounters this total resistance and allows this amount of
current to flow.
This current has to travel the entire path of the circuit.
That is the most important thing about a series circuit, period.
The second thing I want you to remember about a series circuit is a series circuit is also
known as, like FBI lingo, a.k.a., a series circuit is also known as a voltage divider.
A voltage divider.
What voltage gets divided up?
The total voltage.
Remember this?
We call this voltage rise.
How many voltage drops do I have in this circuit?
This circuit.
Three.
So voltage rise is going to get divided into three proportional values.
The biggest resistance gets the biggest voltage drop, the smallest resistance gets the smallest
voltage drop, and the resistance that's just right gets a voltage drop that's just right.
Make sense?
That's the series circuit.
The parallel circuit, the most important thing I want you to remember about the parallel
circuit is that voltage is constant across a parallel network.
This is a parallel network.
Here there are three resistors in parallel with each other.
The voltage rise will be distributed equally, equally, across all three branches.
So whatever this is, if this is 120 volts, this is going to have 120 volts across it.
This is going to have 120 volts across, and this is going to have 120 volts across.
Kind of like how your house is wired.
Your house is wired in parallel.
Each of the outlets has the same voltage across them, or they should.
If not, you've got a problem.
That's the most important thing about a parallel network.
A series circuit was also known as a voltage divider.
A parallel circuit is going to be known as a current divider.
Because what happens to current in the circuit?
This total current here gets divided here at this node and here.
Then current gets divided here and here.
The current flowing through R3 and the current flowing through R2 join up at this node and
flow onto this node.
Currents current plus this current equals total current.
Series circuit, current's constant.
Series circuit also known as a voltage divider.
Parallel circuit, voltage is constant, also known as a current divider.
Complex circuit, well, that's got both going on.
I've got current division going on here in my parallel network and I've got voltage
division going on here between this resistor and this resistance.
This resistance.
The best thing you could do in this circuit is label this A, node A, or in B, or X and
Z, or whatever you want to label it.
I like using letters because numbers typically equate to components.
Letters I could use to, and there's no rule on this, but it works for me.
So I'm going to label this node A and this node B.
The resistance between node A and B is equal to the product over some of R2 and 3.
Remember that?
I studied that last chapter.
The total resistance of the circuit is going to be equal to R1 plus RAB.
This voltage drop, RAB plus the voltage drop across R1 equals RT.
Voltage rise, and really, how many voltage drops do I have in the circuit?
Really, how many voltage drops do I have in the circuit?
Two.
And what are they?
R1 and RAB, or R2 and R3.
If I say R2, it's really the same thing.
R2 is the same as R3.
You could argue and say, well, you really got three voltage drops here.
You got a voltage drop here.
You got a voltage drop here, and you got a voltage drop here.
Well, this voltage drop and this voltage drop are the same voltage drop.
It's the same difference in potential, so I really, I don't want to call it different.
It's the same.
Make sense?
Some different circuit conditions that I want to talk about, and this is very important.
I want you to use the proper terminology with me.
It's part of why you're here at Lake Washington Technical College studying this stuff is to
learn to speak another language, the language of electronics.
The circuit condition that I want to talk about is called a closed circuit.
Is a closed circuit a good thing, or is it a bad thing?
Depends on what you want.
Thank you.
It depends on what you want.
Right now, the circuit in this room for the interior lights is closed, meaning the circuit's
energized, and we have an appropriate amount of illumination in here.
That's a good thing.
If I go and operate the switch and try to open the switch and the lights won't go out,
that could be a problem.
That could be a problem.
If you're operating an electric tool and you try to shut it off and you can't shut
it off, that's a problem.
Be a closed circuit is causing you a problem.
I had this problem with a pressure washer.
One of these $100 pressure washers, Costco special, great pressure washer for what I
do.
Got a patio, I got a deck, I don't need 40 horsepower, fire breathing, peel the paint
off the Queen Mary pressure washer.
But it's my pressure washer, and I like it.
I got a lot of tools, got a lot of neighbors, I know I got a lot of tools.
My neighbor Tom, he's since moved, it's another story, I'll tell you about that some other
time.
I finally drove him out of the neighborhood.
Tom's an engineer, an electrical engineer with Boeing.
Hey Joe, I'm going to stain my deck.
Can I borrow your pressure washer?
I'm a nice guy, but I hate loaning out tools because nobody takes care of stuff like I want
to take and care of.
I mean, if I borrow somebody's tool, I take care of it 10 times better than my own, and
if I break it, I buy it, I replace it.
So Tom, that's fine, I'll loan you my pressure washer, but only plug it in a dedicated outlet
and do not use any extension cords.
Because it's right on the label, it's not that I'm that smart a guy, I just read the
label, the tag that's on it.
Because this motor requires a lot of current to be able to turn and be effective.
If you plug it in an extension cord, it doesn't get the right amount of current.
Remember that whole thing, the cord gets hot, the hotter it gets, the more resistance, the
more resistance, the less current, the less current, the hotter it gets, it's a vicious
cycle.
So I loaned him my pressure washer.
How did it work out?
Oh, pretty good.
Thanks Joe.
Fast forward a couple of weeks later, I go out to wash my sidewalk.
I plug the thing in, turn it on, and it's on, continuously on.
It won't shut off.
Normally what happens, it's a real simple circuit.
This switch right here on a pressure washer, one of those cheap Costco specials, what it
does is there's a water pressure sensor.
When the water pressure builds up, what it physically does is open the switch.
So what you do in the handle, when you release the switch or release the pressure, as soon
as you release the pressure, you close the switch, you turn your motor on, the motor
turns the pump on, and you're pressure washing.
You release the trigger, you build the pressure up, you open the switch.
Mine will never shut off unless I unplug it.
If I unplugged it and it still kept operating, well, that'd be something.
Keeps operating.
I'd ripped the thing apart, and what had happened was, I guarantee you, I didn't see
him do it, but what, because I had no problem with that, and I had it for years.
He plugged it in a non-dedicated circuit, it built up a lot of heat, and physically,
the switch, the contacts got welded.
I took the switch apart, the contacts were welded to each other.
That's how hot it got.
So I went to my file cabinet, opened the drawer, pulled out the manual, got the parts list,
contacted the company.
The new switch would be $65 plus shipping.
A new pressure washer at Costco, $109, I can have it right now.
The old one's in a landfill somewhere.
After I cannibalized some parts off of it.
You thought your neighbor called?
No, I ran him out of the neighborhood.
I finally ran him out of the neighborhood.
There was a chainsaw involved.
Trees falling.
Long story.
Long story.
Now actually, what pushed Tom over the edge was, he had problems in his basement, flooding,
split level house, and water would get in.
So what he dug, did is he dug a trench around the entire foundation of his house, and then
what he's going to do is he's going to put a treatment on the outside concrete, and then
he was also going to backfill it, put in drainage and everything.
So he had this ditch dug.
It was a lot of backbreaking work.
He did it all by hand.
Got to respect that.
But it took him forever to do it.
It took him years to do it.
So I used to accuse him of having a moat.
It's like, Tom, what's the deal with the moat?
So anyway, again, I had a buddy of mine over, and it was the wee hours of the morning, and
we were enjoying some libations and some cigars.
And actually, my buddy who's got my sense of humor, he's like, hey, Joe, is that Tom's
moat?
What's up with that?
Doesn't he want that thing full?
I'm like, that's a good point.
Why have a moat if it's not?
So anyway, we turned on his garden hose and started filling the moat, and then we're just
laughing and like busting a gut, and then Tom came out and he's pretty freaking ticked
off.
Then we're filling his moat with water.
I mean, he woke up to the sound of running water, like, why is water running in my house?
And hey, man, we thought we were doing you a favor by filling your moat, you know?
He was out of there within six months.
Open circuit, is this good or bad?
Depends.
Depends.
Now, my pressure washer, this would have been highly desirable.
When pressure builds up, it opens the switch, interrupts the flow of current to the motor.
Another circuit condition is called a short circuit.
Have you all heard of a short circuit before?
God blessed my wife, but she's been my wife now for a long time, and I've been in this
industry since puberty.
So hanging out with a guy that teaches electronics and does electrical stuff, you'd think something
would rub off.
Constantly, I get a call, and it's kind of like, the blunder's not working, I think
it's got a short circuit, and I'm like, holy crap, you tell short circuit to me, I'm like
ready to call the fire, but I mean, short circuit is like what you see in a Star Trek
when they get hit by a phaser, you know, and the, you know, I mean, that's a short circuit.
That literally is what a short circuit is.
A short circuit will cause an electrical fire.
And then on further probing, what exactly is the blunder doing?
Well, I plug it in, I hit the button, but nothing happens.
Oh, you mean it's an open circuit, not a short circuit, big difference.
The majority of household appliances that I've encountered that have failed have failed
because of an open circuit condition.
That's where nothing works.
Now you've got to be careful, because sometimes a short circuit will cause a protective device
to open and render the piece of equipment dead.
So you've got to get in, and like that direct TV, direct TVO, that was dead.
That was open intentionally.
I found the open, it was that fuse with heat shrink around it, trying to disguise it to
make it look like a fuse with heat shrink around it.
Make sense?
So keep that in mind, open circuit, short circuit is always bad.
There's never an intentional reason to short anything.
Current flow in a circuit can be varied by changing the voltage applied to the circuit.
As voltage increases, current increases.
As voltage decreases, current decreases.
And also changing the resistance in the circuit.
As resistance increases, currents going to decrease.
So these first values we call these directly proportional, right?
If voltage increases, current increases, directly proportional.
Voltage decreases, current decreases, directly proportional.
Resistance increases, current decreases, inversely proportional.
Now, in the beginning when Ohm gave his like sermon, I don't know if it was a sermon, Ohm's
sermon on the mount, somehow I think I'm getting my history messed up.
This is what Ohm said.
I think the speech was given down at the king dome.
And he was at the king dome, and he got up, hello, hello, hello.
This is, this is, I'm the happiest man, man, man, alive.
Alive, alive, because, because, because, I know, no, no, Ohm's law, law, law, law.
Y'all ready, ready for this, this, this, this?
E, E, E is equal to I, I, I times times times R, R, R.
And the crowd went nuts.
Forty-five thousand people on their feet.
Ohm's law, Ohm has spoke.
Actually, I think I'm getting my history mixed up a little.
I don't think it went down like that, quite like that.
So this is Ohm's law.
This is what Ohm really said.
Voltage is equal to current times resistance in the circuit.
And of course, instead of the letter E, we could use the letter V, V is equal to I times R.
Now remember that trick that I showed you with the triangle T in the center?
Let's put this in that, V, I, R.
So now you've got all the other variables.
If I ask you how much resistance is in there in a circuit, you cover R up, it's voltage
divided by current.
If I ask you how much current is there in a circuit, you cover up the I and you say
it's V over R.
If I ask you how much voltage is there in a circuit, it's I times R.
So by knowing that one formula, you can figure out all the other algebraic manipulations
of it.
Does that make sense?
So in essence, that is Ohm's law in all of its variables or variations, I should say.
Algebraic variations.
So you don't even need to be a math whiz to be able to do it.
Ohm's law states relationship between current, voltage, and resistance or I is equal to E
over R or E is equal to I times R or R is equal to E over I, however you want to look
at it.
But in the beginning, beginning, beginning, it was V, V, V, or actually E, E, E is equal
to I times R, R, R, R, 45,000 people on their feet applauding the man with the beret.
I don't know if you wore a beret or not.
If I was Ohm, I'd wear a beret.
Some of the algebraic formulas, if you will, and when I say that, I know there's some people
in here that cringe like, I got to know all this math or whatever.
All this is a recipe.
That's all this is.
By laying it out like this, it shows you how it needs to be laid out to explain the
behavior.
In a series circuit, the same current flows throughout the circuit.
Total current is equal to the current through resistor one plus the current through resistor
two plus the current through resistor three, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
It's a fancy way of saying current is constant in a series circuit.
Total voltage is equal to voltage drop across one across two across three, et cetera, et
cetera.
That's what I'm saying.
A series circuit is also known as a voltage divider.
Total resistance in a circuit is the sum of the individual resistances in a circuit.
That's a fancy way of saying you got to add it all up.
Resistance is additive in a series circuit.
In a parallel circuit, total voltage is constant across the parallel network.
Resistance is formula.
Down below, total current is equal to i or one plus i or two.
This says that a parallel circuit is also known as a current divider.
Oops, there it is.
That's another formula.
The reciprocal of the resist, the sum of the reciprocal of the resistances equals the
reciprocal of the sum of the reciprocals equals the total resistance in the circuit because
when we add resistors in parallel, what are we doing?
We're actually adding up the conductivity of the individual branches.
To determine unknown quantities in a circuit, you can kind of use this as a checklist.
Draw schematic of the circuit.
You've got to start off with the schematic of the circuit.
If one has not been provided to you, you need to draw one.
Troubleshooting circuits off the top of your head doesn't really work well.
You've got to be looking at the big picture, pun intended.
Label all known quantities.
Sometimes you may need to get these known quantities from manufactured data sheets.
Solve for equivalent circuits.
Solve for equivalent circuits.
When I say redraw the circuit, remember when we were dealing with a parallel network,
two resistors in parallel with each other, you could redraw that circuit and just show
one resistance.
Two resistors equals one resistance.
I could do a simplified, do you want me to do a simplified drawing of my car, electrical
system right now?
Want to see this?
Battery.
Car.
And to be honest with you, I'm not being silly.
I could redraw every circuit of my car and come up with an equivalency and this is what
it is.
And I'll tell you what, if you go out to your car and you turn the key and there's nothing
and you open the door and the dome light doesn't come on, nothing works in the car and all
of a sudden this is exactly what you've got and there's an open in this circuit and it's
a pretty big open or your battery's dead.
I don't think your whole load is dead.
It's like oh my goodness all my load is dead.
I've got to replace the load, save the battery, you know what I'm saying?
It doesn't work like that.
But do you see the power of troubleshooting like that?
What's working?
My car's dead.
What do you mean it's dead?
It's a conversation with my wife.
The car's dead.
What do you mean it's dead?
It's dead.
When you turn the key does it click?
No.
When you open the door does dome light come on?
No.
Oh it's dead.
But you've got to ask those questions because it's different.
When you open the door the dome light comes on but you turn the key, does anything, do
you hear a click or anything?
Immediately your troubleshooting, you're narrowing it down to what circuits perhaps
could be faulty.
So redraw to simplify.
There's another big law out there, it's Kirchhoff's law, GR Kirchhoff extended Ohm's law with
two important statements, Kirchhoff's current law, the algebraic sum of all currents entering
and leaving a junction is zero, equal to zero.
Kirchhoff's law is kind of like this, everybody know the intersection down here at the bottom
of the hill.
Let's say that you're a traffic cop and you're directing traffic down there in the center
of the intersection.
And you've got three cars coming at you this way and you've got five cars coming at you
this way.
In a few moments how many cars are going to be going away from you?
Eight.
Because three are coming from one way, five are coming the other way, chances are our cars
don't come and we're just kidding, we're going to back up.
I've seen them do that down here, but generally speaking, three plus five equals eight.
Pretty profound, isn't it?
That's what Kirchhoff came up with, and he made the textbook, you laugh, his name's
in the textbook, my name's not.
That's Kirchhoff's current law, and what Kirchhoff is saying is again the total current entering
has to exit.
And it's really a profound troubleshooting tool because what you could do, what you could
do is I say, I've got three amps of current flowing at me and I've got eight amps flowing
away from me.
What does that tell me?
I must have five more amps coming in from another direction that I'm not aware of and
there's only one other circuit, so I must have five amps.
And I tell you what, you could take that information to the bank, it's a law of physics, and it's
so powerful in troubleshooting, it's extremely powerful in troubleshooting.
There was a guy that was in my division, one of our techs in the Navy, goofy guy, I'll
tell you some stories about him and his wife in the future.
But this dude, it just, you know, every day was a mystery what you'd see this guy into.
So military equipment is put together really, really, really well and we didn't have cordless
screwdrivers, so you used to have to take stuff apart by hand.
So I come in and I'm like, you know, what are you working on?
He's like, yeah, we've got a problem with this unit here and I want to take this current
reading, you know, and you know, in order to take a current reading I've got to open
the circuit.
So you're going to remove this access plate here with 64 screws and you're going to remove
that, you're going to get in there and take that reading, you know, why don't you use
this here which is called Kirchhoff's law, okay?
You got this amount of current going this way, this amount of current coming in and
the unknown is what you want to measure here, you're going to use Kirchhoff's law and determine
with 100% accuracy how much current is flowing through that point, you don't have to take
the panel off, you don't have to remove the screws, you don't even have to use a meter,
you could use math, put the meter down, math, solve the problem and to be honest with you,
these are the technicians that I look for, these are the technicians that I want to hire.
If you start the troubleshooting process with the manual and then you're going through tracing,
redrawing, applying these principles, these laws, before you go ripping into stuff, you're
going to save yourself a lot of grief, a lot of grief.
It's like going to work for Boeing, Boeing builds big airplanes, on the tail of their
airplanes they put a light that blinks so other airplanes don't hit their airplane when
it's flying, you know, I'm not making this stuff up, it's kind of like the light doesn't
work.
Well let's get a man lifting, get up there and take it apart and whatever, you get a
man lift, you get all harnessed up, you know, your five stories in the air, you're manipulating
the controls and all of a sudden, oops, you put a dent in the rudder.
When you could have done some troubleshooting, probably through an access panel down below,
using Kirchoff's law, how much current do I have flowing up there, what's going on,
then make some determinations, is it really essential for you to get up there and take
that assembly apart, get a man lift, harness yourself up, run the risk of plowing into
the rudder by accident, I mean accidents happen, so always look at that kind of stuff.
Is there an easier way of going about getting the reading that I want?
That's the power of Ohm's law, that's the power of Kirchoff's law.
Kirchoff's law also has a voltage application and Kirchoff says the algebraic sum of all
voltages around a closed circuit equals zero.
This is a fancy way of saying voltage rise equals voltage drop, and you know how much
you're left over with, zero.
We talked about this last week, didn't we?
We talked about this last week.
If you put 12 volts in, how many volts are going to get used, 12.
If you're troubleshooting and you can only account for 11.5 volts, that half a volt
is somewhere that it doesn't belong.
You got 120 volts that are supposed to be coming out of these outlets.
If you plug it in, you only get 98 volts, something's wrong.
If you could go to that box and prove that you got 120 across each leg, but you go to
an outlet in your home and you get 98, something's wrong.
You find where the missing voltage is, you find the problem.
So again, does this sound really basic?
What goes in must come out.
It is.
But I'll tell you what, when you get to industry, you'll deceive me.
You're going to get your head to all, ooh, wow, ooh, it's complex.
I never worked on one of these before, oh, geez, it's got to be something really, it's
got to be the flux capacitor must have failed.
I missed that day when Joe talked about the flux capacitor.
Keep it basic.
Keep it basic.
The fundamental parts of the circuit, the source, the load, the internal wiring, the
controlling device, the protective device, you got to be able to prove every one of those
parts, functional parts is functional.
And how are you going to learn how to do that in the lab by doing your labs?
Theoretically, how are you going to come to appreciate that by attending a lecture and
doing your rent assignments?
Because that's what this industry is about.
It's about the written theory, which is kind of cool.
Some of you had back-breaking jobs in the past, okay?
I never worked a hard day in my life.
Actually I did, but it was all mental.
And I'll tell you what, there were days working on my system.
That's the other thing too, you know, it's one of the reasons that we all try to treat
you as professionals here in this program.
When you go to industry, you're going to be professionals.
If your equipment ain't broke, they don't care what you're doing.
But when it's broke, they expect you to be there bringing it back from the dead.
No questions asked.
Well, I'm a union guy and do I get time and a half and fix the freaking gear?
Get it up and running.
That's all they care about.
And actually there are some union maintenance jobs that, you know, do pay you well if you've
got to put in that over time.
But generally speaking, this is where you make your money.
This is the most, I tell you what, I'm taking a lot of time with this chapter.
This is one of the most important chapters of the book.
It's one of the most important chapters of this entire program.
I could talk for a week about just this chapter.
And you know what the beauty of it is?
You've all been here.
This is your third week in this program.
You understand what I'm saying?
Do you understand what I'm saying?
The message isn't going to get any worse.
It's not.
The most complex electronic systems could be rapidly troubleshot, keeping these fundamental
skill sets in mind.
Ohm's Law, Kirchoff's Law, five basic parts of a circuit.
Is my source good?
Is my load good?
Is it the interconnects?
Can I prove that?
The other thing you've got to do as a technician is just pay attention to what can you check
quickly?
What can you check quickly?
Again, like my former esteemed colleague on the submarine, Mike Wirep, was his name.
Wirep, weird name.
He'd be the kind of guy like, well, you know, I think it's the wiring, Joe.
I want to look at the, I want to do continuity checks.
I mean, you're talking these big multi-pin connectors and you're going to disconnect
and check the continuity.
It could take months.
You really think that's the problem?
You really think a wire like broke in the middle of the night behind that equipment
rack?
You know, I don't think so.
I think it's, you know, maybe something like controlling device.
Have you tried reloading the software, you know, the virgin version of software that
we have in that safe?
Why don't you try reloading the version of software?
Controlling device is what I'm thinking, right?
Reload the firmware, software.
Reboot the system.
That's what the problem manifests itself.
Oh, Joe, most amazing thing happened.
We loaded the software, started working.
Wow.
Good thing it didn't like take, you know, six months and check the continuity of all
them wires in the back of the equipment rack.
What would the odds have been?
In summary, the electric circuit contains a voltage source, a load, a conductor, the
two optional ones, controlling device, protective device.
Don't second-guess those.
Hey, you want another troubleshooting hint?
Another type of protective device, it's called a resettable fuse.
Resettable fuse.
A lot of consumer electronic products, DVD players, VHS players, stuff like that, tuners,
TV tuners, have these resettable fuses.
And a lot of times what happens is the device will not work.
So it's kind of funny.
You know, my family, they all know, you know, Joe, and the family, he's the electronics
guy.
You've got a problem, you know, and they always call me with the problem.
So it's amazing how many things I've fixed from afar.
They tell me what the problem is, you know.
And a lot of these have been with DVD, VHS players, things like that in the past.
So what I'm going to have you do is I've got a ritual that I'm going to go through here
on the West Coast.
I want you to unplug that device, okay, and what's the most comfortable chair you have
in the house?
I want you to remove it and put it in the most comfortable chair of the house overnight.
And I've got some rituals and some telepathic, you know, things that I'm going to do.
And then I'm going to call you back in the morning and let you know when I'm done.
Okay, and I'll go plug it in.
Holy cow, it works!
How did you do that, you know?
It's all about chi, okay?
Freakin' resettable fuse.
For whatever reason, there was a glitch that tripped that.
You got to unplug it, totally discharge the whole unit, plug it back in, it reboots thinking
it's back at the factory.
The first day it was ever made, problem goes away.
You got to make sure you give it overnight to be able to do that.
So I've brought back countless.
I've had a lot of people come in here, colleagues, hey Joe, my amplifier, this amp doesn't work
anymore.
I can have, you could have it if you could fix it, okay, because I went out and bought
a new one.
I figured this thing is toast.
I go plug it in, it works.
By you unplugging it, you fix it, I don't even go on to it with people.
We would be surprised the amount of stuff that you could fix by simply unplugging it
for 24 hours, plug it overnight, not even 24 hours, plug it back in, you're good to
go.
Why does it take time?
Because these resettable fuses, there's a time delay before they're actually solid
state devices, before they physically reset and allow the circuit to function properly
again.
So you want to get it back to that neutral state of when it left the factory.
I don't know, in mobile audio, did you encounter any of that stuff?
Or by disconnecting it for a period of time, would fix the problem?
Yeah, I mean, when you did a harder reset, touch positive, negative together, make sure
the circuit's completely different on the EnerGuy, airbag lights, some control systems
if you get a hard reset, would do that to make sure that everything just paints inside.
So the fastest way would be to...
Yeah.
And that's the other thing that you can do even with a DVD player, if you just short
it, not unplug it, make sure it's unplugged and then short it, keep the leads shorted
together, then that's a kind of a fast track.
But still, there are some capacitors we'll talk about in the future, store energy in
the form of an electrostatic field that may keep stuff alive for a considerable amount
of time.
So...
Flux capacitors.
Flux capacitors.
Current path, we talked about series circuits, parallel circuits and complex circuits, series
parallel circuits.
We talked about current flow, negative to positive, varied by changing the voltage or the resistance.
We talked about Ohm's Law and also determining unknown quantities in a circuit as well as
Kirchhoff's Law.
For current, current is constant in a series circuit, Ohm's Law.
All the current entering a node must exit the node, Kirchhoff's Law.
Powerful, powerful stuff prevents you from removing 64 screws by hand to take one reading.
He used to think I was an A-hole.
This here is Kirchhoff's Law.
I stayed awake during that class.
You could use this here tool to prevent yourself from removing 64 screws.
Chronic.
Chronic, you're a freaking jerk.
No.
No, I'm not.
I think the guy that's removing 64 screws and then is going to strip the screws, break
the heads off.
That's another story.
There was a dude, a local company, can't make this stuff up.
Broke heads of screws off.
The product's ready for shipping, got freaking instant glue, glued the heads back on.
First time it was out in the field and they took a panel off for maintenance, snap, snap.
What the heck is this?
What is that on there?
They look at it.
It's like this instant glue.
Who worked on it last at a company?
Why'd you do that?
But, well, I didn't want to get in trouble.
You're out of here, you know, that instant.
You can't make stuff like this up.
Try to avoid it.
Questions?
Yes, and that's basically what we're studying is the theory.
Laws of physics.
We have proven that although this is theory, these are laws of physics, voltage, the relationship
between voltage current and resistance, the relationship between voltage current and power,
Kirchoff's laws, they're laws of physics.
We know that we could prove with 100% accuracy that this is how they behave.
Also, in science, generally, a theory is something that is provable all to an infinitesimal
degree and a postulate is something that's unproven.
Very good.
Thank you.
Okay.
Hey, before we wrap things up, because we've got another chapter to do, okay?
Well, fortunately, one of the reasons that I took this amount of time here is this other
chapter is not a chapter that I am going to lecture on.
It's another chapter that you've got to watch some videos on.
There are four videos.
When you go to the Google site, it's going to say, follow this link to watch test equipment
videos, okay?
And there are four videos that I want you to watch and you're responsible for the information.
I think all of you kind of figured out that I'm the kind of guy that likes lectures, okay?
I like to have fun with lecture.
Hopefully you're not falling asleep during my lectures, but I like lectures and it gives
me quality face-to-face time with all of you.
However, that being said, I also, I'm not the smartest guy, but I know that a picture
is worth a thousand words.
So if I could have you watch a 15-minute video, that's a lot of frames.
That's a lot of pictures.
That's a lot of data.
More time than I have to preach to you about this stuff.
The four videos.
The first video is going to be a basic introduction to digital multimeters versus analog meters,
okay?
The analog, when I speak of analog, this is what I'm talking about here.
We can, old school.
The digital meter is going to be based on a Fluke 70 series meter that quite frankly
all meters are really measured against.
The second video is going to talk specifically about how to perform resistance and continuity
measurements using an analog meter and a digital multimeter.
Resistance and continuity.
The third video is going to talk about measuring current and voltage.
So by the end of those three videos, you're going to know how to measure resistance, current,
and voltage.
If you know how to do that, let me tell you, you've got it going on.
You've got it going on.
Because those are three of the big four properties that all of this is based on.
So these are very, very important videos.
One of the reasons that we have them on videos and upload it is so that you can watch over
and over again to make sure you understand exactly what the process is.
So by the time you get into the lab, you can apply that.
Very, very critical.
Like how to diffuse a nuclear bomb.
You want to get it right the first time.
The fourth video is produced by Fluke Corporation.
How many of you know about Fluke?
Fluke is the real deal.
The real deal.
Expensive local company.
John Fluke.
John Fluke, former submarine guy.
Got to support his product.
He was before my time.
But yeah, John Fluke is a former submarineer.
They produce this video and it kind of, it's a drama.
Not a drama.
Like, oh, I can't believe he's going to test the voltage.
You know, it's got a story behind it.
There's a kid who's working on the job and he blows up something and his boss is like,
you know, you need to go out to the community college and talk with the electronics professor.
And basically it reviews how to perform basic measurements, resistance, current, and voltage
with a Fluke 70 Series DMM.
That's the fourth video.
So all of the information of those videos is testable.
The link is on the Google sites.
You can watch it at the privacy of your own home.
You can watch it on these machines, but that is what we are doing in lieu of this chapter
on test equipment.
Does anybody have any questions on anything that I covered tonight?
Yes.
No, the Google site.
It's the sites that were in the syllabus.
Okay.
This right here.
If you go to that Google sites, the electronics, LWTC electronics, you're going to see a link
in there.
Follow this link for test equipment videos.
You click on that and then it brings you to some server in Peru that we've uploaded those
videos to.
We got stuff all over the place.
You know what the alternative is?
You got to sit here and watch it all.
We've really tried.
I got my TAs working very, very hard to get as much stuff as we can uploaded to the web
so that you could look at this stuff morning, noon, and night.
Any other questions on anything in general?
Make sure you get that video watched over the next 24, oh, those videos watched over
the next 24 hours.
All right.
A chapter that I really like talking about is chapter seven because the title is Power
and I like power.
I like power.
Remember what was it?
Tim the tool man?
Remember power?
You could never have enough power.
The gas-powered blender.
I think it's a great idea.
If you've ever mixed any frozen concoctions, having a little bit extra power to chop that
ice up and get just the perfect consistency is not a bad thing.
I've never driven a car.
I've never driven a car that's had too much power.
Actually, no, and I did have the opportunity.
I went through Richard Petty's driving school two years on a row.
This was probably about 10 years ago.
I thought these cars would have governors on them.
You go through and they're going to turn some goofball like me loose in a Winston Cup car
at the time.
No governors.
That car had a lot of power.
Putting the right hand.
It's scary.
I got the Drive Las Vegas Motor Speedway and I'll tell you the whole story sometime, but
actually I got the fastest times of the day.
I was at the top of the reader board, Joe Greenock, it was pretty freaking cool.
So I was thinking about quitting my day job and becoming a NASCAR driver.
Luckily I have good friends that woke me up to reality, but the power was fabulous.
So I think as much as I love aviation and aerospace, I see the Blue Angels in town.
I look at those F-18s and knowing my own piloting skills, and I think I'm a pretty good pilot,
but knowing my own pilot skills, I probably last probably five or six seconds in one of
those things before there'd be a fireball going down the runway, a little bit too much
power for me.
Power in electronics is in electrical is very, very important because it's the metric that
we use to determine output.
It's the metric that we use to determine efficiency.
It's the metric that we use to show us how much energy we're converting into work.
So this is a really big chapter.
If you fully understand the implications of power, you're going to be a better technician.
You truly are, because looking at inconsistencies in power output is going to start to paint
a story, tell you a story, and paint you a picture of what's taking place with a system.
So with that being said, let's jump and immerse ourselves into chapter seven power.
After completing this chapter, we're going to be able to define power as it relates
to electric circuits, state the relationship of current and voltage, solve for power consumption
in electrical circuit, determine the total power consumption in a series parallel and
a series parallel circuit.
Now power relates to the rate at which work is being done.
Relates to the rate at which work is being done.
Work is done when a force causes motion.
I'm sure my kids, I got three kids, three boys, they're all grown, the youngest is going to
graduate, new dub here in June.
Business finance, he's going to make me, he's going to make a bunch of money and then hire
me to hang out with them.
He's going to do really well.
My kids probably all think I'm a jerk because I know stuff like this.
We'd have family cleanup day around the yard, and I'm out in the front yard digging ditches
and doing whatever, and the kids are in the back yard, it's supposed to be raking leaves.
When I come around the corner and they're standing there leaning on the rake, what are
you guys doing?
We're working.
No, you're not because work is done when a force causes motion, right?
So by simply standing there bracing yourself against the rake, you're definitely not working
to get back to raking, so obviously me knowing this stuff, they think I'm a jerk.
So work is done when a force causes motion.
Now check this out, force, voltage, current, motion.
Voltage creates current causing electrons to move in a circuit.
So if you've got a voltage and you've got current, you're doing work.
May not be the work you want to get done, but you're doing work because a force causes
motion, voltage causes current, and we know voltage is pressure, current is movement,
it's got to be power, make sense?
Now electric power rate is the instantaneous rate at which work is done, instantaneous.
That means take a snapshot right now, how much work is being done right now?
What's the pressure?
What's the current?
Right now, instantaneous value, make sense?
Now that's not how the power company, it's actually odd the power company is called the
power company, let's go back to that.
Power relates to the rate at which work is being done, work is done when a force causes
motion.
How many of you here pay money on a monthly basis to the power company?
Why are they called the power company?
All they're really providing us with is voltage, you know who the power company is?
It's you.
It's to take money out of our wall, it's exactly.
Who's the power company?
You're actually the power company, you're providing the current path if you will for
the current to flow.
They're just providing you with the voltage.
They should be called the voltage company, okay?
I mean realistically, that's all they're doing.
When you pay for electrical service to your home, all they're providing you with is a
voltage, a electrical pressure at your box.
It's up to you to hit the breakers, turn the circuits on, turn your lamps on, turn your
appliances on, turn your loads on.
That gives current a path to flow, now you're consuming power, power company.
I always, you know, I see, I take this stuff to literal, which is one of the reasons that
I'm here and you're there, okay?
But it just doesn't make sense, does it?
It really doesn't.
Now the power company, the voltage company, charges you in watts.
Actually, the power company charges you in what are called kilowatt hours, kilowatt hours.
I'll talk about more of that in a second.
Measure in watts.
Wattage is greater when work is done in a short period of time than when the same amount
of work is done in a longer period of time.
Wattage is greater when work is done in a short period of time than when the same amount
of work is done in a longer period of time, right?
A mild example of this, it's an area of I enjoy motorsports in general, I enjoy mechanical
things, you know?
No offense to any of you here that are into any of the fine arts, but if I had a chance
on a Sunday afternoon of going to the opera, which I've attended, the opera, the symphony
orchestra, musicals, plays, not a big musical guy, no offense, but it's not how I roll,
or going down a bowing field and standing at the edge of the fence and watching the
heavy metal takeoff, okay?
I'd probably be down a bowing field, it's just how I roll.
So I've always been a big advocate of motorsports.
One area of motorsports that I never was really that intrigued with, I respect it, but I'm
not that intrigued with pursuing it, is drag racing, but I respect it immensely.
Drag racing is about getting as much end power out of the engine and coupling it to the wheels
and getting the car down the track, a quarter mile track as quickly as you possibly can.
If any of you have ever watched drag racing, I mean some of the rockets, rockets, strap
yourself in, go pow wow, quarter mile, you know, a matter of seconds and they're down
that quarter mile track.
I've always been, I've enjoyed NASCAR racing and Formula One is just, Formula One for me
is, because they not only go down the track that fast, but they turn around and come back
and they make some turns in between, so that's really amazing technology.
But, follow what I'm saying, drag racing takes all of that power, couples it to the
wheels, the tires, traction, and accelerates, okay?
So they're consuming a huge amount of power and converting it into energy to get down
the track.
Would that be the same concept if you had a car that did 45 miles in one hour, versus
a car that did 80 miles in one hour, and you would be consuming more power in the amount
of an hour, would you get there faster?
Absolutely.
Yep.
And to get that work done in a shorter period of time, it's going to take you more power.
So that's one of the reasons that, you know, with gas prices going up, getting off that
pedal, it does make a difference, it does make a difference.
The epitome for me, and it's a toss-up, it's a toss-up, NASCAR was involved in both of
them, right?
Space Shuttle.
Space Shuttle, or old, kicking at old school, NASCAR, the Saturn V rockets.
Saturn V rockets, a little tiny capsule up on the top, big, huge freaking rocket, okay?
Light it.
The dude that lights it, lights it, and then goes like three miles away and goes into a
concrete bunker, okay?
And then literally with the Space Shuttle, it's the same thing, they light it, and then
they like run three miles away, and you know, that thing goes off, right?
Seven minutes later, they're in outer space.
Seven minutes later, they're in outer space.
NASA throws power at the problem to get the Space Shuttle into orbit, okay?
So obviously we're talking about, if NASA could meter out that power, you know, you
could probably light several cities for a good deal of time.
Instead, they say, how can we get that power and concentrate it in liquid fuels, solid
rocket boosters, and then be able to concentrate that energy so we could get that Space Shuttle,
which is freaking huge, it's a big thing, into outer space in seven minutes.
Not eight minutes, not nine minutes, but it's seven minutes, they're in orbit.
Tremendous amount of power.
Have any of you here ever seen a Space Shuttle launch?
Yeah, I had the opportunity back in the 80s, I actually saw the Challenger, fortunately
not the time that it had its malfunction, I saw it before that, and actually ironically
Dick Scobey, who's from Auburn, Washington, I saw a mission that he flew prior to the
catastrophic accident that they had, but I was in Titusville, Florida, and you're listening
to the radio and you hear the countdown and everything, three, two, one, and you know,
I don't know how many miles away you are, like 10 miles, 12 miles, you know, you see
it going up, going up, and then all of a sudden the wall of sound hits you, and it's just
a sound like I've never heard before, it's like, wow, that is freaking cool, you know,
the next thing, you know, it's gone, man, it's in orbit, they're in orbit, over and
around the Earth, tremendous amount of power, okay, so the same thing with electronics, same
thing with electronics, the more power we throw at something, the more work we can do,
so you know, basically, you know, if you're attending a concert, you know, the Pink Floyd
Orchestra is performing in an auditorium, they are going to have to throw a lot of voltage
and current at the problem to create a lot of acoustic energy to satisfy the masses, because
that's what we've all grown accustomed to, is loud music, right, okay, what is the basic
unit of power? That is not a question, it's a statement, what, what is the basic unit
of power? It is literally equal to the voltage across a circuit multiplied by the current
through the circuit, it represents the rate at which work is being done, and what is the
guy that came up with it, and what he said, I think he gave this presentation down at
the King Dome back in the day, 45,000 people, Ohm gave his spiel, right, remember that,
V, V, V is equal to I, I, I times R, R, R, R, right, that was Ohm's deal, Watt got up
there not to be outdone, and he said P, P, P is equal to I, I, I times V, V, V, and that's
what he said, that's what he said, so again, P, I, V, triangle with a T in the center,
power is equal to voltage times current, if I ask you how much voltage is there, and you
know how much power there is, right, in current, then you can calculate out the voltage, if
I ask you how much current is there, if you know the power and the voltage, you can calculate
out the current, and of course power, current times voltage, that's all your variables,
simple math, and this is called Watt's law, Watt's law, so so far, for those of you at
home keeping track of what's going down, we've gone over Ohm's law, we've talked about Kirchoff's
law and this is Watt's law, these are laws of physics, they allow us to calculate what's
going to take place with 100% accuracy, very, very useful tools, we're not teaching you
this stuff because I got nothing better to do with my time, we're teaching you this stuff
because this becomes very valuable for an electronics technician, paints a picture, tells
you what's going on, literally tells you what's going on, okay, a little known fact about
yours truly, I used to work in radio, okay, I worked on the air, I was on the air personality
for an AM radio station in Connecticut, and it was one of the things that got me interested
in electronics, because I worked kind of hard and I didn't have a whole lot of job security,
there was a guy at the station, the chief engineer, this guy, every year he'd buy a formula
firebird, trade in the old one, get a new formula firebird, and he always kind of had
a girlfriend with him that was kind of had it going on, if you know what I mean, okay,
and he did very little, he came every week to the station and he'd get all of the readings
that all the on the air people took from the transmitter, we were able to take the readings
from the transmitter remotely, but we had to log in these voltages and these currents,
and then he would come, he'd come with a calculator much like this, okay, and he'd sit there and
he'd perform these calculations all the way down, and then he'd sign the logs, take them,
stick them in a folder, and then they'd be held by the station.
What he was doing is that the station, commercial station, was licensed by the Federal Communications
Commission to only broadcast so much power, and the proof of how much power was being
transmitted was the voltage of the final transmitter tube, the current flowing to that transmitter
tube, if you knew those two you could calculate out the power, and then there was approved
engineering design criteria for the antenna system, that the antenna system had certain
number of losses, so you could prove to the FCC, you see, we were not broadcasting more
power than we were allotted, we were not interfering with that station in Pennsylvania, okay, we
couldn't have been, because we're only broadcasting out what you've allowed us to broadcast out,
so it was a technician calculating this out through the current and voltage readings that
I think it was every four hours we had to take, every four hours on the air personnel,
and it was right there in the studio, it was an equipment rack and you could go and just
sequence through, you know, and take the voltage readings, the current readings, and log those
in and that became part of the permanent record, so it was kind of funny, it really was inspirational
for me seeing this guy as the chief engineer, he was a chief engineer and he was assigned
several radio stations in Connecticut on contract, the guy made really good money, you know,
and I'm like how do I get his job, well you need an FCC license, you know, basically the
general radio operators license to be able to maintain a commercial radio station like
that, so anyway, I'm an examiner now for the FCC and I give that exam and I've never in
my life owned a Formula Firebird, so I have had some girlfriends that kind of had it going
on if you know what I mean, until it hits the fan, until the station gets hit by lightning,
okay, and then it's like oh, and then you got the general manager, right, the program
director, and all of that advertising dollars that were spent, right, you're losing that
money because the station is off the air and that's how stations pay the bills is all the
advertising, so when you're off the air, you're in a pickle, people will tune to another station
or whatever, so it's kind of a big deal, ironically though, kind of behind the scene story like
here, we had a woman in our program that completed this program and I got her an internship, she
interned for a period of time at KISW and the engineer at the time over there, Brian, he hadn't
had a vacation for three years because again, as a chief engineer, you just don't go on vacation,
yeah, I'm taking my vacation next week, you know, you can't do that because if the station goes
off the air, who's gonna, you know, so for the, there was nobody, nobody that he could hand the
station over to, once she got in there and she built up some credibility, he actually went
on vacation and gave her the keys and it's kind of like hey, you've got it, so you've got the
station, she was a student here at Lake Washington Technical College, she was the acting chief
engineer for KISW, also, also because all these engineers and all the radio stations, they're
all in cahoots with each other, okay, so if the station goes off the air, you know, call Tony
over at Cairo, he'll come over and help you out, you know, you've got all these engineers that will
lend a hand, even though you're the competition on paper, if I need something, you'll help me out,
if you need something, I'll help you out and it kind of goes, it's a, you know, unwritten law,
if you will, and radio to help everybody else out, so kind of exciting. So anyway, this power
reading is very, very critical, so that you could tell the performance of your equipment and it's
something that, if any of you go into commercial broadcasting, you're gonna be doing the exact
same thing, taking those power readings, how much energy are we, are we getting off the antenna,
the only way to tell them is how much voltage you got, how much current you got, you got going,
same thing, you come from an audio car, car audio background, same thing, you got a thousand watt
amplifier, it's a math problem, okay, 1000 watts, you know what this is, okay, 12.6 volts DC, you
know what this is, well, this is gonna tell you how much current it is, it's a math problem, you
know, now it's a thousand watt amplifier, that's peak performance, and how often you're gonna be
cranking out that peak performance, but you've got to design everything backwards to make sure that
if you crank it up all the way, you're not gonna cause an electrical fire, it's a good meltdown,
so you've got to design, and it all integrates, really it's a beautiful thing. Now the electric
company, the electric company, the voltage company, they charge you, they charge you for kilowatt
hours, kilowatt hours, that's a thousand watts, a kilowatt, right, per hour, so that you consuming
a thousand watts over an hour, okay, I don't know if any of you go to the gymnasium periodically,
the gym workout, some of the life cycles, stair steppers, these things, some of them have integrated
in calories that you're consuming, some of them have a screen that you can go to for watts, okay,
so I often thought I hate working out, I really do, it just, I'm not afraid of hard work, okay,
if I got to dig a ditch in the backyard, I love doing it, you know, I'm all about hard work, but
going to the gym and like, you know, for an hour just doesn't make sense, at least put the thing
up to a generator, let me charge my cell phone or something, and you know, let me save a nickel or
something, if you know, that makes more sense to me, but anyway, somebody's screens have watts,
and if any of you have ever done that, how hard you have to work to generate a watt, I mean,
it's amazing, so the electric company, the voltage company is selling us a thousand watts
per hour, that's the unit of measure that they charge us, okay, so anybody know off the top of
their head about what we're being charged here in the greater Seattle area, a kilowatt hour,
zzz, wait, you're being ripped off, man, that's, that's chronic power and light,
about eight cents, about eight cents, some of you, depending on your, on your, your scale,
six and a half cents, seven cents per kilowatt hour, which is the thing that I kind of struggle with,
I go, this year alone, since January, I got invited to attend a green energy conference,
good jobs, green jobs in Washington DC, and then I was invited to be a guest speaker in Milwaukee
at the green summit, so I, I'm some world-class speakers I get to be in the presence of, so I
go to this like green summit in Milwaukee, and I get seriously jazzed, you know, like, yeah, I'm
going to go home and I'm going to do an energy audit, I'm going to see, I'm going to get home,
lost them six and a half cents per kilowatt hour, you know, how much effort do I have to put into
really saving, and how much am I going to save, it really doesn't make sense, I mean, it really
doesn't, there needs to be consumer incentive for you to, to really hunker down and save,
because electricity here in the Northwest is very, very inexpensive, and that's a good thing,
I'm not complaining about it, you know, and there are some things that you could do to save,
save energy, but there's only so much that you could do, and we're really not paying that much
for it, even like with electric cars, I know my colleague did some of the math with purely
electric cars that we're coming out with, and really it equates for the price of gas at four
bucks a gallon, it comes out to being that it's about 99 miles per gallon that you would get,
equivalent to travel, travel 99 miles, then it would cost you to do that for that fill up,
and that's what about what it equates to when you're paying six and a half seven cents per
kilowatt hour, which is bad, you know, I wouldn't mind having a car that got 99 miles per gallon,
100 miles per gallon, but is it worth the investment of me scrapping my, you know, my V8,
I mean, because I don't, unless I'm having, unless I'm driving a Tesla, which is out of my range,
you know, I don't think, I like that V8, you know, V8 Taurus, pour some fuel into the situation,
a little bit of air, get out of the freeway, set the pace, I keep up with the flow of traffic,
set the pace, and I have documentation, watching the state control of a little Tesla at math, okay.
So, good analysis to determine the power dissipated by a component of voltage,
drop, and time, so I'm talking about for a component now, okay, this works for loads,
this works for like an amplifier, if you've got an electric load, an amplifier, a transmitter,
you could do this, but this also works for individual components, so if you know how much
current's going through the component, and you know the voltage across the component,
then you could figure out exactly how much energy that component is dissipating. Now, remember resistors,
remember resistors, resistors are devices designed to possess the property of resistance,
resistance is that force which opposes the flow of electrons, the byproduct of resistance,
when current encounters resistance, it generates heat, that's how we determine the power of that
resistor, because all resistors are not created equal, there's ath watt resistors,
quarter watt resistors, half watt resistors, one watt resistors, five watt resistors,
how much energy could they dissipate, and literally, literally it's the voltage across the component,
times the current going through the component, that's going to give you that power that's being
consumed by it. If a resistor, if you ask too much of a resistor, it will fry, it will fail,
if you exceed its rated capability, so all electronic components are really like that,
you know the voltage, you know the current, we're going to talk about some exceptions in the future,
they're not resistive components, they're called reactive components, that'll come later this
quarter, we'll talk about that, and that they don't, these are components that don't consume
energy in the form of heat, that's why they're called reactive, but something we'll talk about
in the future. Hey, the neat thing with power, power dissipated in series or parallel is equal to
the sum of the power dissipated by the individual components, power is always additive, it doesn't
matter if it's series or parallel or whatever, power is always additive, I've got a 400 horsepower
engine on my airplane, and I remove it and get another 400 horsepower engine amount, each engine
on each wing, now 400 times two is up to 800 horsepower worth of power, as were before in a
single engine aircraft, that was only up to 400 horsepower, okay, it's kind of funny, I know a
little bit about airplanes, but the odd thing about airplanes is when you do that, instead of the
airplane costing twice as much, it ends up usually costing you about three times as much,
so for a twin-engine airplane you're going to pay through the nose, you know, much higher performance,
a lot more going on with it, a lot more structural that they have to do, but power is always additive,
that's why the space shuttle, right, solid rocket boosters on the space shuttle,
all right, they have two, you know how much power that is, twice as much as one, okay,
that's why they put two of them up, and actually from what I understand, I think the space shuttle
can, I don't know if it could get a shallow orbit, if it's just on one solid rocket booster
or not, but those things are literally like Roman candles, once they light up they're going for a
ride, there's no shutting them down, uh-oh, we changed our mind, let's back it back to the pad now,
you're going for a ride, power, so power is always additive, always additive,
this is the thing like with your home, forget about what is energy conservation, a bunch of
your home, every device that is on in your home right now that has a voltage across it
and current flowing through it is consuming power, okay, there's a lot of phantom loads in your home,
stuff that's plugged in but it ain't turned on, but it's still consuming power, why? You got voltage
across it, it's got a current flowing through it, you're plugged in, how many have a nice flat
screen TV at home, right, how many have it, is it turned on right now, do you leave it on 24-7
or is it turned off, still consuming power, still consuming power, so that way when you go home and
hit that remote, pow, that screen comes right up, if not there'd have to be a period of time with
some electronics for it to warm up, come up, everybody wants instant gratification with systems,
especially somebody old tube systems, right, those really consume a lot, you had to wait for the tubes
to heat up and everything, but most electronics are really in a standby mode, your battery charger
right now, your cell phone charger at home, if it's plugged in the wall and it's not plugged
into your cell phone, it's still consuming some energy because it's got current flowing through
a coil there, when you plug in your phone, it consumes more current, right, so a lot of these
again are phantom loads that exist at your home, you're consuming energy, real small amount, real
small amount, it all adds up, it all adds up, you know, as you want to things that give you a sales pitch
for tomorrow's meeting, right, you can watch a documentary called Power Search, that was just on
on public television, there's a talk a lot about that, you know, it all adds up, it's all about
power, you know, I didn't hear about her, did she save money early, huh, I'm not gonna do that,
all my plugs are like behind the couch and crown, I'm gonna climb back there, it's all the power
stripper that on off, you know, that's it, in all honesty, that actually I thought about that,
you know, my wife and I travel a lot and we, you know, we go away and really would make sense,
just shut off that main breaker of the house, you know, leave for a month, come back and then,
you know, you go get your electric bill, they still charge you the same, you know, they're just
messing with you, gotta have your thucks in a row, man, you gotta pay attention to that meter, so
now electronics, the power dissipated in a circuit is often less than one watt,
electronics, microelectronics like you're studying here, typically the value is going
to be less than a watt, typical values will be the milli watt, this is times 10 to the negative third
or one-thousandth of a watt
and the micro watt, one million micro watts equals one watt,
so we're talking a millionth of a watt, that's typically what's consumed in
some of you are working around with amateur radio, you want to get your amateur radio license and
play around with some of that stuff, some of them are here for power transmitters,
you need to make sure you have the available current and voltage
signal on, you're not going to be able to do that, because again, you want to hear behind
why power is equal to current and voltage, so if you're on a low voltage system,
like a car, like a car or a boat or an airplane, and you want to start jacking this value up,
that means you're going to have to start using a bigger cable, a physically bigger cable,
you have more electrons that you're going to have to transport from the source to the load,
and that's what you're measuring, okay, so the math doesn't lie,
total power dissipated in a series or parallel circuit is equal to some of the power dissipated
by the individual components, meaning power is additive, power is additive, there's no such thing
as negative power, but this is putting power back in, you know, perpetual motion machine,
you get something like that going, give me a call, okay, give me a call, I have my attorney
contact, your attorney, and I'll personally fly you to Bimini, and you could watch the sunset
drinking out of a coconut with one of those screwy straws, an umbrella on the top of your drink,
okay, now all we do is consume voltage, we consume power, nothing puts things back in,
so it's not, I guess it'd be like me getting an airplane engine, you know, mounting one,
like going this way, and then the other end, you go this way,
one, yeah, one, that one, you lift off, you know, so UFO, no, it's a doofus,
it's a doofus, what's that guy doing? Does that make sense? All right, summary,
power is the rate at which energy is delivered to a circuit, power is also the rate at which
energy or heat is dissipated by the resistance in a circuit, this isn't, that second bullet
statement there isn't something we dig, it's something we got to deal with, we don't want
our electronic equipment to get hot, it's one of my, one of my, I got a lot of electronics in
my family room, got my audio, I got surround sound, I got my plasma screen, TV, I've got,
got all this equipment, I've got, I got several computers, I got a computer that monitors the
weather at my house, why, because I'm just into that kind of stuff, I got my other main computer,
I've got all my network gear from, for router, I got a switch that powers the other internet
connections in the house, got all that stuff, in the summer, that room really gets freaking warm,
okay, in the winter it's kind of cool, warm I mean, you know what I mean, you come in there and I got
all this electronic stuff that's keeping that warm, really heavy and temperate, but you know,
was it last year, two years ago, we had the heat wave, it was like, holy cow man, I had to start
shutting stuff down, I'm like, you know how important it is to start shutting stuff down,
so I don't have a Wi-Fi system in the house, not that that generates that much heat, but
everything else in there does generate the heat, we don't want that, we don't want that,
it's something we have to live with, so a lot of times when equipment is densely packed,
that thermal profile tells us what's going on, former member of our advisory committee here
at Lake Washington Technical College was the chief engineer for Channel 9 out of Seattle,
and we went down there for a tour one day, their transmitter is located up on Capitol Hill,
and he was showing me the air inlet temperature and then the exhaust temperature, right, the air
that they're sucking in to run through the transmitter to Kula, and by looking at that,
you know, this is the inlet air temperature, this is the exhaust, by looking at that difference,
obviously if it's a warmer day, they go up like this, right, I mean it is what it is,
by him looking at that, okay, if this stay stationary and then this one goes up,
it immediately tells him what, the transmitter is consuming more power, that means there's a problem,
because when it was brand spanking new, this is what it was, this is the inlet,
that the difference between the two is a critical number, temperature,
you raise the temperature, shows you something's not operating efficiently,
plain and simple, one of the tricks, because I paid attention, I'm not that smart of a guy,
but I did pay attention when I was in school, formal schooling like this, one of the things
that I used to do is when I was in the Navy, we had very, very complex circuits, and there was
this one board that had memory chips on it, and it used to fail, and running the diagnostics to
determine which chip it was was just very, very laborious, and I've always kind of been a lazy
guy, and I'm like, you know, there's got to be an easier way of doing this, you know, so what I did
one day is just for giggles, and then we had to figure out what it was, I put it back in,
it fired the whole system up, right, and then immediately shut the thing down, pulled the
circuit card out, right, and I started going across the chips, got to the hot chip, and guess
which chip was the hot chip, the fail component, so anyway, it was kind of funny, my colleagues
thought like I was like into, you know, black magic, and like voodoo, and you know, because
there'd be a problem with the chip, and then I'm like, okay, you know, I'll figure out which one
it is, but you're all gonna have to leave, okay, and I actually started doing, I hit a little mojo
bag with some bones in it, and a crow's foot, and I played the whole thing up, you know, and we'd
shut the thing down, I'd come out, U44, I was like, how the heck did you do that? I was looking at
which chip was getting hot, the one that gets hot is the one that failed, and it's generating more
heat, and that's what the problem is, so you could really determine, use this trouble shooting tool
later on, if something's getting hot, and if you know what the norm is, beyond that, now they've
got stuff on the market, they've got thermal imaging, power company, actually uses thermal imaging,
they'll go ahead with the thermal imaging gun and look at their power runs, and where two wires
are joined together, if it starts to generate a lot of heat, they know there's a problem up there,
okay, because if it's generating heat, that shows that that connection has too much
resistance, because resistance generates heat, so you could analyze, you know, with thermal
imaging, really see a picture of physically what's working, what's not working, so that's an advance
that's taking place really, within the past decade, thermal imaging now is pretty much mainstream,
you know, it's not that, heck, you could get a non-contact infrared, you could get one
Harbor Freight tools, you know, from 1995 to later, and that would have shown you what, you know what
I mean, I had used to burn my fingertips finding the hot chip, okay, now you could just use one of
those and say, oh yeah, this chip is hotter than all the others that are doing the exact same job,
where the failure is, power is measured in watts, watts is what power is measured in, it's not a
question, it's a statement, power is literally the product of current and voltage, current times
voltage, any questions on power, you were saying that to determine the total voltage drop, any
component is a different formula than what it would be to calculate power, but in the book it says
no, no, I'm just saying
how much power is being consumed across a component, you need to use that voltage drop
across the component, not total voltage value
go ahead and take a 13 minute break and we're going to start off again at 635, 635
chapter 8 dc the circuits, dc circuits, one of the things that you need to understand about
this chapter is it's the concepts that we're going after, we want you to understand the basic
concepts, you're not going to make a lot of money necessarily going out and working on circuits like
this in industry, circuits that are made up of a power source and a bunch of resistors, but what
this is designed to do is to show you an approach on circuit analysis, we are going to use circuits
that contain a bunch of resistors in industry and those resistors are going to be used to establish
voltage operating points around transistors or other semiconductor devices, so although you're
never going to go out necessarily work on circuits exactly like this you have to absolutely,
positively understand the steps and the competencies of circuit analysis as it pertains to dc circuits,
okay that goes without saying and quite frankly we've already talked about these concepts,
this is just the chapter where we pull it all together, after completing this chapter you're
going to be able to solve for all, now let me emphasize the words all, unknown values, that
means voltage, current, resistance, and power, all we solve for everything because if you know
everything I could never ask you anything that you don't know because you know everything,
in series circuits parallel and series parallel circuits, understand the importance of voltage
dividers and design and solve for all unknown values in a voltage divider circuit,
we are going to spend time on voltage dividers, some of the stuff I'm going to blast through,
but voltage dividers are something that I'm going to spend some time on the board here to make sure
you got a handle, it's quite frankly the book is okay but the author really drops the ball
with voltage dividers, he pulls a couple numbers out of the air that I still don't have a clue
where it comes from so I'm going to show you how to approach that, as you know a series circuit
is a circuit that provides only one path for current flow, the simplest example of a series
circuit, you ever have those holiday lights, the Christmas lights that a bulb burns out and the
whole string goes out, it's a series circuit, because the filament of one bulb interrupts
the flow of current to all the other bulbs, series circuit, if you've got a string that one bulb
burns out and maybe 10 other bulbs go out, what does it tell you about those 10 other bulbs,
they're all in series, the whole string may be a combination circuit but that individual section
that went out is in series, so there's a lot of lessons behind looking at festival lighting
and when it goes out what exactly is taking place there, factors governing the operation are the
same current flows through each component, literally the same current, the same electrons,
they only have one path to go, that's from negative to positive so they have to travel the entire route,
total resistance in a series circuit is equal to the sum of the individual resistances,
right, this is what chapter 3, 4 review, right, you got resistance, you add it up in series,
always additive and that includes the resistance of a bad solder joint, the resistance of a bad
splice, remember how I said the power company, the voltage company will actually use thermography
and look and say wow we've got a splice up there and it's generating a lot of heat, we've got to
shut that section down and replace that because it shouldn't be generating any heat if it's a good splice.
The total voltage across a series circuit is equal to the sum of the individual voltage
drops, meaning total voltage is equal to voltage across component 1 plus the voltage across component
2 plus the voltage across component 3, this is a review, this is the same thing I quote,
you could quote me, right, I love it when you quote me, right, voltage rise equals voltage drop,
okay, so here voltage rise ET or VT if you prefer equals voltage drops, ER1, ER2, ER3,
those three voltages better equal what I put into the circuit, if not you got a problem,
if you find where the missing voltage is you probably found the problem,
where was the missing voltage, where was it, oh it was on a bad splice, oh okay, you fix that
problem, boom you're up and running. The voltage drop across a resistor in a series circuit is
proportional to the size of the resistor, meaning the bigger the resistor, I'm talking about in ohms,
I'm not talking about physical size, the more ohms the less current, the more ohms the higher
the resistance the bigger the voltage drop across that resistor, I always think of a resistor, remember
how I used Seattle traffic flow as an analogy, right, a big resistor is like a big accident,
if you just got a fender bender is that going to slow the traffic down, yeah,
fender bender they pull over the side, people start, you know, slow down or whatever,
now you got a three five three five car pile up, it's a big accident, that's a big resistance,
a big resistance is going to create, I gave it away already, a big backup, a big backup is a
big difference in potential, a bunch of people here that want to get to work at a bunch of people
here on the other side of the freeway that, an empty freeway basically, that's a big difference
in potential, okay, I love flying in my airplane over traffic jams, as a matter of fact being a
pilot owning an airplane, being stuck in a traffic jam drives me freaking nuts, like why am I stuck
in this traffic jam, but from the air it's so obvious, where there's an accident or a problem,
because all the traffic's backed up and then just a few cars are making it through, difference in
potential, big resistance, make sense, it's a mistake, that's for parallel, you sure that's
not parallel you're looking at, typo, typo, yeah, total power in a series circuit or parallel circuit
or complex circuit, power's additive, pt is equal to pr1, pr2, pr3, pr4, just add up all the power
and that's going to give you your total power, the bottom line, you want the bottom line or you
want the bs, bottom line, in a series circuit the most important thing to remember about a
series circuit is current is constant in a series circuit, period, the second most important thing
to remember about a series circuit, series circuit is also synonymous with voltage divider, when I
say series circuit I want you to think current's constant, I want you to think voltage divider,
that's just how I want you to look at them, and if you're not looking at them that way, you ain't
looking at them right, Houston we're going to have a problem, okay, those are the most important
things, I'm going to have you repeat that back to me in the future, do not deceive me, okay, remember
that stuff, the most important thing in a series circuit is current is constant, why is it constant,
it's only got one path to flow so it better be constant, the second most important thing about
a series circuit is a series circuit is also known as, right, aka, like in police lingo, aka also
known as a voltage divider, voltage divider, in this particular circuit, I mean I look at it,
and yeah I've been doing this since puberty, but I look at this and what do I see, I see a voltage
source and three voltage drops, voltage rise and three voltage drops, three loads, I don't know what
they are, but I know these loads are connected in series, and I know that all the current that
flows out of the negative terminal of my voltage source has to travel this complete path,
no place else for it to go, so the current's going to leave the negative terminal of the battery,
it's going to make this corner, 90 degree corner at the speed of light,
this is cool stuff ain't it, the speed of light, come on down through here the back stretch, hit
resistor 3 and create a voltage drop, a difference in potential, current's going to finally make it
through that obstruction, another 90 degree corner at speed of light, come up here to R2,
it's going to create another voltage drop, because there's another obstruction, there's
more resistance here, current's going to continue on, another 90 degree corner through R1, another
voltage drop, this voltage drop, this voltage drop, this voltage drop have to equal this voltage
rise, if anything's missing you got a problem, find where it's missing and you found your problem,
power additive, resistance additive, what else is there, so anytime you've got, the other way I
want you to look at it is anytime you've got one way into a circuit and one way out, what does that
tell you, it's a series circuit, it's a series circuit, because I cannot, I cannot show you
every possible series circuit ever invented, if you've got one way in and one way out it's a series
circuit, even if it's one component, one component, could that be series, yeah, one way in, one way
out, it's series, right, right, to solve for values in a circuit in order, the first thing I recommend
you do is try to solve for that total resistance, once you determine RT total resistance in the
circuit, then try to solve for total current in the circuit, IT, once you know IT, then you could
determine what your individual voltage drops are, right, so solve for your total resistance,
total resistance with your total voltage will show you how much current you're allowing into this
circuit, current flowing through the circuit, encountering the resistance, v is equal to i
times r, the total current, the same current that travels the entire path, times the amount of
resistance there is in a circuit, so this is going to drop a portion of that voltage,
this is going to drop a portion of that voltage, this is going to drop a portion of that voltage,
these three portions better equal the voltage that's put into the circuit.
In regards to the slide previous to this, uh-huh, this one, yeah, it doesn't say
on the slide series or parallel, so these will, will they primarily cross out between the two
applications? Yeah, but I gotta warn you, this here is just like generic, this is like generic,
and the thing of it is, is when you get out into industry or in lab, I may give you this,
I may give you this, I may give you this, but this is encased in epoxy, you can't even get to it,
you can't even get a part number off of it, you can't even take a reading of it,
so you're gonna have to use these laws and say, well, see, I remember Joe said that this is equal
to this plus this plus this, I know what this is, I know what this is, I know what this is,
but I don't know what this is, so then you could say this minus this minus this, the remainder
is equal to this, and it's a safe assumption because you're using a law, Kirchoff's voltage law,
basically to determine what the unknown is, and if you're using a law in industry
to figure out what part you need to buy, whose money you need to spend, it's a pretty safe
assumption, I mean it really is, so that's why we're teaching you this, so don't necessarily use
this as a checklist and like, oh yeah, I took copious notes, I listened to what Joe Grinnekat
said in lecture, I went home this weekend to try to do my homework and it didn't work because I
couldn't determine total circuit current because I didn't know what this value was because Joe
didn't say sometimes we might not know what this value is or we need to find it on the internet
off of a data sheet from a manufacturer, so the bottom line I want all of you to realize with
these circuits and analyzing the circuits, you always need to find at least two bits of information,
if I only give you one piece of information you're not going to be able to get very far,
but if you could extract two bits of information then you could reminipulate these three to suit
your needs as long as you get the right answers, make sense? Okay, parallel circuits, I might as
well get the cat out of the bag right from the get go, parallel circuit's the most important thing
you need to remember about a parallel circuit, is voltage is constant across a parallel network,
voltage is electrical pressure by being constant across a parallel network, what am I talking
about? I'm saying that that voltage can be constant across all components that are connected in
parallel, your house is wired in parallel, the freaking voltage coming out of the outlets better
all be the same, if not you got a problem, you got a problem, voltage is constant across a
parallel network, most important thing you need to remember, so when I say that what's most important
thing about a parallel circuit like church you all repeat after me, voltage is constant across a
parallel network, okay? The second most important thing about a parallel circuit is that a parallel
circuit is also known as police lingo aka also known as what? If a series circuits a voltage
divider what's a parallel circuit? It's a current divider, divides up current, some of the current
goes one path, some of the current goes the other path, remember the Seattle traffic pattern last
week? Was I here with talking to you folks about that or was it somebody else? Was it a dream I had?
I had a dream, it was about current and that's what it is, so some of the current's going to take
the 90, some of it's going to take the 520, some of it's going to take the north end of the lake,
some of it's going to take the south end of the lake, make sense? I've been a commuter for 20 years,
I know Seattle traffic, I've gotten out of here and gotten out of 990 and driven eastbound
to get the Tacoma, the highway 18, just so I could avoid traffic, so I know a little bit about
traffic, look at these circuits like that. Factors governing the operation of a parallel circuit,
the same voltage, the same voltage, not an equivalent voltage, the same voltage exists across each
branch of the parallel circuit and is equal to that of the voltage source, so literally this is
what we're literally, this is what we're up against, total voltage is equal to voltage
across component one, it's equal to voltage cross component two, it's equal to voltage cross
component three, it's not only mathematically equal to, it's the same pressure, I'll show you
in the schematic, same pressure. In that, in and of itself, will help you solve problems.
If you know something's in parallel, you could assume, if it's connected in parallel, I should
have the same voltage across that. Well, gee, the thing's still not working or it's working kind of
goofy, it's hard to get to, well sometimes you have to remove that access plate, access panel,
go in there and take the reading, holy cow, everything else in parallel is at 12 volts,
this is only at 9 volts, I'm missing 3 volts, you find I'm missing 3 volts, you found the
problem, it's that simple. One of the most powerful tools, how many of you here like tools?
I got tools, I got like every tool known to man in my garage, just ask my wife, she'll tell you,
okay, I like tools. One of the most powerful tools in your box is this stuff right here,
the second most powerful tool you're going to have is the digital multimeter, because the digital
multimeter is going to allow you to get out there and find the missing 3 volts, find the
missing 3 volts, found the problem, found the problem, you save the day, you save the day,
hit your boss up for a raise, he gives you a pink slip, cut you loose, just kidding,
you get a promotion, life is good, make so much money, get married, start a family,
get a girlfriend on the side, it's all good, and I don't mean that.
The current through each branch of a parallel circuit is inversely proportional to the amount
of resistance of the branch, I is equal to E over R, I is equal to E over R, so that means
because R here, that means E over R, right, E over R, we use the slash here, but that means
that this is on the bottom of the slash, so whatever we do to R is going to have an opposite
effect on I, we call that an inverse proportional relationship, an inverse proportional relationship,
so for resistance increases, current decreases, bigger accident, less flow of traffic,
smaller accident, traffic flow increases, plain and simple, so keep that in mind,
the value of least resistance in a parallel circuit will have the highest current flow through it.
The total current in a parallel circuit is the sum, literally the sum of the individual branch
currents, that's why we call parallel circuits current dividers, thank you current dividers.
The reciprocal of the total resistance in a parallel circuit is equal to sum of the
reciprocals of the individual resistances, this is a fancy way of saying when we put
resistors in parallel with each other, we actually add up the, the reciprocals, we add up the
conductance of those, of those pads, not the resistance of those pads, and the conductance
of those pads literally is the reciprocal of the resistance, and as Simon came up with, right,
that was his whole trip. The other formula that I want you to be aware of, and I know some of
you are resistant, reluctant to use it, it's a product over some formula, if you've got two
resistors or two resistances of parallel, use the product over some formula, product means
R1 times R2 divided by the sum, R1 plus R2, and it's a real easy way, I mean it's what's the,
you know, you got a half inch nut that you need to get loose, you know, you could either use,
you know, the box end wrench, or you could use your teeth, use the easiest tool, the easiest tool
is the product over some formula, well that's another formula we got to memorize, don't memorize
these formulas, use them and learn them, you understand the difference, memorizing stuff
never worked for me, I mean that's always my fear that I'm gonna get pulled, that's why I don't drink
and drive, because like I get pulled over, even if I haven't been, or you know, if I'm not totally
under the influence, they're gonna ask me to do the ABCs, and I'm probably gonna screw that up,
they're gonna throw me in the husk out because I don't know my ABCs, because I never really
memorized them, I kind of like learned them, saying backwards, I mean have you do that crap,
can't freaking do that, what the heck are you doing, while hopping on one foot, you know,
recite the alphabet backwards, no man officer, with all due respect, let's see you do that,
huh, geez, you're killing me, total power consumed in a parallel circuit is equal to
some of the power consumed by the individual resistors, no mystery here, we just talked about it
last chapter, power is always, that's beautiful, correct, if you only have two components in
parallel, two or more, you got to use your favorite formula, the reciprocal of the total
resistance of parallel is equal to some of the reciprocals of the individual resistances,
a lot of people like that one more than mine, mine is only good for two,
also with that don't forget your thumb rules, remember your thumb rules, right, if it's equal
resistance, you simply count up the number of resistors, that value of resistance and divide
it by that number, if I have four 100 ohm resistors in parallel with each other, what's the total
resistance, four 100 ohm resistors in parallel with each other, 100 divided by equals 25 ohms
of resistance, the other thing for resistors in parallel, the total resistance will always be
less than the value of least resistance, it'll always be less than the value of
least resistance, thumb rules, okay, you pay attention to those thumb rules, your GPA is
going to increase drastically, because you're going to have something to check yourself against,
I don't know if I use the right formula, but I remembered you always said the value of least
resistance will be less than the value of least resistance, my answer meets that,
I'm comfortable with that answer and stick with that answer, power is additive, it's a parallel
circuit, remember I always said voltages constant across parallel network, that's because this
electrical pressure being exerted by this source is distributed equally across these three loads,
period, it's the same, it better be the same, if it's not we got a problem,
if it's not we got a problem, where's the missing voltage, this is how your house is wired,
in parallel, the outlet in your bathroom better have the same voltage across as the outlet in
your family room as the outlet in your garage, if not it's not wired properly, something's up,
I got a big circuit like this at home, because I do everything big, that's how I roll,
I made some significant improvements to my backyard about 10 years ago, my backyard used to come out
and used to drop off a hill and it was just an unusable backyard, I wanted to like do stuff back
there, you know what I'm saying, you know what I'm saying, so I was looking at, I had to build a
retaining wall, pocket big bucks to put in a nice retaining wall, so I was looking at different options
and I like to utilize the resources that are available to me, so I have a good friend of mine
that worked for the railroad, Burlington Northern, and I said hey, you know you guys use those railroad
ties, what are the chances of getting some of those railroad ties, what are you talking about,
all like a truckload, those are hard to come by Joe, I ain't what it used to be,
so for like three years I kept hitting them up for railroad ties and wasn't getting anywhere,
and we had a great relationship, finally he said something, he was kind of hitting around about
going for an airplane ride, you know, it's hitting me up for an airplane ride, and finally, and I'm not
the quickest study, the smartest guy out there, sharpest tool in the shed, I finally like oh,
I get it, so I gave him a call like hey Larry, what are you doing Monday night, you know,
want to go for an airplane ride, pick them up in Arlington and we went out over the cascades,
beautiful sunset, whatever landed, right, that Wednesday my cell phone's ringing, hey Joe,
still want those railroad ties, yeah, I got clearance not only to give you the railroad
ties, but I got clearance to use a Burlington Northern crane to load them on a truck for you,
okay, you just got to get the flatbed, so I went out and rented a flatbed, I drove literally,
it was funny it's a Burlington Northern, but it was a yard up in Burlington, so I had to drive
all the way up there, he loaded them on 148 ties, long story short, I built a beautiful retaining
wall, I actually had a former student of mine that was an engineer, he designed a wall for me,
you know, did the prints and everything, built this wall and landscaped it, beautiful, so now I
have a backyard, my neighbors, they weren't digging it, because now they're looking at like, you know,
he's got a perfect yard, we still, you know, there's like a wall, you know, railroad ties,
funny part of that story too, that entire, I built that by hand, 148 ties, I don't know if you've
ever picked up a railroad tie, they are heavy, I built that by hand, back filled it by hand with
a wheelbarrow, gravel, drainage by hand, you know how much weight I lost that summer, zero,
probably had something to do with the pizzas and beer I was consuming while I did it, but anyway,
what I wanted to do is I wanted, when it was all landscaped and everything, in the process,
before landscaping, I wanted to put in low voltage lighting, low voltage lighting around the perimeter,
so you know like these, the goofy lights you stick in and you know, but I wanted to put in conduit,
I wanted to do this right, and as a pilot, I kind of want that almost to look like a runway,
and you know, in airport, you know, the lights around the periphery, so I use these low voltage
lights, I had a big power supply in my garage and equipment rack, dug conduit all the way back,
did my calculations, and the other thing about calculations, determining what size wire you
should use, the kind of wire that I use is the kind that falls off the back of a truck, you know,
and the kind that contacts provide me with, so I went with this gauge of wire, it was a little bit
substandard, but you know, I was like, ah, the math kind of works out and it's kind of good,
so I've got all these low voltage lights, and ironically, ironically, I came out nice, came
out really, really nice, nice backyard, but I could tell, if I brought you back there, you
probably wouldn't, you probably wouldn't even notice it, but I could tell which light is the
furthest from the power supply, just looking at it, and it kind of bothers me, it doesn't bother me
enough to rip up the conduit and pull new cable, okay, but I know, I know by looking at it, and
what does that tell me? That tells me that the load furthest down the line is not getting the
same voltage as the load closest to the source, and gradually as you get further away from it,
you just notice a little difference in illumination.
Yes, that's my whole point. Why, it doesn't it?
I needed, I needed to use basically a heavier gauge of wire in doing that, if I had done that,
then I could, yeah, there's ways of faking, soldering, what are you doing out there? I'm
soldering in resistors to these other laps, why'd I get it? My wife would probably finally really
give me the boot, but it bothers me, it bothers me because I'm, I'm, I like doing things right,
and I guess I did do it right, because you know how much that wire that I used cost me,
you know, literally fell off the back of a truck, so you know, don't, don't judge me. I have a friend
that's a police officer, I asked him, I said, you know, what's the whole deal like if I got
something that fell off the back of the truck? He like sat up, and he's like, you know, I'd like,
I'd love to drive the, cite the driver for driving an unsecured load, you know, so.
Anyway, so this is a parallel circuit. Now, yes.
You know, that's one of the other things I was kicking around, can I stick an inert gas in there,
and, and you know, increase the, the dielectric properties, and you know, she'd throw me out,
man, she'd throw me out. And you know what, I know you find it's hard to believe, maybe you won't,
but I actually have a nitrogen bottle at home, doesn't everybody? And I don't necessarily use
it for welding. Series parallel circuits, this is the easiest part of this entire chapter.
Circuit thick, it's just about series and parallel circuits. To solve most series parallel circuits,
simply apply the laws of rules of each type. There's no mystery, there's no silver bullet,
there's no easy way for me to describe it to you. Use series formulas for the series parts of the
circuit, use the parallel for the parallel parts, period. That's all it is, that's all the series
parallel circuit is, that's what it looks like. R2 and R3 are in parallel with each other.
You got to solve for that before you could solve the total resistance, because R2 and R3, one of
things that I like to do is identify these points right here, these are called nodes. I'm going to
call this node A and node B. The resistance between node A and node B is equal to the parallel
resistance of R2 in parallel with R3. I'd use the product over some formula to determine what RAB
is. Follow what I'm saying, RAB, the resistance between node A and node B. The total resistance
in the circuit is equal to R1 plus RAB, that's what equals total current, excuse me, total
resistance. Total current can be determined by that. Once I know what total current in the circuit is,
total current is going to create a voltage drop across this resistor.
Total current is going to create a voltage drop across this resistance.
The resistance I'm talking about is the resistance of AB, which is the combination of two in parallel
with three, make sense? So once you do that, it's just easy to slice and dice. The worst thing is,
is when you see, I mean, you know, obviously we gave you some problems with the assignments of the
book that are, you know, take time for you to solve. But the first thing you got to do is, is break
it down. The other thing too, is if I had a resistor in series with another resistor here,
I'd need to solve for these two first, because they're in series with each other, but in parallel
with this. So then I need to solve for this section of the circuit, which is in series with this
section of the circuit. So, you know, a lot of students get frustrated
and think there's a checklist they could follow or a protocol. No, you just got to pay attention to
the individual laws and rules that we established, but there are no two circuits alike. One of the
things that I've heard over the years of teaching here, I got a lot of new students that come and,
or quite frankly, a lot of people, they're working in industry already, and they want to come in,
and they want to learn how to read schematics. Joe, if I come to your program, can I learn how
to read schematics? Well, yeah, but we don't have a schematic reading class. There's no schematic
reading class. And quite frankly, I wouldn't want to have a schematic reading class, even if I could
fill the schematic reading class, because you wouldn't learn anything. What are you doing here by
studying this? You're learning how to read a schematic. You're learning to differentiate between
those sections of the circuit that are in parallel with each other and those sections that are series
components. Later on, when we talk about transistors right now, those of you in the full-time program
did a component ID test today to be able to recognize different types of components. You're
going to see what happens when we put a transistor, a diode, a capacitor, different components in
different configurations. If I put a capacitor in series, all as it is, is a capacitor in series.
It's still a series circuit, and everything that we've talked about this week still applies.
There's going to be some things that are going to be a little bit different with a capacitor in a
circuit. We'll cross that bridge when we come to it, but it's still a capacitor connected in series.
And there's really only three types of circuits that you're ever going to deal with in your entire
career, and that is series, parallel, and complex. So if any of you this week have been grunting,
groaning, outside, weeping, gnashing your teeth, you know what? It's all right, because once you
master series, parallel, complex, there's nothing else I'm going to throw at you. There's nothing
else that Peter's going to throw at you. Now that being said, we're going to have you look
at some complex circuits in the future, and you know what? You will deceive me. As much as you
could pass this test on series, parallel, complex circuits, you're going to forget about it in the
future, because we're going to give you some schematic to read that's got some different
components on it, or it's got some components drawn at weird angles or something, and you're
going to get your freak on, and you're going to say, boy, they never taught me that. I don't know
what to do. You know what you do? You fall back to the basics. The only circuit you're going to
encounter in industry are series, parallel, and complex. And if it's complex, what laws do you
use? Those are series and parallel. You just got to figure out which components are in series,
which one are in parallel. I can't say it any stronger. If it's in series, there's one way in,
there's one way out. If it's in parallel, that means there's interconnection of all the components.
Make sense?
Voltage dividers used to set a bias or operating point of various active electronic components.
We use voltage dividers to create the voltages that turn on transistors and integrated circuits.
They're used to divide a higher voltage to a lower voltage, and this process is often called
scaling, because what are we doing? Voltage rise equals voltage drop, or voltage drops.
So voltage drops will always be a fraction or scaling of the total voltage that we apply to the
circuit. Does that make sense?
We're going to use Ohm's Law to solve that. That's the current through his circuit. I'm not done
with voltage dividers. Trust me, I'm not done. I'm done when the screen goes black. Now, no,
I'm not done when the screen goes black. Then I'm going to show you some stuff on the board,
so sit tight. That's not my spiel on voltage dividers. Ohm's Law to current through a circuit is
directly proportional to voltage across the circuit, inversely proportional to resistance.
Ohm's Law, i is equal to e over r. Current division, current is directly proportional to voltage
across the circuit. If a voltage increases, current increases. If a voltage decreases,
current decreases. The voltage drop is equal to the percentage of the dropping resistor to the
sum of the dropping network. You know what? I'm giving you this formula. If you dig math,
great. If this confuses you, just tune me out. Because everything could be solved with Ohm's
Law and Watts Law. If you dig math, this is another tool in your box. Let me show you how this
thing works. If I want to calculate out my voltage drop across a load, across a resistor,
this voltage is going to be equal to my voltage source multiplied by the voltage drop
divided by the voltage total. Let's keep this really, really simple so we can understand how
this formula works. If I've got two 100 Ohm resistors, if I have two 100 Ohm resistors
in series with each other. I want to know what voltage I'm dropping across one of those.
I'm going to draw that. You know what I'm talking about? I should be able to use words because the
test I give you, the quiz, is going to be words. That's why I try not to draw too much on the board.
I'll draw some stuff on the board, but I want to draw too much because I, Joe, all week you've been
drawing stuff on the board and then you ask me a bunch of words. You've got to pass the quizzes
and their words, word problems. But if I've got this, if I've got this and I've got 100 volts,
let's keep this real simple. What this formula is showing me is what is our drop here?
V drop is equal to voltage total times our drop over our total.
Okay, so let's take a look at that. Voltage total is going to be
100 volts times our drop, which is one of these voltage drops, whichever one you're trying to
calculate for. Let's say it's this one. It's going to be 100 divided by, what's my total
resistance in a circuit? 200. Okay, what's 100 divided by 200? What is it? 0.5. 0.5. What does 0.5
mean? What percentage? Half. It means 50%. So 100 times 50% equals what? 100 divided by 0.5. What
does it equal? 50 volts. We could do this one in our head. That's why I want you to do this in your
head so you understand the formula. You understand how the formula works? So if you know what this
value of total is and you want to calculate out, let's say that I went ahead and I changed this
now, that this is 500 ohms and this is 100 ohms and I'm asking you what voltage is going to be
across this voltage drop here. 100 divided by 5, basically 1.5. 1.5. What percentage is 1.5?
2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 20%. So that means 20% of my voltage is going to be dropped across this.
If 20% is being dropped here, actually no, right? Because this is 100 over 600. So what percentage
is that? I was off on my math. I'm sorry. You guys were buying it, man. I want to be your banker.
What's 100 divided by 600? Because total resistance is 600. 17. So basically 17%
is going to be dropped right here. 117 volts is going to be here. The remainder is going to be...
Where's the remainder voltage going to be dropped? This is an easy question. Right here. It's got to
be because this plus this has to equal this. Does that make sense? So this is just another formula
for those of you with mathematics. One other tool. I like tools. Just ask my wife. I've got every
tool. There's another tool for you. So if I'm giving you... I could sit here all day long and tell
you how much voltage is dropped here, how much is here. It's a lot easier to use this formula.
Although you could calculate the same thing using Stray Ohm's law. It's just going to take you a
little bit longer to get to the answer. Make sense? All right. In summary, a series circuit provides
only one path for current flow. Series circuit formulas include IT is equal to IR1, equal to IR2,
equal to IR3, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. RT is equal to R1 plus R2 plus R3, et cetera,
et cetera, et cetera. Voltage. A series circuit is also known as a voltage divider. So therefore,
the sum of the individual voltages must equal source voltage. I is equal to E over R. Well,
that's Ohm's law. Power is additive in a series circuit. Power is additive in a parallel circuit.
A parallel circuit provides more than one path for current flow. Parallel circuit formulas
include IT is equal to IR1 plus IR2 plus IR3, the reciprocal formula for resistance. Voltage
is constant across a parallel network. Again, I is equal to E over R. If you want to calculate
how much current is flowing through an individual path, and power total is equal to PR1 plus PR2
plus PR3, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. Series parallel circuits are solved by using
series formulas for the series parts of the circuit. Parallel formulas for the parallel
parts of the circuit. We talked about voltage dividers, more to come. And we talked about
current division, process of, excuse me, process of current division in a parallel circuit.
Any questions on this? Okay, let's talk about voltage dividers.
Kind of get emotional when I talk about voltage dividers. It's kind of like your first real
circuit that really does something. Trust me, it'll be good.
But I need some help, though, because we've got some electronic experts in here.
I'm going to need some help. What kind of a circuit would I use to divide voltage?
Series. You've got three to choose from. Multiple choice answer.
Series circuits, parallel circuits are complex circuits. The correct answer is ding, ding,
ding, ding, ding, series. Okay? So a series circuit is also known as a voltage divider,
right? Y'all believe me? Okay, so let's go ahead and draw that.
This is a voltage divider. Any questions?
Unfortunately, this is a voltage divider, but unfortunately, this isn't going to do much for
us. This will do a lot for us, but if we effectively want to use it, it really can't be
represented like this. It can't be represented like this. First of all, we got to ask ourselves,
why would we want to divide up voltage? We want to divide up voltage, like I said in here, to power
transistors, to power integrated circuits, to power different types of loads, to power different
types of devices. Make sense? Okay, so let's say as an example that I have a 48 volt power supply.
This is a big rack mounted power supply that sits there and drones. It puts out 48 volts DC,
but I've got some different appliances that I want to power from it. Okay? One of the devices that I
want to power from it is a 12 volt radio, a simple 12 volt radio. Okay? And that 12 volt radio is a
citizen band radio, CB radio. So what I need to do is I want to connect that radio
to this resistor right here and have this resistor produce 12 volts across it. So when I go out
here and connect my radio, which I'm going to represent, anybody know a symbol that I could
use to represent a radio? What's that? R. Yeah, yeah. There's no special schematic. What I'm
going to do here is I'm going to draw a resistor and that represents the load
that a CB radio has. And I'm going to connect it in parallel.
Do you agree that that's in parallel? So whatever voltage is here is going to be right here. Okay?
When I did this, I just changed the dynamics of the circuit. I just changed the dynamics of the
circuit. What I just did is I just loaded the voltage divider. So we're going to call this a
loaded voltage divider now. And quite frankly, a voltage divider in and of itself without any
the loads connected to it's kind of stupid. So you guys, guys, if you had read ahead and you
really had mastery of it when I'm showing you the voltage divider, you could have said,
Joe, that's stupid. What are you going to do is put three resistors, divide the voltage. What
good is that? Okay? What you got to do to make it viable is connect the load to a loaded voltage
divider. This is a real circuit. We're really going to do something here. We're really going to
power a CB radio. Okay? So to figure out, we know that this is 12 volts because the manufacturer
just said this is a 12 volt CB radio. You plug it in your cigarette lighter, you could wire it
into your car, and you too could be breaker breaker 1-9. Makes sense? So we know the voltage
is going to be 12 volts. The other piece of information that is critical for us is we have to
know how much current is required by the CB radio to operate properly. So what we're going to do
over here, okay? P-I-V. Okay? I know that the CB radio, a typical CB radio, is about five watts.
And I know that that CB radio, because I got the box, and the salesperson at Radio Shack,
we know how smart they are, said I could wire it up into my car. It's a 12 volt system. Okay?
So this is going to be 12 volts. So how much current is going to be required to power that radio
when I key the microphone and I broadcast out five watts? By the way, that's the maximum you'll
ever consume in a CB radio. If it's a five watt radio, the maximum you're ever going to consume
is when you're transmitting. If you're just receiving, that doesn't consume much energy at all.
It's when you key that mic and transmit that you're going to start consuming the most power.
So I'm thinking worst case scenario here. Okay? So all we need to do here, right, with your calculator,
go five divided by 12. What do I come up with? 0.42, rounding off, right? 0.411, 0.416666.
All right? That's what I got. Everybody get that? Everybody saw I came with that? Okay?
That's assuming the radio is 100% efficient. You know what I mean? Like every ounce of current
is going into generating that, which there's going to be losses. How do I know there's going to be
losses? When I use the radio, it's going to get hot. All that energy is not going to get out the
antenna. If you get that working, you get all the energy, getting out the antenna,
give me a call. All right? I have my attorney contact. I personally fly at a bimini. I'll
set you up. Pour you your first cocktail. Okay? I'll set the tab up for you.
So what I'm going to do with this, just for the case of example, is I'm going to round this.
Generally speaking, a CB radio is going to take a minimum of half an amp at 12 volts,
a minimum half an amp. Probably it's going to be even more than that. But in order for it to
transmit out 5 watts, you see the math. Does everybody see the math? Okay. So I am going to
assume that this here is 0.5 amps. So we know everything about the CB radio now. It's a 12 volt,
5 amps, 5 watt radio. I feel pretty good about it. We can calculate out the internal resistance
of it if we want it to. I don't see the benefit of doing that now. We don't need to do that right
now. Make sense? Okay. Voltage divider. Voltage divider. I've got another device. I've got another
device. And this other device that I have is, by the way, we're not going to put this in your car
anymore. We're going to put this CB radio on my boat. Why I want a CB radio on a boat? I do not know.
It's a power thing, man. I want to talk with truckers because I'm going underneath the bridge. Ha-ha.
You start the traffic. I'm going underneath it. Ha-ha. I'm on my boat. Okay. I'm going to install a,
I'm going to install a radar system. And the radar system
that I could represent with a resistor
is going to be connected across these two resistors.
The voltage of my commercial radar system is 24 volts DC.
And it puts out 200 watts.
How much current is going to be needed to go through this device in order to transmit out 200 watts?
Again, if you get confused, draw the triangle, P, I, V, 200 watts divided by 24. What do you come up with?
How much?
0.12? 0.12?
How much? We got a big disparity here. That makes sense, right? If a half an amp can power a CB radio,
it's going to have to be more than a half an amp to power 200 watt transmitter, right?
Even at, even at double the voltage. So all's I got to do here is power is 200
divided by how much? What's our voltage? 24.
8.33? And that assumes what?
That assumes 100% efficiency. Do we get 100% efficiency out of this stuff?
To be honest with you, if we're lucky if some of this stuff operates at 80% efficiency,
20% of the energy gets consumed as heat. So just for the case of example,
I'm going to say that this thing really in order for it to work properly is going to need 10 amps.
And this might be what the placard data on the back of the radar says or the manual says,
okay? But you understand that which one of these are real? If you do the math, this number could
be good, this number could be good. And if that's the case, then we know that the answer is going to
be 8.33 amps. But in reality, because of the losses, because of the property of resistance,
we're probably going to be consuming really about 10 amps. Make sense? Okay. So now what I have
is a circuit, a viable circuit. And by the way, if I want 24 volts here,
and I am getting this voltage across these two resistors,
what voltage must I be dropping across this resistor right here?
How much? Why 12?
Yeah. And I am connecting this radar unit in parallel. I love it when you talk that way.
Parallel with these two resistors that are in a voltage divider network. Okay. So what we did
is we just built a voltage divider, a loaded voltage divider. But we've got to analyze it now.
We've got to analyze it. And this is where the author like pulled numbers out of his backside,
and he really didn't justify it. And I don't even know where that's coming from. That's why
we're having this lesson. Question? This, remember, this here, I bought this military surplus. This
is a 48 volt power supply. Okay. So it converts my ship's power to 48 volts DC.
Yeah. So if this is 48, and this is 12, and this is 12, what's this got to be? 24. Why?
Come on, guys. Quote me what I've been quoting you.
Rise has to, your drop has to equal the rise. Absolutely. Because the drops have to equal
the rise. I'm putting 48 volt rise in. I'm getting 48 volts a drop. 12 here, 12 here, 24 here.
All voltage drops present in the count of 4. Makes sense? Okay. So this is cool. It's really
going to work like this. But we don't know the math. We don't know what values of resistance
to use here. This is where it gets tricky. This is where there's another thumb rule.
It's why you come to lecture. Okay. If the book was that good, the book was that good,
you could be home in your underwear studying right now. And I could be home in my underwear
correcting your work. Instead here, I'm dressed up wearing lab coats, you're wearing lab coats,
and we're having this interactive lesson. The thumb rule is, you ready for this? The bleeder,
the bleeder current needs to be one-tenth of the total load current.
The bleeder current needs to be one-tenth of the total load current.
How many of you buy that? You better buy it. I just sold it to you. Now the question is,
what the heck is he talking about, bleeder current? The bleeder current is the current
flowing through the first resistor that starts the voltage division process. So by me saying that,
first of all, we've got to determine what is our total load current? What's our total load
current in this circuit? 28? 48? Total load current. Current is measured in
amps. What is my total load current in this circuit? 10.5. What? Pounds ounces, kilograms,
amps. I love it when you talk that way. Total load current is 10.5 amps. Everybody see how we did
that? The only loads in this circuit, this is a voltage divider. These are my loads. The only
loads in the circuit here are, what the heck was this, a CB radio? Breaker, breaker, 1.9, CB.
And then this was a radar system. Radar system consumes 10 amps. This consumes half an amp.
So my total load current is 10.5 amps. Do you all agree with that? Okay. So I said
the foam rule is that the bleeder current is one-tenth of the total load current. What's one-tenth
of 10.5? Okay. So 10.5 divided by 10, 10.5 amps. Do you all agree with that?
Get some puzzle to look. One-tenth of my total load. One-tenth of 10.5 is 1.05. Agree with that?
So that's how much current, I'm going to do something here to change the color to make it stand
out. Okay. It's going to be passing through this first resistor. Very good. Okay. And this is going
to be 1.05 amps. And again, that's where, where's that coming from?
So at least remember my, my deal. So right there, we just unlock the entire circuit.
We just unlock the entire circuit because what we've got here is 1.05 amps coming up out of this
node. How much current do we have coming up through here? Where'd that number come from?
Thank you. The paperwork. Okay. Or your calculation based on, if the paperwork left out the current
demand, you know it's a five watt radio. And again, as long as you can prove it,
got to be able to prove it to somebody. Okay. So we called that 0.5. So we've got 0.5 amps
coming up through here.
All the current that comes up through the radio is going to come here into this node right here.
So I got 0.5 amps coming in from this angle. I got 1.05 coming in from this angle. Can any
tell me about how much current's going to be going through this? How'd you come up with that?
And how'd you come up with that? Is that just, is that, is that a notion?
It's a current divider. It is a current divider. Okay. But again, what's going to bring tears to
my eyes is if you quote me laws. Are there any laws that govern what's happening here in this node?
What is it? Absolutely. Kirchoff's law. I got 1.05 coming up here. I got 0.5 here. We got
a traffic cop standing in the middle of that intersection. How much current's driving away
from them? 1.55 amps. It's got to. It's got to. If this thing's functioning, it's got to work like
this. So I've got 1.55 amps coming up through here. Okay. How much current is coming up through
this load? How do we know that? Plackered data, technical documentation, calculation utilizing
Watt's law. I don't know. Because Joe said so. Actually, I didn't. All I gave you is that 24 volts
in the 200 watts. You folks really calculated that out. The only curveball that I shot you in any of
this was the efficiency bit. I'm talking about efficiency. The book doesn't even talk about that.
But you just, you don't get 100% of anything. You don't. There's nothing that's 100% efficient.
So I got 10 amps coming up through my radar system. That means that 10 amps makes a 90 degree corner at
the speed of light. Okay. 10 amps. 11.55 amps. How'd you get an extra amp with Watt?
What was the rule here? What was the whole thing on unlocking this entire circuit?
What did I call this resistor? The
bleeder resistor. And that's what's starting the whole process. We have to have some current going
through that to create. And the reason that we use 1.10, so is that these loads come on and offline?
The circuit's going to have stability because that CB is not always going to be on. And when we
turn the CB off, we don't want the whole circuit to go cattywampus. We want it to be somewhat
balanced. Same thing with the radar system. So it's a thumb rule. It's not an absolute. It's a
thumb rule that should give us consistency of operation for this circuit. Makes sense?
So we know that we have 11.55 amps coming up through here.
Boom. If I've got 11.55 amps flowing into my power supply, how many amps must I have flowing
out of my power supply? The same. Okay. So that means I've got 11.55 amps flowing into this node.
If I've got 11.55 amps flowing into this node and 1.05 amps flowing out of this node,
how much current do I have flowing in this direction? How much?
10.5 amps. Do you agree with that? If I've got 10.5 amps flowing
into this node and I got 0.5 flowing in this node, how much current am I going to have flowing
in this direction? Isn't that the same number we started off with?
So I just prove that this works. I just traced all the current through this circuit in doing this.
Now, the easy part of the analysis,
VIR, let's calculate out resistance, voltage over current. Voltage over current, right?
Voltage 12 over 1.05. 12 over 1.05 is going to give me this value of resistance. R is going to be equal to
11.428 ohms. That's what I came up with. Are we going to find a 11.428 ohm resistor?
Can we find something close? Maybe we could find one with tolerance as a 10 ohm resistor that's
on the high side, 20 percent tolerance. We could find one that's within that, right?
Because a 10 ohm resistor could be anywhere from 12 ohms to 8 ohms. So yeah, we might be able to
find something close to that. It's not going to be that critical. You're going to get less
of a voltage drop there because that is kind of critical. The bigger the resistor,
the bigger the voltage drop. The smaller the resistor, the smaller. So we could do the same
thing up here, right? 12 volts divided by 1.55 amps, 7.7 ohms, and then finally here up at the top,
24 divided by 11.55, 2.08 ohms.
And this is how you analyze a loaded voltage divider.
It's really nothing unique. All we did is apply Ohm's law, Watt's law, Kerchoff's law.
You know, one of the other things that's kind of fun that I could do with this circuit,
I think it's fun. You'll probably think I'm horrible for doing that kind of stuff.
What is it?
It's the exact same circuit. And to be honest with you, this is how this thing would really be
connected. This is how it'd be really connected. Your 48 volt power supply would be connected to
what kind of ground? Electrical ground. Not necessarily earth ground, electrical ground,
which is typically a chassis ground or a frame of a vehicle or a boat, the hull of a ship,
the frame of a train car. This is how it's going to be done because we're going to use the frame
as a conductor. Circuits are going to operate exactly the same. We're going to get the
bottom of the circuit here, the bleeder resistor, connect that also to ground, chassis ground.
We're going to connect the negative lead of our radio directly to chassis ground. We're going to
connect the negative lead of our radar. The radar's kind of out of an unusual position, you know?
I got that, you know, the pulpit up there, I drive the boat, I want the low radar there.
So I'm going to have to run quite a bit of cable, but I'm still going to connect it to
chassis ground. And this is the exact same circuit that you just analyzed. I just made it more
complex, complicated looking by putting these grounds in. Basically, when you see this in a
circuit, you know that electrically all of these are interconnected. Don't let me screw you up with
this kind of stuff. And it's assumed that you know how to interpret this type of stuff. Questions?
10.5 divided by 10.
One tenth is 10, right? One tenth is 10. Make sense? 10.5?
1.05. You can multiply it by 0.1, you get the same answer.
Another question? No? Questions?
So you could sit here, and again, that's a thumb rule, but you could use it for analysis.
And then if somebody asks you, how the heck did you come up with that? How did you, what,
you want me to buy these parts? Well, how'd you come up with that? Well, I used it as a thumb rule
that I want my bleeder current, okay, as opposed to the author, who just, again, I don't know where
those numbers came from. I don't know, I don't want to know, it is what it is.
So in the future, use that one tenth. I use that one tenth, you're not even going to get the,
I mean, you'll get the, you won't get the answer that the author gets in the book.
I don't know what, you got to do it wrong to get the number that the author gets in the book.
So there's, in the future, when you see loaded voltage dividers, use that one tenth rule,
unless you're told otherwise. You know, there might be an engineer that knows a lot more
math than we know. They say, no, we want you to assume 15%, or 20%, or whatever.
But you need some guidance. We're not engineers. Guys, remember that? You know that? We're not
engineers. Anybody here want to be an engineer? Honestly? No offense, honestly? Okay, if you
want to be an engineer, that's, you know, that's good. You're going to immerse yourself more in
the world of theory. We immerse ourselves more in the world of reality.
So we're going to do what we're told to do. Actually, I had a meeting today with an engineer,
we're looking at some engineering, starting some engineering classes here at Lake Washington,
a parallel program to pursue your engineering degree. And the way he was talking about it,
too, like a pyramid. It's like a pyramid. You get to research science, a handful of
research people up here at the top of a pyramid. Then you've got engineers designing this stuff.
And then you got technicians making the stuff work. So there's a lot more technician jobs out
there to support engineering. And the engineering supports R&D. You know, Boeing only has a handful
of people that sit around and think about weird crap all day long. Thank God, right? Because then
what they do is they farm it out to the engineers and say, hey, make this work. Make this work.
And then the engineers figure it out and the calculations and everything. And then they
give the technicians and they say, make this work. And then we are the last line of defense.
And the only thing that we have to fall back on are the laws of physics and the theory of operation.
That's all we have to fall back on. And if you're going to apply that, then you're going to be ahead
of the game. So no question about it. No question about it. This actually worked out pretty well
for us with last week doing seven and eight and then saving chapter nine for this week.
Because that's the only thing that we're going to do tonight is going to be chapter nine,
magnetism. And this is a huge chapter. I don't think there's any other property that has
had such a profound impact on society as magnetism, as you're soon going to see.
I mean, if it weren't for the property of magnetism, electronics and electricity would not be
what it is today. It's really that simple. So with that introduction, let's forge ahead with
chapter nine, magnetism. After completing this chapter, you're going to be able to identify
three types of magnets, describe the basic shapes of magnets, describe the difference between
permanent magnets and temporary magnets, describe how the earth functions as a magnet,
state the laws of magnetism, explain magnetism based on the theory of atoms and electron spin,
explain magnetism based on the domain theory, identify flux lines of their significance,
define permeability, describe the magnetic effects of current flowing through a conductor,
describe the principle of an electromagnet, describe how to determine the polarity of an
electromagnet using the left hand rule, define magnetic induction, define retentivity and residual
magnetism, define a magnetic shield, describe how magnetism is used to generate electricity,
state the basic laws of magnetism, describe how the left hand rule for generators can be
used to determine the polarity of induced voltage, describe how AC and DC generators
convert mechanical energy into electrical energy, describe how a relay operates as an
electromechanical switch, discuss the similarities between a doorbell in a relay, discuss the
similarities between a solenoid in a relay, describe how a magnetic phonograph cartridge
works, describe how a loudspeaker works, describe how information can be stored and retrieved using
magnetic recording and describe how a DC motor operates. I don't think we've had any chapter
up to this point that has had so many objectives and this just shows us the far-reaching hand
of the property of magnetism. It's everywhere. All the magic that's done in today's society is
brought to us really by magnetism. I'm not bragging about it. It's really what takes place.
Magnets. There's really several different types, three types. Natural magnet is derived from
magnetite and it just so happens that I've got a couple pieces of magnetite in my pocket.
These are natural magnets. It's like found in the earth's crust. Here it is. We'll pass this
around and we'll let you play with polished magnetite. That's kind of cool stuff.
So that's found in the earth's crust and it's just a natural magnet.
Artificial magnet could be created by rubbing a piece of soft iron with a piece of magnetite.
So if you've got a piece of soft iron and I see underneath what the heck are you doing under there,
I'm creating an artificial magnet by rubbing a piece of soft iron with a piece of magnetite.
And what it's going to do is it's going to pull that magnetic property off of the magnetite and
transfer it to your piece of soft metal. Actually, that's a trick with a lot of mechanics. If you
magnetize the tip of a screwdriver, it comes in handy for picking up things that you drop
into odd places. Finally, the third type of a magnet is an electromagnetic magnet.
This is created by current flowing through a coil of wire. Basically, when we pass current
through a coil of wire, we're going to develop a magnetic field. And in concentrating that,
that's how we have an electromagnet. So electromagnets range in size from very,
very small to, if you've ever seen like at a junkyard, a scrapyard, on a crane,
they've got an electromagnet. You turn it on, it like, you know, picks up a car or whatever.
Actually, my favorite application, I'm a big James Bond fan. Remember that Jaws dude? It was like,
you know, like biting things, like train cars and stuff. And you know, they turned on the big
electromagnet, boom, pal. You get pulled right up to the ceiling on that. So that was a giant
electromagnet. I'd hate to have your credit cards anywhere near that as your credit cards have
magnetic strips on it and a strong electromagnet will probably desensitize those cards. Here's
some examples of some magnets coming variety. It's my personal collection. Just kidding. This is
torrid core, meaning it's a donut shaped. It's circular. This is a standard bar magnet. This
would be like a horseshoe magnet because it kind of looks like a horseshoe. The thing to remember
is that all these magnets are going to have a north pole and a south pole, even that magnetite
that we're passing around there. If you try holding it unusual, it won't even attach each other.
Basically, the reason that those four pieces of magnetite are attracted to each other is because
the north pole is attracted to the south pole of the other magnet, which is attracted to the north
pole, the south pole of the other magnet. North and north ain't going to work. Permanent magnets
retain their magnetic properties. That's why they're called permanent magnets. Temporary magnets
are only going to retain a small portion of their magnetic properties. That's why they're called
temporary. Over time, that magnetic field may deteriorate or be altered. Permanent magnet
will retain the magnetic properties. Now, this is kind of cool, and I'm sure it's no surprise to
any of you. The earth is a giant freaking magnet. It has to do with the core of the earth and then
the crust. We basically have a giant north pole and we have a giant south pole. The problem about
the north pole and the south pole, I got to give you a geography lesson here. If I wanted to go
find Santa Claus, where would I look and how would I get there? How could I navigate my way to this
place? With a compass, and where am I trying to get to? Okay, so you want me to use a compass
to try to get to the north pole to try to find Santa Claus? To get to the magnetic north pole.
If I get to the magnetic north pole, am I going to find Santa Claus? No, nowhere to be found.
In order for me to find Santa Claus, what am I going to have to do? I'm going to have to go to the
north pole, or the north geographic pole, which is literally the top of the earth.
Anybody want to take a wild guess what the best way of getting up there might be?
What's that?
Well, I'm talking about means of transportation.
Submarine. Yeah, you could be in a short sleeve shirt and go up there, surface at the north pole,
because it's underneath the Arctic Ocean. So you could surface at the north pole.
So I just happened to flaunt that. I actually have never been to the north pole. My submarine has
been to the north pole. At home, I've got water from the north pole in a vial from my submarine
that went to the north pole. My submarine actually delivered, believe it or not,
Al Gore to the north pole. It was after I was off the sub, but they did a mission
and went to the north geographic pole. Typically on the ice, they've put a lot of research camps
to conduct research, magnetic research. I mean, that's the place to do it.
So the north magnetic pole is, this is this illustration. It's an artist depiction. It's
not very accurate. The north geographic pole is going to be somewhere up here up north of Labrador,
and it moves about two kilometers per year, and it's actually moving in a northwestern lead
direction. And the variance, the magnetic variance. Anybody know the magnetic variance?
The difference here between the north pole geographic pole and where the north magnetic
pole is? I know because I'm a pilot, and it's kind of important, okay? Because if I start flying
northbound or whatever, which am I going geographic north or am I going magnetic north?
And the difference here in the Seattle area is between 19 and 20 degrees difference.
It's pretty significant. So this hallway right out here in this wing is aligned pretty much with
the north geographic pole. If you could walk straight, which none of us could do, we've got
a dominant leg, and you walked out this hall and just kept walking north. Eventually you're going
to get to the north pole flying Santa Claus. It's all going to be good. If you had a compass and you
stepped outside the door here and you looked, that north magnetic pole is going to be literally
over in this direction here. So it's very important because again in the aircraft,
you've got a compass, you set your gyro compass for that magnetic heading. And I bet you folks never
realized magnetic properties had such a profound impact on all these different things. If any of
you are familiar with airports, airport runways are designated based on their magnetic heading.
So C-TAC airport, C-TAC airport's got three runways, but they're all parallel with each other.
So they all have the same numbers. If you're headed southbound, typically when we have crappy
weather here in Seattle, if you look up and you see an airplane going on the C-TAC, what he's
going to do is he's going to fly out over like Magnolia, then turn inbound, and then what he's
going to do is land on runway 16. Because if you rounded that, it's on a compass heading of 160.
So how do you make sure you're, you know, since there's three runways down there, because we
all remember those of us that have lived in the area a while, that third runway when they put
it in, it was very controversial. It's 16 left, 16 center, and 16 right. That's how they designate
which runway you're cleared to land on. Add 180 degrees to that, and you end up with what?
Runway, no, 16 plus 180 degrees, runway 34. So if you're landing northbound at C-TAC airport,
you're cleared to land on runway 34 center, 34 left, or 34 right. Okay. Ironically, and the
reason that they select runways is they do wind studies to determine where the prevailing winds
are. You want to take off into the wind, and you want to land into the wind. So primarily here in
central Puget Sound, that's pretty much how all the runways are. Auburn airport, 1634,
Renton airport, 1634. C-TAC, 1634. Boeing field is a little bit different. It's runway 31 northbound,
so there's going to be a slight variance in runway 13 in the opposite direction. That's just how the
winds are kind of funneled there by the location of Boeing field. But Renton airport used to
be runway 33, but because of that magnetic procession, what they've had to do is they've
had to renumber. Do you think, oh, it's no big deal. You send a guy out there with a can of paint,
and you paint the new number on the runway. It's not that easy. All of the procedures,
all of the approach procedures, all of the publications, all of the databases all have
to be updated. It's really a big thing. So eventually, all runways are going to have to
change their number as that north magnetic pole continues to fluctuate. Why am I telling you
this in an electronics class? A lot of you are going to go to work in industries that are associated
with electronic navigation. And you got to know this. I mean, you don't have to memorize it. I'm
not going to quiz you on this magnetic procession in the 1920 degrees variance here in Seattle.
But a lot of you are going to go to work in electronic navigation systems, and you need
to understand the difference between the two. Makes sense? The laws of magnetism. I think most
of you probably remember this from elementary school. Unlike magnetic poles attract each other,
right? Unlike a track. So north is going to be attracted to a south. The south is going to be
attracted to a north. Like magnetic poles repel each other. North and a north, they're going to
push each other away. South and a south, push each other away. This is actually kind of interesting
too, because it has some applications now, like magnetic levitation. Some of these rail systems
that they're actually, the whole train, levitates magnetically. That's how they're doing it. That's
how you get a whole train to levitate. Because north pole and the north pole, they'll basically push
each other away. And then once you've got something floating like that, it doesn't take a whole lot
of energy to move a train. I mean, think about that. That's, I don't know if you've ever even
thought about why do we use trains. I mean trains, that wheel on a rail, very little friction.
So it takes very little energy to move a bunch of stuff, right? If you could kick it up even a
notch further. I mean, we still have to overcome the friction of the bearings and the axle and
the wheels on the track. Now, if you could levitate the entire train magnetically,
then just give it a little push and that thing's going to be able to move with hardly any energy.
So these are a lot of the advancements that we probably want to stay tuned for, because in the
name of efficiency, we're trying to play with a lot of this stuff. Color code for magnets. Color
code for magnets. Red is the color code that we use for north pole. Blue is the color code that
we use for the south pole. So if we were going in search of Santa Claus and we got to the north
geographic pole, what, how would we know we got there? What would we see?
There'd probably be reindeer, but what color pole would there be?
Red and white, very good. Red and white pole. We know that. Candy cane, right?
If you were at the south pole, what color would the pole be?
Blue and white. Striped pole, right? I mean, if you got to follow that same tradition.
If you're outside a place that has a pole that's red, white, and blue, where are you?
Bingo. Excellent. Very good. I got students that just...
Same students that don't know what a barbershop is.
I like the barbershop. That's how I roll. That's my thing.
So yeah, that's the color code for magnets. Magnetism, the property of magnetism,
can be traced to the atom. As electrons orbit the nucleus, they also spin on their axis.
This electrostatic charge produces a magnetic field. So even these electrons are going to
have magnetic properties. The direction of the magnetic field is the same as the electrons'
direction of spin. So even at a subatomic level, we're going to have properties of magnetism.
Ferromagnetic materials, ferro, meaning materials that contain ferrite,
this is the stuff that will rust. If the metal will rust, it contains a high amount of ferrite.
So any ferromagnetic materials are materials that respond to magnetic fields. Any of you have
magnets at home stuck to your refrigerator? Your refrigerator is made out of a ferromagnetic
material. If it were not painted, it would rust, plain and simple. If not, the magnets wouldn't stick
to it. It's actually the old trick too, if you're going and buying a used car or whatever and you're
looking for Bondo, right? Put a magnet over it and obviously if it sticks, you know that that's
all original with no Bondo. You know, you all of a sudden get to an area and that magnet doesn't
want to stick. Don't try this with a Corvette. Of course, Corvette is a fiberglass. And actually,
with all the cars now, with all the plastic on them, magnets aren't going to stick well to plastic.
Atoms combine into domains or groups. When un-magnetized, the domains are random.
This is what we're looking at here in this illustration. This is random domains, okay?
This is an un-magnetized piece of ferromagnetic material.
As soon as we magnetize it, watch, this is kind of cool, boom. When magnetized, the domains align in a
common direction and the material becomes a magnet. So if you've got my magnetite that we're passing
around and you rub a screwdriver up against that, this is ultimately what's going to happen.
You're going to align those domains and it's going to become magnetic.
What would it do between a ferro and non-ferro metal again?
Ferro contains ferrite and that's the iron content that makes stuff rust, basically.
Now a magnetic field. A magnetic field. This is kind of where you got to hit the I believe
button, right? It's invisible lines of force that surround a magnet. These invisible lines are called
flux lines. We got to be careful because those of you in ELEC 115 are learning about flux, right?
It's a different kind of flux. There's two types of flux in electronics. There's magnetic flux that
we're talking about tonight and there's also flux that we use as a cleaning agent for soldering,
okay? You're not going to use a magnetic field for cleaning and soldering to the best of my
knowledge and magnetic field has never been used as a cleaning agent. Flux, however, is used as a
cleaning agent, different type of flux. So this word has two meanings in electronics and don't forget
one of the reasons that you're here is to learn the language of electronics. I wish I had had
me as an instructor because I was kind of like flux and I was like, why are we going to use magnetic
lines of force to clean something and make it more soluble? Nobody ever explained that to me
and I wasn't the smartest student. These flux lines have polarity and that polarity is north
to south, north to south and it always forms a complete loop. They do not cross each other
and they tend to form the smallest possible loop. Some of you may have done this like in
third grade. You've got a magnet, bar magnet, you've got a piece of paper and on top of that piece
of paper you sprinkle iron filings. The iron filings will actually form a pattern and that
pattern that you see is the invisible lines of force. It is the flux lines. That's exactly what
you're doing by spreading those iron filings on that is seeing the lines of flux as a visual aid,
if you will. Permiability, there's a new word for you, permeability is the ability of a material
to accept magnetic lines of force. An example of something that has a high level of permeability
would be your refrigerator at home if you've got magnets stuck to it.
My last refrigerator that I bought and you never, how many of you here like buy a refrigerator because
like you got nothing better to do and how many of you like buy a refrigerator because your food
is all spoiled and your old one died. I mean that's normally how you go about it. My last
refrigerator I was like in a panic and I found one and they never fit right. They've actually
made them bigger so if you want one to fit into the small hole you got to get a custom refrigerator.
A smaller custom refrigerator costs more than the big one that doesn't fit right. So I just got the
big one it doesn't fit right. It's bigger whatever but I get home and I paid a lot of money for this
thing and then I get my magnets and I got you know the magnets to put juniors work up on and
everything else and my favorite pizza place. Magnets won't even stick to this thing because
it's like this designer facade so you could, what the heck is this? I mean you know so you got to
put the magnets on the side. You got to put them on the side because the front is so that you could
make it you know I don't know. I just want something to keep my stuff cold. That's all I want.
So permeability is a material that readily accepts these lines of force.
If a magnet will stick to it it has a high level of permeability.
Now there's a direct correlation between electricity and magnetism probably why we're
talking about it tonight right in electronics program. A magnetic field is generated when
current flows through a wire period. Period. Let me say that again a magnetic field is generated
when current flows through a wire period. So when you plug something into an extension cord
is it generating a magnetic field? You bet you. When you have, when you connect a speaker up to
an amplifier and you've got current flowing through that wire to the speaker are you generating
a magnetic field? Yeah okay. Anytime current flows through a conductor you generate a magnetic field.
So if you could see magnetic fields and you had an energized piece of equipment you would see all
of these lines of flux that are being formed by simply turning a piece of electronics on.
By simply turning a piece of electronics on or an electrical circuit on you're generating lines of
flux. Sometimes it's something that we need to be aware of other times it's something we need to
discount. An example would be in your home okay. Typically how your house is wired up the magnetic
fields that are generated by your home are not sufficient enough to cause you any worries.
They're not going to demagnetize your credit cards. They're not going to you know screw up your
brain. You know it's but still they are generating magnetic fields. There's no way around it.
Yeah and again with some computer screens there's some higher frequencies that are used and I mean
it's the same thing. You know is it harmful or harmless? I don't know. There's also some laws
on the books about building schools underneath power lines. You know so if there was nothing there
why are there laws on the book about that? You know I've never had an interest of well my only
interest of living underneath a power line would be able to perhaps tap into that magnetic field
and lower my power bill which of course would be illegal and not above board and I would never do
that but I never really had a whole lot of interest of like living underneath power lines.
You know because it's just an unknown. You just you just don't know because those high voltage
wires they move a lot of current through it. I mean you create huge magnetic fields. I don't know
if you you realize this but there if you get a fluorescent tube and you go underneath a lot of
these high voltage wire you could you could excite the gases inside the fluorescent tube and light
look mom it's lighting up with no strings attached so if it could ionize gas inside a fluorescent
tube you know what's it doing to your you know I don't know about you you know but I've had a
pretty good life I got a lot of good memories I do not want to scramble those memories so I'm
going to keep my brain away from magnetic fields and anything else that will alter some of these
fond memories that I have from my youth so this is exactly what it would look like here
we have current flowing through a conductor and we're going to generate this magnetic field around
the outside um if the magnetic field is strong enough stuff would stick to it normally the
magnetic field is is not that strong so stuff won't necessarily stick to it like iron filings are
not necessarily going to be attracted you know to a low energy circuit that's energized but
that being said there's still a magnetic field there it's just not strong enough to
you know attract an iron filing you know to to stick to the circuit thank goodness you know or
whenever we turned anything on it would be you know now yeah it would it would have to be a
significant enough field to attract you know current to do that the current going through it
would have to be sufficient enough to create a big enough magnetic field to attract an iron filing
electromagnets composed of many turns of wire close together because as I as I just said one
piece of wire may not be strong enough what happens if you get that and then you wrap it around again
now you just doubled it you do it a third time you tripled it fourth time quadrupled it the
math is simple the math is is that simple so every time with a winding you add a winding you're
increasing it that magnetic field that you're generating by it so the principle of an electromagnet
when wire is twisted into a loop the flux lines are brought together the flux lines are then
concentrated at the center of the loop and we establish a north and south pole anytime you
create a magnetic field you're creating both a north pole and a south pole
the strength of the magnetic field can be increased three ways the more turns of wire the more
flux lines are going to be added together and concentrated the greater the current
the greater the number of flux lines that are going to be generated okay this only carries you
so far though because what happens you're passing current through what
a piece of wire what property does wire have associated with it
resistance so you just can't keep increasing the current because if you keep increasing the
current eventually what's going to happen it's going to become a fuse I mean even if the wire is
this thick you have enough current go through wire that's this thick eventually you're going to
part that wire okay and it's going to begin to get hot and so it could cause an electrical fire
so you just can't keep saying it let me take another step back you know what kind of wire
we're going to use to make these coils we're going to use what's called magnetic wire and
magnetic wire is not wire that's inherently magnetic magnetic wire is wire that's used to make
windings and what it is is thin copper wire but it has a a lacquer coating on the outside
there's an example right there outstanding that's magnetic wire okay and it looks like copper wire
and it is copper wire but on the outside is a thin lacquer coating that lacquer coating
acts as an insulator an electrical insulator to prevent the wire from shorting because if I wound
wire over itself why would current want to go all the way keep going through the wire it would
just short right out okay so we have to keep it insulated by by using that lacquer on it so
let's get back to this bullet statement here the greater the current the greater the number of
flux line generated I'm going to get to a point that I cramped so much current through that coil
it's going to begin to get hot if any of you have ever done paint removal you know that that
paint removal when you're using a heat gun works really really good for removing paint
it works good on removing lacquer too so once you ask have too much current go through that coil
you're going to compromise that lacquer coating and that's the end of your coil by the way if
any of you have ever smelt a coil that's the end of the coil by the time you smell it it's over
with you've already compromised the integrity of it it'll never work right again transformers
motors coils any of that stuff any of that stuff if you smell it if it gets that hot forget it
another way that we could increase the magnetic field is we could insert a ferromagnetic
core into the center of the coil usually iron iron has a high level of permeability
by putting it into the center of the coil and unwrapping the coil around it it's going to
enhance the magnetic characteristics so by putting in a ferromagnetic core it's going to enhance
the characteristics now magnetic induction is the effect a magnet has on an object without physical
contact the effect the magnet has on an object without physical contact this is the cool thing
and i think some of you were playing around even with these uh with these magnets here right
and how they're not even touching
but yeah
it's having an effect on the other magnet that's magnetic induction
on residual magnetism is the magnetic field that remains when an object is separated from a magnet
we used to have literally a big problem with residual magnetism
this is something that i might i don't know if any of you want to make a wild guess at this here
i'm thinking of a very very large object that developed magnetic properties
and those magnetic properties needed to be removed or it could compromise the position
of this large steel cylindrical object
submarine submarine big big big problem in submarineing
because the submarine being made out of a ferromagnetic material would pick up the earth's
magnetic field and gradually it would become magnetized and the problem was
there was equipment that would detect the magnetic anomaly so there's no way of seeing
a submarine and some of our submarines are so quiet you would never even hear the submarine
but if you're flying in an anti-submarine warfare aircraft and you pick up a magnetic
anomaly a large submerged contact that's creating a magnetic variation chances are
you found a submarine so this is exactly what if any of you ever go up around would be island and
you see those uh the big four engine turboprop aircraft p-3s no not those those are awaks those
are like airborne command posts the p-3 orion is a submarine hunter and off the back of it
you'll see like this little thing that looks like a stinger and that's what that is is called mad
gear magnetic anomaly detection so when you're flying around typically what they they just wouldn't
be looking for a magnetic anomaly what they would typically do is have a circular scan radar on
radar so when they stick up a periscope all of a sudden they get a blip blip if it's a good radar
operator that's all it takes are two two blips and then he'll shut the radar down so what they'll
do is they'll continue to fly and then he'll go to a sector scan okay so from a circular scan blip
blip then he'll shut it off then he'll get he'll he knows where he's looking for because he saw it
on the radar screen he'll go to a sector scan right sector scan is back and forth like this so
then off it's gonna be and then he'll shut the radar off and then he'll drive his cursor over to
where he had that contact and hit enter autopilot will bring the airplane to that point in the ocean
and then the operator is looking at the mad gear and then all of a sudden they start to get a magnetic
anomaly at that point they pop a flare out over the target if you're at war at that point the
aircraft is going to go into a bank start to open the bomb bay doors fly right over that point put
a torpedo in the water it's a smart torpedo it's going to find the target and blow it up that's how
you die in a submarine in a combat situation okay the only thing that we would know my job was to
detect that so i was good at picking up the blip blip but again the good guys the good operators
two sweeps two sweeps and they'd pick you up the british came out with a radar that basically 400
miles away could spot a beer can floating in the water so it's kind of like when i saw that technology
can't come out i'm like you know i think it's time for me to move on to a different career
because if this turns into a shooting war we're dead really quick you know really really quick
so to get rid of this residual magnetism um if any of you aren't the boating or fishing and you
ever have the opportunity to get on hood canal don't get too close to the submarine base because
they have gun boats and stuff and it's all restricted area but over at the sub submarine base
in banger they've got a giant pier it's a degausing pier and what they'll do is pull an entire trident
submarine into it and pull off that magnetic field and get it back to just an un-magnetized
piece of of steel but over time that magnetic field will build up again and it needs to be
stripped off periodically or you're going to have a real profound magnetic signature
correct yeah i told you i'd have to kill you
a lot of it depends where you operate to and what the magnetic you know i mean if you're doing a
lot of stuff up north and there's some stronger magnetic variants you're going to pick that up
a lot quicker yeah because then if you keep track of what boats go in and it begins to paint an image
earth's magnetic field
earth's magnetic giant magnetic field
and then again we see this manifest itself like with the aurora borealis if any of you
ever seen the aurora borealis i had the opportunity in february i went up to fairbanks
and they say that if you're up there between october and april for three nights basically you
stand a 90 chance of seeing the aurora borealis so we were up there for the flight up there we saw
him from the airplane the first two nights i mean it was it was phenomenal i mean we couldn't have
planned it any better because there was a huge solar flare and that's exactly that earth's magnetic
field is attracting the charged particles so as soon as they get the upper regions of the atmosphere
they ionize so literally it's like a neon light except that's in the sky so i should bring in
some pictures and show you i mean just it was breathtaking just phenomenal you're just standing
there minus 23 degrees um it warmed up the the week prior it was like minus 47 or whatever and
i seriously even though i had gloves on and everything i had to take off my gloves to manipulate
the camera i ended up burning the tips of my fingers and it took about a week for me to get the
feeling back and it's very very dangerous but way cool you know way cool to see this and you
know people spend thousands and thousands of dollars to go up there and and and see that
but it's the magnetic field it's actually attracting that near the poles retentivity
is the ability of a material to retain its magnetic field after the magnetizing force
is removed so unfortunately a submarine hull has a high level of retentivity and um that magnetic
signature you want to strip that off because it's not desirable to have a submarine magnetized
now magnetic shields are made of low reluctance materials they're used to protect electronic
equipment from magnetic flux lines okay sometimes we need to protect the equipment from these
lines of of flux um because they could cause interference or even worse um let me kind of
back up for a second and then see if you could connect the dots on this we all understand that
when we apply current to a conductor we create a magnetic field right so bear with me if we have a
magnetic field that happens to pass through a conductor what do you think we're going to do
i'm going to create current yeah so basically if current creates a magnetic field an electromagnetic
field can create current um this is one of the things that they kind of figured out the hard
way when we started lighting off nuclear weapons one of the side effects of a nuclear weapon
was an emp an electromagnetic pulse and this electromagnetic pulse was a giant magnetic pulse
that would go through the atmosphere and when it contacted came in contact with a conductor
it induced a current where current didn't belong fry radios back in the day when they first light
started lighting off nukes um basically we all use tubes and tubes are high voltage devices and
it would cause some interference and some wacky symptoms and that was about it with us going to
micro chips now and integrated circuits that amount of current is going to fry that's our
technical term for the night fry these circuits okay because we're dealing with minute amounts of
current to get the job done so all of a sudden you have an emp you're gonna fry stuff and um
quite frankly it really concerns me i know enough about this where you know basically if you had
you know everybody's afraid of a dirty bomb and everything and yeah that's that's really bad news
but i tell you what one strategically placed high altitude nuke going off over the central us
it's going to totally wipe us out and set us back into the stone age okay and it's the high altitude
ones that really screw things up because they're far reaching because of the line of sight and um
yeah i mean can you imagine a world you know in a world that your atm doesn't work in a world that
your grocery store which uses a computer to order new food and supplies from the distribution center
doesn't work your cell phones don't work your internet doesn't work your computers don't work
your car computers don't work the only people that are going to be driving around the old people
kick an old school diesel where you know compression and fuel and you've got the diesel engine running
okay science fiction no pure science this is how it works so um these magnetic shields are actually
used in some military applications for hardening the the sites because we know that this emp is
going to cause problems none of the consumer stuff that we use is hardened air force one
what the president flies around in is hardened okay they brought that down to kirtland air force
base outside albuquerque new mexico and that's where they do the cmp testing and basically prove
what it's able to withstand and again that's all really highly classified information um the same
thing with the autopilots the uh you know now it's all fly by wire technology
so this electromagnetic interference could cause big problems i don't know if any of you um
remember years ago there was a problem with the airbus well there's always been a problem with
airbus um just different problems as time progresses but this was the problem with airbus was
was with the a320 aircraft and the a320 was the first commercial aircraft to use what was called
fly by wire technology and it's actually funny i like messing with people um that are flying on a
lot of people don't realize that up in the cockpit there's no control yoke like this on an a320
they're flying with a joystick and you know the pilot's seat and he's got the instrument panel
in front and right off to his left here is a joystick and that's how the pilot captain
it's got his on the left the copilot's got his on the right so there was a um an air show that
they were doing a fly by and what happened is the the airplane came died to the you know the
symbolic low pass and then kept going and going and going right into the trees at the end of the
runway and there was a huge fireball and explosion a bunch of people got killed but there were a
bunch of people including the pilot that survived and he was like man he's i don't know what happened
you know i was pulling up the whole time the aircraft was not responding so in the in the
basically the investigation they determined at this big air show in europe there were military
aircraft that were present they had their high energy weapons fire control radars turned on
and they think that high energy got into the computers and basically put current where current
and it got confused so he's pulling up on the stick you know to pull up and you know dip the wing
and you know you know the maneuver at least i know the maneuver it's classic maneuver
instead he's pulling up and just right into the freaking trees you look that up on youtube
a 320 crash and you know they they they very well documented crash um they added a lot more
magnetic shielding to it um bowings first air planted dabble with fly by wire was the triple
seven and it was kind of a gamble military aircraft have used it for years but military
aircraft are kind of a different animal you know if you got a problem in the military
aircraft you know eject eject eject pow you punch out and you know you live to fight another day
in a commercial airliner you got hundreds of people behind you there's no eject eject eject
it's like you got to ride it out and you fix the problem so bowings first airplane with fly by
wire technology was the triple seven was the triple seven and believe it or not was kind of funny
because bowing opted for standard controls not the joystick they could have done the joystick
because basically the standard controls are controlling the equivalent of a joystick but it
makes a pilot feel like they're kicking at old school and uh they're not kicking at old school
it's they're still putting in inputs that create small currents to feed a computer and then the
computer controls the control surfaces of the aircraft so in a lot of cases like that suffice
to say you reckon bowings got some really good magnetic shielding on their flight control systems
fly by wire absolutely it's to prevent current from being where current doesn't belong in any time
there is a magnetic field you run the risk of putting current where current doesn't block
absolutely absolutely and that was actually one of the other problems too that bowing had you
know every commercial airliner statistically gets struck by lightning once a year so next
time you go on your dream vacation or whatever you got on that airplane suffice to say that
airplane was probably struck by lightning in the past year as bowing went to and for most
aircraft it's not that big of a deal because what happens is when an aircraft is struck by
lightning it follows what's called skin effect and that current passes over the skin of the
aircraft i mean it could scare the dickens out of you if you're on board it's going to be a big
you know and in some cases fireball coming through the cabin and you know it's going to scare the
dickens out of you but it's not going to bring the airplane down one of the manufacturing trends
now with aircraft though is not to build airplanes out of aluminum it's to build it out of composites
okay if you're using carbon they're not always using carbon they're just using various composites
so one of the things that they're doing on aircraft now especially control surfaces
flaps ailerons that control the role of the aircraft and such these would typically be made
out of composites so you get struck by lightning it's quite simple the lightning gets in there
has nowhere to go it blows the the the control surface apart not good if you're in the airplane
okay because now you're going to lose control because you don't have the ability to control the
aircraft anymore so Boeing actually started doing is that by put basically putting in a conductive
layer into the composites so that will allow current from a lightning strike a place to dissipate
so kind of get rid of the aluminum only to put a conductor back into the composite so it's still
highly efficient and lighter and stronger and everything else i guess lighter and stronger
i don't know when they fail they fail big but i guess aluminum when aluminum fails it fails
big too so i don't know i like kicking her old school electromagnetic induction is the principle
behind the generation of electricity and i think all of you know where i'm going with this because
we just talked about emp magnetic field passing through a conductor is going to induce current
current is produced when a conductor passes or is passed by a magnetic field
as the conductor passes through the magnetic field a deficiency of electrons is going to be
created this results in a difference of potential between the ends of the conductor
so again if you've got a long piece of wire you pass a magnetic field through it you're going to
induce current many years ago i think the space shuttle um conducted an experiment like that
and literally what they did is they trailed a long wire loop and what their goal was to try to
track it through the earth's magnetic field and see if they could you know generate current from
that um basically they vaporize the wire that's how much current they generated from the earth's
magnetic field so if there was a way of harnessing the earth's magnetic field as a generator you
know our energy woes would be over but i don't think there's a you know adequate way of of harnessing
it at this point basically trail the wire and pull it through the earth's magnetic field and vaporize
the wire so when the conductors remove from the magnetic field the free electrons return
to their parent atom so what we're doing is we're getting electrons to move in a conductor
by getting electronic electrons to move in a conductor we call that current call that current
so we're creating current faraday's law the induced voltage in a conductor is directly
proportional to the rate at which the conductor cuts the magnetic lines of force okay gonna make
this real simple if you'd understand faraday's law here okay envision up here that i have a big
north pole big magnet sitting here boom big giant and here i have a big south pole you all agree
that i've got lines of flux that are going from the north pole to the south pole and all that stuff
that i talked about earlier the straightest line the shortest distance right so in between here i'm
gonna have a strong magnetic field if i had a giant magnet right here do you agree with that
okay faraday's law says that if i my conductor if i got a conductor this is a conductor when i say
conductor i'm not talking just a piece of wire i'm talking about a piece of wire that has a loop
in it so the current's got to have somewhere to go it has to have a load right if i get this and i
move it perpendicular to the lines of flux i'm going to generate my maximum amount of current
because i'm doing what i'm cutting the lines of flux if i get the conductor and i move it
parallel to the lines of flux nothing's going to happen i mean nothing is going to happen
because the lines of flux are going north pole to south pole so me with the conductor moving
it like this all day long nothing's going to happen all of a sudden i move it like this i'm
moving it right through those lines of flux perpendicular so i'm going to get maximum
effect of cutting those lines of flux so that's in essence faraday's law
it's it's me cutting those lines of flux so i'm still going to have a strong effect by
simply cutting it now if i'm doing it at a 45 degree angle what am i going to be doing
i'm really half effective it's not this and it's not this it's going to be half at 45 degrees
faraday's law but i'm cutting it at a 45 degree angle so i'm not cutting the maximum
lines of flux by by cutting it at 90 i'm getting the maximum out of it
so that's faraday's law this here don't try this in your car on the way home somebody will think
you're like doing gang signs or something you know yo yo i'm an electronic student yo
this is called the left hand rule and the way that this thing works is that your your finger
points in the direction of flux which way does flux go
which way does flux go from where to where positive to negative east to west
north to south i said that earlier right flux goes north to south north pole south pole
so this means north to south that's the direction that the flux is is pointing in makes sense
my thumb is going to point in the direction of motion so as an example let's go back to me with
this wielding the yardstick here is this the yard this is the yardstick 36 inches
that's one of the reasons that i'm real happy that we're not on the metric system or we weren't
when i grew up because having attended a catholic church for school for a period of time the nuns
if the nuns had been equipped with meter sticks as opposed to yard sticks there's a good chance i
wouldn't be here with you today okay because that additional three inches would have been just enough
probably for them to connect and uh yes i was beaten by the nuns anyway so i've got a north pole here
a south pole here remember that north here south here okay so that means the lines of
flux are which going which way north to south so i got to do what
makes sense i'm going in this direction okay so the left hand rule now my thumb is going to
point in the direction of motion so this means the conductor is moving down through this scenario
and if that's the case
if that's the case my middle finger is pointing towards me which way does current flow
this is not a trick question folks negative to positive so that means i am positive with respect
to my finger negative the positive current to blow towards me okay to make it easier let's
make this the north pole let's make this the south pole and let's move our conductor let's move our
conductor down by moving the conductor down current now is going to be flowing away from me negative
to positive make sense so again will you ever use this in industry i doubt it but this is a way of
determining which direction we're going to induce current in a generator based on relative motion
now magnetic and electromagnetic applications probably the biggest and most important is the
ac generator ac generator converts mechanical energy to electrical energy by utilizing the
principle of electromagnetic induction and this is the most popular way of producing electricity
now whether we turn this ac generator we're going to turn it by the shaft right whether we turn
that shaft from steam and a turbine that's generated from coal oil nuclear hydroelectric
it's irrelevant the key is that we're turning the shaft and turning the shaft we turn the generator
that's what produces the electricity now if we take that another step are there are there
means that are more efficient than others are there means that are more ecologically minded
than others are there you know what we watched last week in our program meeting on wednesday
i mean even that dude you know who was uh you know pretty much a tree hugging kind of guy saying hey
i've rethought nuclear you know and although nuclear is is dangerous and it's something we need to be
aware of you know polluting the environment with coal is worse so um things for us to think about
but the key here is by turning that shaft we generate ac electricity with an ac generator
this is how it works this is how an ac generator works and the thing that i want to point out to
you here is that these are the magnets and these magnets could be permanent or they could be
electromagnets they could be permanent or they could be electromagnets as a matter of fact this
is exactly what is taking place in your alternator in your car okay and your alternator in your car
are these those permanent magnets or are they electromagnets does anybody know alternator in
your car which produces produces voltage for us the generator are they permanent magnets or are
they electromagnets are they electromagnets that's my question to you what's that
no no because there's a power going to it and what do you call what do you call that if some
of you've ever played around with an alternator you might remember as soon as i say you're going
to know if you've played around with it before called your field windings your field windings
your field windings produce an electromagnetic field this is why if you're you know how you
can push start a car you can push start a car if it's dead you can push start a car if it's
if your battery is totally dead you're not going to push start a car somebody older vw's are different
different magnetos different system okay different on my aircraft my aircraft doesn't have a system
like that it has a a magneto so if i get that prop rotating i'm creating a spark that will
support the combustion combustion process okay kickstart motorcycle
so your car if your battery is totally dead if you if you remove your battery and try to jump
start push start your car pop start it it ain't going to work okay if your battery is kind of dead
not enough to crank the starter but enough to go click click click click click that's probably
enough to create enough of a magnetic field so when you push the car pop the clutch start the
combustion process get the engine turning immediately you're going to start to put
you know increase the voltage to these windings so these windings could be very i don't really
know of any applications they use permanent magnets here most all use windings the same
thing for a power generating plant like at grand coulee dam they got to start off with a little
bit of voltage to create the magnetic field and then get the generation process going they're not
permanent magnets okay so this here this loop of wire this is an artist depiction this loop of wire
has a light side and a dark side this is just so you could see it for the purposes of illustration
but this here is actually a loop of wire
the loop the armature here is connected to these slip rings these slip rings allow the
armature to stay connected 360 degrees of the rotation so if we look at this right now
north pole south pole north pole south pole the armature right here with the winding here at
the top and the winding at the bottom is the winding right now parallel to the lines of flux
or perpendicular lines of flux parallel it's right at the top you see how it's right at the apex
here the top so right at this moment in time it's parallel to the lines of flux how much current
do we generate when we're parallel to the lines of flux faraday's law how much zero and look what
we're generating right here zero when we rotate that armature now we're going to rotate it we're
going to connect the shaft to this and we're going to blow on it and make the shaft turn through a
wind turbine or we're going to steam and rotate you know the shaft through a steam turbine or
whatever but when we rotate the shaft now how many degrees have i rotated it from my peak
90 so right now is the armature parallel or perpendicular perpendicular what does faraday's
law say when i'm perpendicular to the lines of flux i generate my maximum amount of current well
look what we did when we rotated it 90 degrees now i'm at my maximum peak value
when i rotate my armature another 90 degrees see how i started out here at the top then i rotated
it 90 now i rotate it another 90 so i'm actually 180 degrees from where i started off am i parallel
or perpendicular to the lines of flux parallel what does faraday's law say zero what am i generating
what am i generating zero i rotate it another 90 degrees now i'm coming up on the backside 270
parallel or perpendicular perpendicular what am i going to do generating faraday's law maximum
cutting my maximum field i'm right here i complete that cycle i've just created 360 degrees of a
sinusoidal waveform this is an ac generator half of this is positive half of this is negative if
you're actually an electron if you're actually an electron caught in this whole thing basically
what happens is you get moved x amount in this direction then you go back to zero and then you
get moved x amount in this direction and then you go back to zero you never really go anywhere
but you do get shaken back and forth back and forth back and forth make sense
it's an ac generator a dc generator it actually by the way does anybody know who the father of
the ac generator was who do we give credit to ac generation tesla very good nicola tesla
he said ac was the way to go there was another guy big in history who said dc is the way to go
anybody know who that dude was edison actually more of a household name everybody knows thomas
edison actually when i first entered this industry i nobody even knew tesla tesla recently has gained
some acclaim or a cult following depending on how you want to look at it but thomas edison
he wanted to wire up everything in dc if you go back to new york city which is actually the power
company back there is consolidated edison con edison um really started off by edison edison
got the first contract to wire up the um new york city and he wired up a lot of the buildings for
dc and again i we're not going to get into it here in class you could look at youtube edison
experiments electrocuting animals you know um tesla experiments and they were they'd get like
an elephant and like you know electrocute it and like you know kill it dead and say you see this is
why you don't want to use dc this is why you want to use ac ac is much safer you know and
sort of like killing animals and stuff on you know so you can look that up on your own youtube we're
not going to do it here but i mean it was these dudes were at each other because that meant world
domination you know who's going to get the contracts and um again uh tesla was right
ac is much more efficient to transmit we'll talk about that later on so dc never really caught on
but a dc generator this is how uh what a dc generator looks like again you've got an armature
but what note here as we rotate this we're coming in contact here with this is called a commutator
and the commutator only makes contact for 180 degrees
so what happens is as we rotate the armature through we're going to generate a positive pulse
then what's going to happen is we're going to break that electrical connection because the
commutator only makes contact for 180 degrees and then what we're going to do is harness another
positive pulse so it's positive pulse positive pulse positive pulse
it's a definition of dc
definition of dc ac is half positive half negative alternation this is positive
positive positive this is almost like a battery not quite this is a pulsating dc
as where a battery would be constant dc created chemically so the big thing you need to remember
is that an ac generator has slip rings and it maintains contact for 360 degrees of the
rotation of the armature a dc generator has a commutator and it maintains contact for
180 degrees but the same principle is applied we're either cutting the lines of flux or we're not
now a relay a relay anybody here have any experience working on any relays okay relays are
are popular then they still are popular because for handling high amounts of current
still a very viable way of control a relay is an electromagnetic switch
that opens and closes with an electromagnetic coil so real simple with a relay i create an
electromagnetic field with a coil what i have is an armature above that coil and that armature has
a contact on it and it has a spring that basically when the electromagnetic field is energized it pulls
the armature down making an electrical contact when i de-energize it it has a spring that opens a backup
energize makes electrical contact de-energize opens up the circuit or i could do it the opposite
way i could be making electrical contact and when i energize the electrical circuit it's going to
open the circuit relays also could have multiple ganged contacts so when i energize it i'm opening
and closing a bunch of contacts but a relay is an electromechanical switch it's using
electromagnetism to move that armature up and down the good news is it's an electromechanical
switch it's going to fail often and you're going to need highly qualified competent technicians
to go in and troubleshoot it it's called job security they replace that with something that's
solid state it's not going to need to be replaced so as long as there are relays there's stuff for
us to fix we use relays when it's desirable to have one circuit control another circuit
typically one low power circuit controlling another high power circuit
these lights would be an example although i don't know if we've got a relay integrated and i know
that there's a relay that's integrated with the motion sensor so when the switch is energized
that motion sensor you'll actually hear if you walk in here and the lights are off especially over
here you hear the click when that obnoxious somebody's looking for a project rewire this thing to
keep that thing from ever shutting off when you're in the lab becomes pretty obnoxious
it's also used to control several circuits some distance away so an example of like a relay would
be anybody here play with model trains at all model trains are nothing more than a small example
of the real thing if you look at a freight yard on how they switch and build trains they basically
have switches that move an entire it's a motor that will move an entire railroad track so that
trains you know could be built on different sightings and such well how do you control that
you know the switch alone would be like a Frankenstein you know switch you can't do that
typically in a switching yard you'll have a up in a control tower a small switch that they throw
that sends a small signal out to a big relay that could chunk makes connection and allows
all that current to flow and turn the motor which boom switches the track it wouldn't be practical
to have you know wire this thick going to a control tower knocking you know that it would
pull the control tower down wouldn't make sense so it's used to electrically isolate the two circuits
make sense okay example of this would be a doorbell
small signal voltage bringing about a large change large changes you get and woke up out
of sound sleep because the delivery man's outside delivering a package here are some examples of relays
some of these relays are actually encapsulated so they could be put in a explosive environment
because when you open and close that contact what are you doing there could be a spark
there could be a spark so if you're working at an oil refinery you probably don't want that
spark you want that spark to be contained so it's going to be in a sealed relay
this one right here you could probably see the contacts there's two contacts here
and that thing is going to open close big sparks
now a solenoid is a coil when energized pulls a plunger that does some mechanical work
an example of this might be door chimes i'm talking about the old school ding dong ding
dong right those are physically little hammers hitting chimes now most of the stuff even like
clocks if you buy a clock that has chimes it's not chimes it's a recording of chimes
synthesized okay there's very few examples of real chimes being struck by solenoids
another example is your automotive starter when you turn the key typically you turn the key
that energizes a starter relay the starter relay energizes the starter solenoid the starter solenoid
on your car is probably about the thickness of this laser pointer and on the top is going to be a big
piece of metal that when you energize it it's going to pull that metal down and make a big
electrical connection that big electrical connection basically takes all of the energy
from your battery and dumps it into your starter there has to be physically a lot of metal present
to make that electrical connection so a relay has a moving armature a solenoid has a moving
plunger a moving core if you will if any of you have ever played a pinball machine the flippers
solenoids when you hit the button the flipper it's energizing a solenoid that solenoid
is attached physically to the flipper that's going to move back and forth back and forth
energize the energize energize the energize energize energize the energize pinball anybody
you're like pinball it's the bomb it's pure it's it's the pure game
look for a project there you go restore a pinball machine you could restore a pinball machine
contemporary pinball machine it's got everything electrical mechanical you've restored one
early there you go there's projects there's projects right there what what era
really uh i've got one i've got a 14 top cat
the real deal man if you remember that one i had the big gumballs on the top red white blue
when you get it into the advanced levels those things light up it's actually considered the most
obnoxious pinball machine ever created because if you're in a bar you know those freaking lights
you know looks like a police car park there whatever when you get into the you know multi-ball
it's pretty slick what's that Williams yeah
good stuff um 87
one of my other favorites i've been keeping my eyes open if i find one if i find one bring
home my wife will kill me because that one pinball machine she's freaking
why aren't you gonna get rid of that thing never i mean it's so freaking cool man
and i keep it operational you know um but the other one i'm always looking for a cyclone
and if you remember cyclone and it was a big uh big you know during the cold war ronald reagan
and actually there's a cyclone roller coaster and then the front car is ronald and nancy reagan
holding on for dear life great pin great pin anyway pinball brought to you by the amazing
solenoid and relays i love the applications for these things actually one of the things too with
um with relays it's kind of fun is um some airports have what's called pilot control lighting
and one of the local airports here is uh bremerton bremerton national and i don't you know
probably a lot of you don't even know bremerton national you land a 737 over there okay it's
big airport you know they don't have any commercial traffic in and out they've actually
tried in the past but it's just bremerton's not that big of a market but it's a big runway
pilot control lighting so one of the things that i've been known to do in the past if i'm
bringing somebody that's not accustomed to aviation is what i'll do is i'll start the approach and i'm
flying the instrument approach so i'm following an invisible glide path down to the runway so when
the lights are turned off at the airport it's just a black hole you're just descending into this black
void and then usually about a half a mile out what i'll do is i'll dial in the frequency and then
i'll hit the code and basically it's a matter of me just turning my transmitter on and off on and
off on and off five times turns it to high intensity so all of a sudden you're descending
into this black hole and then before you this runway appears with the chaser lights and everything
and it's kind of a power trip you know i think it's kind of cool you know by me simply you know
clicking my radio i just turned on you know this huge airport you know five thousand feet of runway
lights um that's all brought to you by well there's the pilot control lighting aspect of the radio
but what really makes it happen is relays it was really you know really relays it was actually
fun with relays too also called and could be called an industrial contactor industrial contactor
i used to be really in the i guess i've gotten old and i'm out of a swing of things with holiday
lighting i used to cover every right angle of my house i mean it looked like you know christmas
vacation material um and uh it was kind of funny because my next star neighbor he worked for bowing
his electrical engineer for bowing the guy across the street was electrical engineer for the federal
aviation administration so these guys you know i'm out there kind of messing with them and stuff
and you know you see them i'm plugging in an extension cord and the bush lights up and you
know you plug in another extension cord another you know the the roof line lights up and with me
i wanted to control everything at simultaneously so i got this big industrial contactor that fell
off the back of a truck and what i have are four separate circuits each circuit is up to 20 amps each
so what i did is i put in i basically rewired my home and i have separate circuits for the
outside lights and then i have a have it on a timer i mean i could connect it to the freaking
you know clap clapper if i want the two right so simply when that turns on boom everything is on
at once it's like how did you do that this here's an industrial contactor you know it's kind of a
cool system yeah yep absolutely yep yep and actually what one of the things that brings that
about and it's it was kind of where i was segwaying into is um normally for a first quarter student
you'd be taking the plc class el ec 116 plc basically is an industrial computer that controls
opening closes basically relays for industrial control so after taking that el ec 116 class
if you wanted you could buy a plc and basically set up a christmas display on par with with you
know what that what we've seen on video is that with the light synchronized to music and everything
really easy to do with plcs really easy to do well not easy but doable with plcs
phonograph pickups sure some of the younger students are sitting in here and saying what
is a phonograph right you know what what's this with the scratching right that's what
they're scratching on a phonograph right uses an electromagnetic principle believe it or not
a magnetic field is produced by a permanent magnet attached to a stylus the stylus tracks
through the groove of a record in response to the audio signal recorded basically um
back in the day some of you are probably familiar with this like a a musical group
were cutting an album and literally what they were doing was cutting a groove into a blank
and they're cutting an album they're recording an album okay this is how it was done back in the day
then what that would be is a negative then with the positive you could start stamping out albums
all day long and you know getting them to radio stations play your music and start selling it
and that's how you'd make the big time well with the mp3 that's all changed uh we won't we won't
comment on that but the stylus literally tracks through that groove in the record in response
to the audio signal the movement creates a small voltage that varies at the audio signal response
to replicate the wave pattern that originally created it the induced voltage is then amplified
and used to drive a loudspeaker producing the audio effect similarly of the audio signal that
produced it and um you know if anybody here own any albums do you have the ability okay anybody
here have a means of playing any of those albums actually bought a phonograph a couple years ago
because i had some older records and um you know all the stuff's available as mp3 now but you know
they don't they don't you know and only for that full experience you need a phonograph player to
play it so kind of a classic old-school retro way of going but
no it's almost too clear
i tell you some of the stuff i have a hard time because again growing up growing up in kinetica
you know i had my little late transistor radio we'd go down to the beach in kinetica shore
road island mesquamica beach we'd go down there and whatever and you're listening to the new
york radio station you're listening to the hits the top 40 hits you know and um i you know now i
listened to some of the high quality recordings it's kind of like is this a remake or it doesn't
sound like the original you know the original because the original was listening to out of a
little speaker like this you know he transistors mono you know now the stereo version of it it's
a little bit different and of course i was on a limited budget so i wasn't always going out and
buying the albums or certain albums that you had and that was high fidelity back in the day so how
a record player would work magnetic magnetic that little stylus tracking in there magnetic cartridge
loud speaker basically the opposite constructed of a moving coil around a permanent magnet so
basically if any of you've ever bought speakers before one of the attributes you're looking basically
he or she who has the the the heaviest magnet the biggest magnet wins because that's the permanent
magnet and what that means is that you could throw more energy in there to create either an
attraction or a repulsion and move the cone of the speaker back and forth rapidly replicating
the original sound that created it so that's how a loud speaker works so the key components the size
of the magnet the coil how much energy how much energy measured in watts acoustic energy but again
it's a magnetic device that's how it works magnetic recording uses the electromagnetic
principle to store information a signal is stored on tape or disc with a record head
to be read back later with a playback head some can be combined in one package that means record
head and playback head on on the same head the way that this works and it's kind of important
that you understand this basically it's like getting a piece of tape and sprinkling a bunch
of iron filings on that piece of tape by passing that tape over record head when I when I speak
into a microphone I'm creating a signal in the wire because the microphone which also is a magnetic
device the vibration the air molecules moving back and forth create that vibration the microphone
picks it up and transforms that in the small electrical signal that goes in gets amplified and
gets connected to the record head the record head is going to fluctuate its magnetic field
putting those iron filings on the tape into a unique pattern into a unique pattern
that pattern will be stored on that tape not indefinitely because if it's stored here on
planet earth what's one of the things that it could be under the influence of the earth's magnetic field
if you put it in close proximity to any other electromagnetic device it could alter that
so magnetic recordings will not last forever as a matter of fact a magnetic recording every time
you play it back and you try to read that that that fluctuation in the particles that was put
on there it loses a little bit of what it was originally remember how the video stores and
get younger students know what's a video store well back in the day we used to have to go to
places and rent vhs tapes okay um why would you have to rent tapes when it's just get it on demand
well that didn't exist back then you have to rent it on tapes right be kind of rewind absolutely
okay those were the good old days they really were um i think um those tapes they used to sell
they'd only get so many uses out of them and then they would sell them as previously viewed
you know and i used to capitalize and add to my library if there's a movie i really liked
buy it previously viewed but you know what the quality was always on its way out because
every time you use that play that tape you'll lose a little bit of it so like for high end
production and video what they would do is um uh let's say you're making a documentary for the
discovery channel and you're shooting it on video now there's some different ways of doing
if you're shooting it on videotape what they would do is they'd go out and they'd shoot
you know the helicopter and these beautiful shots or whatever they'd get the original tape
they'd make one copy for the purposes of editing editing then they'd put the originals in a vault
and they wouldn't touch the originals then they would figure out what we want to edit this scene
we want to edit that scene we want to do this once they figured out where all the edits were then
they'd go back to the master tapes and they would make a recording of the segments that they want
and produce a video production knowing that every time they run that tape through the machine
they're lessening the video quality of what was on that tape so videotape any magnetic recording
media will over time lose its integrity there's no way around it
yep if you're burning them you're it with basically um uh traditionally it it it's not
magnetic per se but over time it will deteriorate the best method is what's um known as actual ram
like dvd ram and that's for archival purposes you want to you know do dvd ram so that's one
of the problems that i actually as soon as they had a dvd burner that was on the market that was
reasonable like vhs to dvd because when my kids growing up i shot a lot of home movies and stuff
and over time i knew those tapes were going to diminish every time i watched them those tapes
are going to diminish so i got them and then transferred them but to be honest with you i
should have transferred them to um dvd ram ram and it's kind of a niche niche thing but that's
going to last the best and it won't experience degradation all these other forms of media even
if you're burning your own dvds um they will degrade over time
so the way that magnetic tape works that tiny gap between the ends of the core is a magnetic field
a piece of material covered with iron oxide basically iron filings is pulled across the
record head magnetizing it information is written in a magnetized pattern to play back or read the
information the material is moved past the gap in a playback head the magnetic field induces a small
voltage into the coil winding when amplified the information is reproduced and this really
revolutionized the recording industry being able to i mean i remember back in the day i'm dating
myself but wow could actually own a cassette recorder and i could speak in real microphone
and record my voice on magnetic tape and then you could put it in and at a later date and hear
yourself wow that was really the big deal now we have cell phones that we talk into and digitally
record that examples that used this technology on tape would be cassette recorders video
recorders reel-to-reel recorders that were used in a lot of production studios and such
floppy disk drives floppy disk drive is nothing more than a a disk with particle on it with the
iron iron iron particles on it and believe it or not hard disk drives if you've got a hard drive
in your computer using the same technology a little bit better no a lot bit better okay because
now you're you could go out and buy a terabyte drive for forty nine dollars and the reliability
of that data is extremely high and if it's properly maintained you're really not going to lose
integrity of that data and that's really as far as i'm concerned this is really that's the best
method of storage my wife and i really enjoy amateur digital photography and when we go out
and shoot something when it's on the card we're at risk as soon as we plug that card in and we
copy it to one drive i primary drive okay then what i do is i mirror that on a secondary drive
and i mirror that on a tertiary drive and i also pay for a service to go back to that primary drive
and back it up offsite okay let me tell you in the middle of february in the middle of february
all right i fly to to fairbanks alaska minus 23 degrees to see see the aurora borealis to get
some pictures i don't want to lose those pictures because my hard drive fails so i want to make sure
i have backups to backups to backups so as long as you do that you're good with me just transferring
a home movie to a dvd i could lose integrity of that over time if it's backed up digitally on a
hard drive and you could again mirror that then then you're good dc motor operation depends on a
principle that a current carrying conductor placed in and at right angles to a magnetic field tends
to move at right angles in the direction of the field basically what we're saying is if we could
rotate a shaft and create dc why can't we apply a voltage to a winding and create motion
so the difference between a dc motor and a dc generator
is perception most cases they could be used either way it's actually one of the things that
they use for power management over at the grand coulee dam i don't know if any of you have any
of you go recreating over in central washington you ever go camping or anything out there it's
really amazing if you have a chance to go out there this is stuff again they were thinking
about in the early 1900s okay you got the columbia river they built a dam on it not just any dam the
grand coulee dam okay and what they did behind the dam is they created lake roosevelt
for the purposes of irrigation and to store energy to store energy during low demand times
what they did is they have the generator's turn you can't stop the columbia river it's a river you're
going to kill all the fish so you can't just shut the river off you got to keep the water flowing
but if it's low demand time get that harness the electricity then with the electricity drive pumps
drive pumps and they pump the water from lake roosevelt up to banks lake
banks lake very popular for water skiing and recreating banks lake goes to feed agriculture
and then during peak demand times what they could do is turn it backwards and catch the energy flowing
back to lake roosevelt producing energy and then catch it falling back into the columbia river
and harnessing it twice so basically you're using the water to store the energy by simply pumping
it to a higher elevation during that low demand time brilliant brilliant you know and again they
figured this stuff all out in the early 1900s so that's what they've got between lake roosevelt
and banks lake basically our motor generators that you can turn either way and you know either
turn it backwards pump the water up or catch the water falling and generate electricity
and this is simply the process of creating a magnetic field that attracts and opposes and
creating motion instead of motion being used to create a magnetic field
now we're harnessing the magnetic field to create motion with a dc motor
another area that uses electromagnetic fields tv radar computer terminals what we're talking
about is the old school monitor like that old school monitor like that basically in the back
of a monitor like that there's an electron gun so you get to get to go home tonight what did
you learn about in school my instructor was talking about them they're electron guns
it's gonna zap us now an electron gun basically sits in the back of a cathode ray tube and shoots
an electron beam out towards the screen that electron beam is going to be controlled through
deflection windings the deflection windings are horizontal and vertical and that's what's
going to be used to basically paint the image on the screen it's your x-axis and your y-axis
so that's how we'd use that to paint an image now with flat screen monitors we're doing things a
little bit different but it's kind of an evolutionary process based on what we were doing with that
magnetic field in summary we talked about magnets natural magnets
unnatural magnets artificial magnets and electromagnets come in many shapes and sizes
big thing to remember unlike poles a track like poles repel two theories of magnetism
electron spin and domains flux lines are those invisible forces that we can't see
you know this lecture wouldn't be complete if we didn't talk about you know anomalies
you've all heard of the bermuda triangle right well science or science fiction
i mean they've got some really good hard evidence of magnetic anomalies that occur there so
if you're navigating solely by compass and you encounter unusual magnetic fields
or you're flying an airplane that's again has a gyro compass in it
it could cause problems big problems for you magnetic disturbances there's actually on aeronautical
charts they put down areas that have big magnetic disturbance areas that they're that they're used
to the bermuda triangles one of them it's actually one of the things it's kind of interesting too
that i see a lot of these like ghost hunters using um is equipment to basically sense magnetic fields
and there you know there's there's um you know a school out there that basically says that
you know spirits possess this energy and this energy manifests itself as a magnetic field so if
you have sensitive enough equipment and you know i've i don't know anybody watching those shows on
tv you know i've watched enough that something's going on something's going on and actually quite
frankly i think we're very we're very naive if if you know we only believe what we could see
with our five senses you know so um you know i think there's probably some truth in some of this
stuff we talked about the magnetic field determining direction of flux lines we talked about
electromagnets strength polarity retentivity electromagnetic induction we talked about Faraday's
law right parallel perpendicular we not only talked about the left hand rule for generators but i
gave you a specific warning and not doing that in your car in your drive home as someone might think
you're giving a gang signs we talked about ac and dc generators big thing to remember about an ac
generator right slip rings dc generator commutator ac generator makes a wave that's half positive half
negative dc generator makes pulsating positive waves relays basically electromechanical switches
a moving armature or a series of ganged armatures contacts on armature
we talked about how we could use this for doorbell solenoids phonograph pickups loud
speakers magnetic recordings and then finally we talked about dc motors and yes meters that dr is
involved meter movement is nothing more than a permanent magnets and a coil when you pass
current through that coil you either attract or oppose causing the needle move
and then finally we talked about the electron beams created by electron guns
to the back of a crt that's how we used to create television signals radar displays oscilloscopes
and computer terminals and we have any questions on anything that we covered in this chapter there's
a lot of new terms to familiarize yourself with this less math more remembering new terms
question i have the flux capacitor in back to the future i have no idea what that is
and i probably wouldn't recognize it you know if i if i saw it so um yeah
there's no reference to the flux capacitor it's just a completely made up thing that they came
up with pretty much i don't know if there's any wikipedia references to it you know it could
be a fun project to try to build one i reckon well you guys are stomping me tonight
uh i don't know that's what they've always caused it yeah it should be like an electron beam
tube cathode ray tube cathode sends out an electron ray and it's a vacuum tube cathode ray tube
electron beam i don't know got me good question
yeah let me tell you if i was the pope of electronics all of this stuff would have been
called something easier simpler you know some of the stuff you just got to hit the i believe button
but suffice to say like say magnetism it is really really critical um that's actually one of things
too that i don't know if you um i can't confirm or deny but the the movie hunt for right october
you know um that was basically a hydrodynamic drive that was based on magnetic field and um
you know you could look at that and say science fiction science or science fiction i of course
cannot comment on it um but if you research that type of technology the japanese and the japanese
of course is an island nation they're very dependent and always have been dependent on trade
they've played around with that technology on barges to see if they could you know move a barge
using this you know hydrodynamic drive system and um you know again it's not mainstream but
they've played around enough with it so
yeah and to be honest with you um you know and i haven't i haven't wrote a nuclear submarine
in over 20 years um i know that we had submarines out there that were so quiet you wouldn't hear
the submarine what you would hear is the submarine blocking biological noise behind it
so it's like if you had something big going past your your ear you know something is there
because it's blocking the sound so i mean that was 20 plus years ago so we've never had a problem
keeping quiet and keeping keeping things real quiet um but performance is another issue see if
you want to go fast underwater you're going to make some noise and that that will give a location
you know give your your your tell basically so any questions any other questions comments concerns
all right the long anticipated lecture chapter 10 inductance
this is uh this is going to be an unusual property for us to discuss compared to what
we've talked about up to this point what we've talked about up to this point really is
conductance resistance period in discussing inductance you're going to see that things with
inductance change over time okay the property actually changes the influence it has in a circuit
changes over time so you're going to see that this is uh very dynamic literally dynamic component
and property chapter 10 inductance after completing this chapter you're going to be able to explain
the principles of inductance identify the basic units of inductance identify different types of
inductors determine the total inductance in series parallel circuits explain l r time constants and
how they relate to inductance now the property of inductance is that characteristic of an
electrical conductor that opposes a change in current flow opposes a change in current flow
the symbol that we use is the capital letter l so in a circuit if you see on a schematic
diagram l equals that means inductance is equal to whatever specific amount is identified
now an inductor is a specific device designed to possess this property of inductance
an inductor is a device that stores energy in a magnetic field and it's important for us to
understand this property because we're going to counter this next chapter when we talk about
capacitance right i'll let the cat out of the bag capacitance is an electrostatic field
inductance is an electromagnetic field that's what's the magic behind an inductor
now once current is moving through a conductor inductance helps to keep it moving
as the magnetic flux lines build up they create an opposition to the flow of current
an opposition to the flow of current
lens's law talks about that lens's law states an induced emf in any circuit
is always in a direction to oppose the effect that produced it the amount of counter emf is
proportional to the rate of change the faster the rate of change the greater the counter emf
so what this means let's go back last chapter that we talked about remember magnetism
remember when we pass current through a conductor we create a magnetic field
lens's law says if the current was going data way it's going to create an electromagnetic
field like this make sense if we shut the circuit off that electromagnetic field is going to
collapse and it's going to produce a counter electromotive force that goes
that way the opposite way of what created it so if the emf goes that way and it creates some
magnetic field like this magnetic field collapses it creates a counter emf that goes in the opposite
direction so the second part there talks about the rate of change
the faster we turn that on and off on and off on and off expand collapse expand collapse
the more the faster we do it the more pronounced that effect is going to be
if you connect one of these one of them there inductors to a dc circuit it's going to happen
once when you close the circuit and energize it and when you de-energize it that field's
going to collapse and create that counter current so it's only going to happen once it's going to
expand once and it's going to collapse once now i'm going to let out a little secret because
you guys have all read ahead ac what's one thing that's constant about ac it's constantly
changing very good constantly changing so the higher the ac frequency is that we apply to one
of these devices the more pronounced this effect is going to be does that make sense
it goes back to lenses law and again anytime that in class i i say anything about a law
we should like ring a bell dim the lights hit some chimes
and hit a gong because laws you could take to the bank
you answer a question on your quiz using a law on an exam using a law you approach a project
or a lab assignment using a law you're going to get good results
now inductance is measured by the henry and this was invented by a guy whose name was
george
guy by the name of joe henry my main man
henry ironically is abbreviated with the letter h
and one henry is the amount of inductance required to induce an emf of one volt
when the current in the conductor changes at a rate of one amp per second
so one henry is equal to one volt of emf at one amp per second one is equal to one over one
one over one second
now in electronics the typical values that we're going to see
will be the mille henry times ten to the negative third the micro henry times ten to the negative
sixth in some high power applications you may see henry's
but generally speaking most of the stuff that we're working with in micro electronics mille
henry's micro henry's now inductors are those specific devices designed to possess the property of
inductance so they're designed to have a specific inductance that's why come they be invented
they consist of a conductor coiled around a core remember if we got like x amount of magnetism
by creating one turn how much would we get if we make two turns twice as much it's that simple
it's easy math consists of a conductor coiled around a core and it's classified by the type of
core material whether it's magnetic or non magnetic if we use a magnetic core material
we're going to get a higher amount of inductance out of it if we use non magnetic we're going to
get a little bit lower out of it so sometimes they'll use that core material to get it just
not too much not too little but just right this is the schematic diagram for a fixed inductor
and for those of you out there that want to go home and roll your own you could do that
you just need magnetic wire magnetic wire is basically thin copper wire solid core that has
a lacquer coating on it if you've ever looked into a transformer or motor and you see the windings
that's magnetic wire it's all you need some cases you don't even need magnetic wire
because you could you could roll a coil and as long as the wires aren't touching each other
you're using air as an insulation you could roll your own i've been known to roll my own on a few
times with mixed results i have no idea what i'm talking about actually i know exactly what i'm
talking about this is a variable inductor created with an adjustable core material now the way they
they come up with this is pretty fascinating what they'll do is they'll get a a ferromagnetic
core material typically like powdered iron and then they they basically form it into a material
precedent material and then they thread it and then they thread the center of the core
and what you could actually do with it right is righty tighty lefty lucy screw it in and as you
screw it in what are you doing you're you're increasing the magnetic influence of the iron core
so by simply adjusting that this is used for fine tuning in a lot of circuits that contain these
very fine subtle tuning another thing that you could do and i used to see this old school not as
much now they would use a brass insert and when you screw brass in what are you doing brass has a
high level of reluctance so it's going to oppose that magnetic field so by screwing it in you're
lowering the amount of inductance if it was iron core and you screwed it in you'd be increasing
so it's counter-intuitive and it gets worse because what would happen is typically the
questions that i used to be asked in a lot of my military navy equipment schools what we would
have were circuit card extenders so you would do is take the circuit card out put it in the
extender and then now the circuit card was was mounted above the rest so that you could get in
there and adjust make adjustments a lot of times you'd have to make the adjustments from the back
side they'd have a little hole physically in the in the board that you could put your adjustment
alignment tool in so then they'd ask if approaching it from the back side which direction needs you
turn the inductor to see a decrease in inductance so it's one of those things that you know you kind
of let's see if i'm turning it clockwise from the top that's going to be counterclockwise from the
backside but it's it's brass core so as i'm turning it counterclockwise i'm really moving i mean it's
just these questions that like you thought your head was going to explode but you know what you
kind of had a well i don't see how that really ever helped me in life knowing that stuff because
basically when you got out to the fleet you put a circuit you set up your test fixture and basically
as soon as you start turning it the wrong way you see needles go the wrong way and you turn it back
and you get it to where it needs to be and you're done with it you don't sit there and well let's
see if i approach and if i'm using a mirror i'm actually seeing the inverse i mean just crazy
stuff but think about that because these still and some of you may work on some legacy equipment
it's fun to repair legacy equipment to retrofit to do things like that
so you may end up finding some of this stuff this is my personal collection of inductors
guys actually believe me
this is an air core inductor this is a fixed value inductor and that's all it is this wire
wound around a magnetic core it's all it is all of these can type here are adjustable and actually
if you could look here this almost looks like this takes a hex head right like an allen an allen head
whatever you do don't use an allen wrench to try to adjust this because typically the allen wrench
in your toolkit is made out of iron steel ferromagnetic material so as soon as you get it in close
proximity and you adjust it and get it just so you're going to remove part of the magnetic
influence and your numbers are going to go caddywampus so all of these need to be adjusted with
non-magnetic alignment tools i've got a i've got a roll a tool roll at home from back in the day
i should bring it in as an example it's this big tool roll it's like every alignment tool known to
humankind and they're basically all plastic heads the other thing too is uh you know you stick your
a hex head in there you stand a chance of damaging that and even if you break off a little bit of
material that amount of material was designed engineered to be there to create x amount of
magnetic field so you kind of got to you kind of got to get it right so don't start if you don't
have the right tool don't touch this stuff so it's typically called an alignment tool or actually a
tweaker in the classical sense of the word a tweaker and you could always tell who the technicians
were you know because they'd always have the tweaker in their pockets and you knew it's kind
of funny back in uniform submarine base in connecticut i'd be walking around i'd see you with
tweaker in your pocket you know at the at the at the deli or whatever and i knew exactly what you
did for a living the only guys running around only goofballs running around with tweakers in
their freaking pocket were electronics techs that were regularly aligning equipment
air core this is an inductor well not without core material because it has air in the core that's
why it's called air core it's used for values up to five millihenries of inductance wrapped on
ceramic or phenolic core in this case it was probably wrapped around a dowel or something
and then removed and it has form in and of itself this is actually a really good photograph because
you could see the magnetic wire here and you could see where the insulation has been stripped
this is bare wire and then this is insulated a lot of times people see this and they think that
it's bare wire it's not bare wire it's insulated one of the best ways of getting this insulation
off if you're going to do a lot of this is with a chemical stripper chemical stripper
and basically it's it's like a thinning agent you dip it in
paint thinner paint a remover and it removes that right down to the the metal and it makes
it solderable you have to put a neutralizing agent on it but that's the best way of doing it
other than that you know you're going to get your wire strippers and your wire strippers are just
basically going to scratch the stuff off it's not going to really because this is a lacker coating on it
but that's this is an inductor believe it or not just a piece of wire making those five turns
it's going to give you x amount of inductance might be enough for you to get the job done
question on the last air core picture that you had there was a piece of metal going through it
this piece right here i think somehow this is mounted this this serves as a a form somehow to
keep that the shape of it i really don't know usually they're hollow though yeah oh yeah yeah
this is not here to influence the magnetic or all it's either there for aesthetics or to help the
way that's mounted or what have you it's a good observation some of these things are actually
pretty cool looking again anyway when you get into some of that older equipment they made it with a
certain level of elegance you know and um this would be an example of that if you opened up an old
in a 1930s radio you'd probably find that inductor that looks like that in there it's 1970s radio no
you're not going to find that in there iron core iron core could be either ferrite or powdered iron
it's a typo not ion ion core captain the ion core is melting down
damn damn you scotty that's why i'm not into drama right not a very dramatic kind of guy
it's iron core used for values of 200 millihenrys of inductance typically up to 200 millihenrys of
inductance schematic symbol shows these two parallel lines next to the coil that shows that
there's an iron core next to the coil torrid core these are donut shape but do not try to eat them
they offer a high inductance for a small size these are very prolific in a lot of contemporary
electronic applications because the magnetic field is contained in the core offers a very
high inductance for very small size if you opened up a computer power supply you'd find
a bunch of these inside a lot of inductance for a relatively small package
i've had graduates have gone to work for companies and they had to do this part of their job roll
their own they're giving the blank core spool of wire and you sit there and you
thread it through and tighten it up thread it through tighten it up clean the leads
solder it in the boards actually pretty good job most of the people that are playing around with
this stuff are for rf applications radio frequency high energy radio frequency mr. ground what's
going on man i had a question you just backed their waving man take
what's up
up
yeah yep so it's not wasting that field going outside it's containing it basically
increases the efficiency
which makes it more better
this is a shielded core shield of core have a shield of magnetic material to protect them from
the influence of other magnetic fields because if you've got a couple of these in close proximity
to each other one field could influence another device now if you just saw this if you didn't
know any better what would you think this device was now looks like a transformer and the only
tell that there is on this is there's only two wires if you look on the other side you wouldn't
find any other wires but it would look exactly like a transformer as a matter of fact you can
use a transformer as an inductor if you don't connect the secondary leads the primer if you
only use just the coil you could use a transformer as an inductor for some applications that's why
i've got a garage full of junk because i won't throw a transformer away because someday i may
want to use it as an inductor this is laminated core and again if you didn't know any better
you'd think it was a transformer we know it's an inductor because there's only two wires coming
out of it and the top is stamped 4.5 henry's 4.5 h and this was going to vary from 0.1 henry's all
the way up to 100 henry's this is also sometimes referred to as a choke as a choke used as a choke
in automotive applications noise filters meaning to choke off a change it's going to choke the change
just like resistors inductors could be connected in series parallel or series parallel
when you're dealing with inductors measured in henry's in series you treat them exactly like
resistors plain and simple if i've got two henry's and i put it in series with four henry's two plus
four equals six i now i now get six henry's worth of inductance in parallel you treat them like
resistors in parallel so the total inductance will always be less than the value of least
as long as you're dealing with the property measured in henry's
now this is where things get interesting everything else i've been talking up to this
point it's just been kind of hey it's trying to get to know you this the real deal this
dis is what it's all about
it's a series circuit it's a series circuit i've got a switch that has two positions one is called
the growth mode and the other is the decay mode okay so this switch i could toggle from either
growth to decay when it's in the growth mode i have a simple series circuit do i not and the
circuit contains an inductor actually what an iron core inductor because i see the parallel
lines the inductor in series with a resistor makes sense when i close the switch
as soon as i close the switch it's going to allow current to flow through this circuit do you agree
with me what's going to happen is that current is going to come racing through the circuit
negative the positive all of a sudden it's going to hit this curly piece of wire and that curly
piece of wire it's hitting is an inductor an inductor is a specific device designed to possess
the property of inductance inductance is that property which tries to oppose a change in current
so current was at zero it wants to go to 100 percent and this device is going to say uh-uh
i want you to stay at zero why because you've been at zero and i like it like that
but eventually as the current continues to come that magnetic field builds
and current eventually goes to maximum it goes to 100 percent for this circuit
but the inductor because of its property of inductance is going to fight the whole time
to try to prevent that change from occurring but eventually it's going to lose
so close the switch turn the circuit on the inductor is going to fight fight fight fight
fight fight and eventually give up and current's going to be at 100 percent flowing through this
circuit and by the way by the way when current is at 100 percent flowing through this inductor
electrons are like what's up with that it's a piece of curly wire
after a period of time the electrons it's like why am i going through a piece of curly wire
it just has no effect on them whatsoever
and the circuit runs and runs and runs soon as we get the switch and move the switch from the
growth mode to the decay mode the magnetic field that was built up around inductor l1
is going to collapse and it's going to collapse
into itself when it collapses into itself what is it going to do
it's going to act like a what happens when a magnetic field passes through a conductor
we induce we induce current if we move a conductor through a magnetic field we induce current
if the if the if the conductor is stationary and the magnetic field moves through a conductor
we're going to generate current right so as soon as i move this to the decay mode this magnetic
field is going to collapse into itself creating a counter current lenses law remember the opposite
of the force that created it and then that current is basically going to flow through the circuit
until it dissipates
but if this was just a series circuit made up of a resistor a resistor and a switch
you turn it on boom you go to a hundred percent you turn it off pow you go to zero now with an
inductor in here you turn it on it's going to come up and eventually get to a hundred percent
you turn it off the magnetic field's going to collapse and eventually it's going to get down
to zero percent you follow what i'm talking about you guys know what i'm talking about i'm beating
around the bush what am i talking about time constants time constants the time required
for current through a conductor to increase to 63.2 percent so if i apply 100 to it and that first
time constant it's going to rise 63.2 percent in the next time constant it's going to gain
63.2 percent of that's what is what's remaining the next time constant 63.2 percent of what's
remaining the next time constant 63.2 percent of what's remaining the next time constant basically
after five time constant we say enough is enough it's a hundred percent but is it really at 100
percent no because it's nonlinear so really it never reaches 100 percent we say after five time
constant's reached 100%. It's good enough for what we do. To calculate out this
time constant, it's actually relatively easy. Lr is the symbol used for the
time constant of an RL circuit, and the formula is t is equal to l divided by r,
period. It's that simple. Take the amount of inductance divided by the amount of
resistance that's going to give you the time constant. Measured in seconds. That's
what we use as our base unit of measurement in electronics, the second.
t is equal to l over r. Yes. If I gave you four inductors, you'd have to calculate out
the total inductance and plug that in the circuit right there. So I could give you
some real nightmare circuits right now. Think about it. It'd be fair game. I could
give you a circuit that's got, you know, 13 inductors and combination series
parallel and 22 resistors, combination and series parallel. The bottom line is
it's equivalent to this circuit here. You've got to figure that out. But you
should be able to do so without a whole lot of fuss. This is what a time constant
curve looks like.
Here's that first time constant. 63.2%. 63.2% of what's remaining. 63.2% of
what's remaining. 63.2% of what's remaining. What's remaining. And what is it
that I'm actually looking at here? What is this in blue? Is this voltage? What is
this? It's a current. Current. Number one, because the slide says so. But number two,
most importantly, because it's current that's going from zero, the inductors
trying to prevent the change, trying to prevent the change, trying to prevent the
change, trying to prevent the change, trying to prevent the change, trying to
prevent the change. Alright. Current wins. Then as soon as you set that circuit off,
current's going to try to go from 100% to zero, but because that magnetic field
is collapsing, I don't want to decrease. I want to keep it 100%, but I can't. Oh,
crap. Oh, all the way down to zero. But because that field is collapsing, it's
going to try to prevent that change. That's why we use these. That's why we use
these. Absolutely. If we're affecting current, definitely we'll have an effect
on voltage. In summary, inductance is the ability to store energy in a magnetic
field. Just remember the key word for inductance is magnetic. That's how they
do their magic. The unit for measuring inductance is the Henry, measured by the
capital letter H. The letter L represents inductance. Inductors have specific
inductances. That's why they're designed. The symbol for a fixed inductor is down
here at the bottom. Symbol for a variable inductor has an arrow going through it.
The arrow means it's adjustable. Types of inductors include iron core, ferrite or
powdered iron core, torrid core, shielded core, laminated core. Formula for adding
up in series is like the same formula for adding up resistors in series. The only
thing you need to be aware of, you're adding up inductance measured in
Henry's. If it's not in Henry's, can't use this formula. The formula for total
conductance in inductors in parallel is a reciprocal formula. Use it same as you
would for resistors in parallel. Time constant formula T is equal to L over R. You
run this calculation, it shows you what one time constant is worth. I need to
multiply that by how many to figure out how long it's going to take to get to 100%?
Five. Five. Because it takes five time constants to reach 100%. So understand
that when you do this math, you only end up with one time constant. It takes five to
get the job done. Or as it says here, five time constants required to fully build
up or collapse the magnetic field of an inductor. Any questions on anything that
we discussed for the inductors? Yes.
Yup. And that's it. We have inductors because they create inductance. And
inductance is that property which tries to oppose the change in current. So we're
going to have a lot of different components that are going to want to
bring about a change in current in a circuit. And if we put an inductor in
there, an inductor could help stabilize that current flow because of that
electromagnetic property. So it's going to help stabilize current levels in a
circuit. The majority of applications that we're going to use inductors for is
really going to be filtration. Because once we're not there yet, some of you may
have read it far enough ahead, that when we apply an inductor to an AC circuit,
it starts doing some wacky stuff. And by harnessing that wacky property called
inductive reactance, we can use that to filter. We could use it in audio
applications where we want only certain frequencies to go to certain speakers.
And that's why we're going to be doing that wacky stuff. I knew a guy that was
getting some interference on one of his cable channels back in the day. And
because this friend of mine had extensive electronics background, he didn't
want to call the cable company and have them waste their time and come out and
call. Exactly. So this friend of mine built a filter circuit to filter out the
garbage signal that somebody was putting on this pay-per-view channel. And by
filtering out the garbage that got put on the channel, the reception was
enhanced and made the station viewable. And the key component in that hole, so
I'm told, project as an inductor. And ironically, it was an inductor that was
like three turns of wire. One, two, three turns of wire was adequate enough for
the reception to be enhanced. Mind-boggling, so I'm told. Question.
Yeah.
Oh, really? Interesting. Yeah. Yeah. And a little did you realize that?
Yeah. Nobody knew why, but it worked. Now you know.
All right, let's go ahead and take a break. And at about 6.20, we'll start up with
chapter 17. Y'all ready for this?
Chapter 11. Capacitance. Capacitance. If you believed what I sold you last
chapter, this should not be a stretch for you. Because it's kind of like the same
thing is happening, but with a different property.
It's really what it's all about. Well, capacitance is actually kind of cool.
We'll talk about it. A lot of uses for capacitance. After completing this
chapter, the student, you, the student, will be able to explain the principles of
capacitance, identify the basic units of capacitance, identify different types of
capacitors, determine total capacitance in series and parallel circuits, explain
RC time constants, and how they relate to capacitance. Capacitance is the ability
of a device to store electrical energy. Capacitance is the ability of a device
to store electrical energy. Let me stop. The ability of a device to store electrical
energy. What does that sound like the definition of?
Mr. Carter. That sounds like the definition of a battery, doesn't it? The ability
to store electrical energy. So there's really not that big of a difference
between a capacitor and a storage cell. Typically, a storage cell is a small
amount of current over a long period of time. Unless you're a car battery.
But a capacitor generally is a large amount of current over a short period of time
that it's designed to expend, if you will. But the definitions are very, very,
very similar, very close. The key word on how a capacitor works is that
electrostatic field, electrostatic field. Remember inductors, they were
electromagnetic. This is electrostatic. Electrostatic. Talk about that
properly a little bit more in a bit. The letter C stands for capacitance. So inside
a schematic diagram, if you see a letter C equals its capacitor. If you see C22,
it's capacitor number 22 in the circuit. C47, capacitor number 47. A capacitor
is a device that possesses a specific amount of capacitance. How these things
are made are two conductors separated by an insulator. Two conductors separated
by an insulator. What does that sound like the definition for? Close your eyes
and think about it. Two conductors separated by an insulator. What does that
sound like? Banner. You made that up, man. What would the definition of an
extension cord be? Two conductors separated by an insulator. What would
speaker wire be? Yeah, so you know what? There are going to be a lot of things
that have capacitive properties because there are two electrical conductors
separated by an insulator. And a lot of these things that have capacitance is
stray capacitance and capacitance that we don't necessarily want. Engineers
don't want, but we have to deal with it because it's two conductors separated
by an insulator. Anytime you do that, you're going to end up with the property
of capacitance. Anytime you coil up your welding wire, your welding leads,
electro leads, you're going to create some inductive properties.
Yup.
Yup. And that actually, believe it or not, that style of twin lead antenna cable,
it was some of the most efficient. When properly installed, it had higher
efficiency than coaxial cable. The only thing is people would get that nice
ribbon cable and then back in the day, growing up in Connecticut, we had aluminum
windows and you'd run it through the window and slam the window down on it.
There goes any advantage that you had. But when you use the proper standoffs
and you use the proper bend radius and everything else directly to the back of
the set that had higher efficiency, it would get more RF energy into the back
of that television set than using coaxial cable. But it was two conductors
separated by a thick dielectric, thick insulator material. So that's one of the
things that really want you to come out of these lectures with is understanding
that, you know, this is not a lecture about capacitors. It's a discussion about
capacitance and capacitors. But the biggest thing is when you get into somebody
advanced classes like Peter Welty and his PCB design class, it's one of the
biggest challenges is determining stray capacitance inside a circuit.
When we're physically trying to create capacitance, we're going to call the
conductors plates. And we're going to call the insulator dielectric. So two plates
separated by a dielectric. Now that, Mr. Carter, is the definition of a capacitor.
Schematic diagram up at the top is a fixed capacitor, meaning what you see is
what you get within tolerances, of course. Down below is a variable capacitor. There's
actually different ways that they're going to be able to vary the capacitance. One is
going to be varying the distance between the plates. We'll talk about this more in
a bit. And the other is meshing the plates where they don't physically touch, but
they're just closer proximity, more and closer proximity to each other, less and
less proximity to each other. Make sense?
Treat all capacitors as though they were charged. Never touch both leads of a
capacitor with your hands. I've got a capacitor. Where the heck it went? I got to
get my stash better organized. Stuff disappears on here. I actually had a
student network for one of the biomedical companies, Medtronic, named the
Starter. Jumper kits for when you die. It's great. I see them. They got like Costco,
you know. You just got $680 worth of stuff in your cart at Costco. They revive you on
the spot. Make sure you pay your bill. Airlines got them now. We're going to charge
you $25 for that bag to check it. You know, you have a heart attack. They revive you.
So let me die here. Anyway, had a student network there, evening student of mine,
and he brought me a capacitor that was a key component in that. And right on the
capacitor was a label. The energy stored in this device could be lethal. The energy
stored in this device could be lethal. So if that capacitor is charged up and I
toss it until you touch it, it'll kill you dead. Because you're building up all of
that charge and then rapidly discharging it through your body, which is not designed
to do. Capacitor can hold that charge potential indefinitely if it doesn't have
a discharge path. A theoretically perfect capacitor will hold the charge forever.
Because of manufacturing flaws and defects and stuff, eventually that current will
dissipate. I remember when they were, I've been here for a while. Not when they were
building this building. Not when they were building that building, the new one. Not
when they were building this building, but when they were building that building, like
20 years ago. And there's actually a time capsule buried out there somewhere. And they
were looking for ideas from, you know, I'm like, let's charge up a capacitor and put it
in the time capsule. I mean, as an electronics guy, I think that'd be cool. Like, great,
let's take it out of its protective covering and see if any voltages still present. I
mean, I would have gotten a kick out of there all looking at me like I'm a goofball, you
know. I mean, I'll just think that would have been an outstanding freaking idea.
Because of the chemicals, a chemical cell will eventually dissipate. So it has a
shelf life. Lithium batteries have the longest shelf life. I mean, those, what are they,
the Energizer, whatever that you could buy, Lithium, best batteries they could buy, very
great product, innovative product, if you absolutely positively have to have a part of
electronic device work operate under extreme temperature conditions, whatever. Great shelf
life, use those batteries. So I just bought some and I think that it's good to the year
2025 or something on it. It's like, wow, that's a shelf life.
The basic unit of capacitance is the ferrad. A ferrad is the amount of capacitance that can
store one coulomb. Remember the coulomb? 6.24 x 10 to the 18th electrons of charge when a
capacitor is charged to one volt. So you've got a couple different things going on there.
You've got these two plates and what you're doing is you're charging it and what it's
doing is you're physically loading those plates up with a large number of electrons. And then
you're building up an electrostatic field across those two plates. So when you build up
one coulomb across the plates, we're able to store one coulomb of charge and bring the
capacitor up to one volt, we call that a ferrad. Now, typically the most important thing
that we're going to work with in electronics are going to be centered around the micro
ferrad. The typical value of measurement of capacitance is the micro ferrad, which is
times 10 to the negative 6th. And also the pico ferrad, which is times 10 to the negative
12th. So we go from the 6th to the 12th. What's between 6 and 12? Nano. You know, for the
longest time I used to put out in lecture, you will never see a nano ferrad capacitor
because they didn't use to make nano ferrad. Actually, you know what they used to call
nano ferrad capacitors? Millie micro. Millie micro. Three places past. Millie. No, micro.
Millie micro. Three places past micro, which would be nano. So we call that, they'd call
it millie micro ferrad, MMF, millie micro ferrad. Or they would call it tens of thousands
of pico ferrad. I don't know if it was a small letter N that just like freaked them out. Seriously.
I mean, sometimes it boils down to that. It was, you know, they'd have this congress that would meet
and analyze this stuff and they just wouldn't. So I used to put it out in lecture. You will never
see a nano ferrad capacitor. Whenever I put out absolute, somebody feels compelled to prove
geogrenic wrong. So the next day I was doing, hey, you know, I found this, my company is
using these. What's this? You know, it showed it to me. It was like a 20 nano ferrad capacitor.
Great. You're doing it. It should be a 20,000 pico ferrad capacitor. Or a 20 millie micro
ferrad capacitor. But, and I'm intentionally talking to you about this because traditionally
capacitor values have been all over the place. As far as how they label them and how they
identify them and sometimes determining what size capacitor is, it is, is very, very difficult.
And what a manufacturer labels it as. I mean, resistors were easy with color code. Sometimes you got to
trust the packaging on these things. What's up?
Do you remember what the ferrad rating of the capacitor the guy brought in from the distributor was?
No.
Hi.
Yeah. Yeah, I mean, enough to kill you. But yeah, you could really, don't do the stuff here.
I mean, that's one of the things. Again, we take safety seriously. But some of those big
capacities charge up, leave that there or, you know, in the Navy, which was different. We were
government property, you know, always used to do that crap, you know, charge it up and say,
hey, check this out, you know, here, catch. You know, stuff freaking hurt, man. It wasn't funny.
Go up to somebody with a charge capacitor and stick it on their neck.
Yeah, these people weren't trusted with our nuclear arsenal.
Basically, that's a high discharge device. You're using capacitors and inductors in there to create a high
voltage to make someone compliant.
A capacitor is either fixed or variable. A fixed capacitor has a definite value that cannot be
changed. It's made a certain way, if you will. A variable capacitor is one whose capacitance can be
changed by varying the space between the plates or by varying the amount of meshing between two
sets of plates. Although they say mesh, the plates never touch. They have to be kept electrically
isolated with an insulator in between, and that insulator could be air.
Factors affecting capacitance. Now, this is kind of important to understand these. If you understand these,
the math makes a lot of sense. The area of the plates, right? The bigger the area, well, actually,
let me put that formula up on the board. C is equal to Q over V. Remember that? Capacitance
measured in Farads is equal to Coulomb brought to a volt. One Coulomb brought to one volt equals
one Farad. It makes sense. So, area of the plate. What effect is that going to have? Is that going to
affect Q or is that going to affect V? Q. The bigger the plate, the more electrons that could
park on the plate physically, right? Because even though electrons are electrons, they still take up
space. They still are comprised of matter. So, very good. So, the bigger the plates, what effect
does that have on capacitance? Bigger plate? More capacitance. Smaller plate? Smaller
capacitance, right? Because Q and C are directly proportional, right? Because Q is sitting up on
top of this here. Distance between the plates. Distance between the plates. What's that going to
affect? So, what's that going to affect? Q or V? Think of the distance between the plates as like
regapping a spark plug. That's the distance between the electrodes. This is the distance between the
plates. The further that you move those plates away from each other, the higher the voltage you could
store on those plates. And that's where engineers have to determine what am I trying to do here? Am I
trying to store a lot of electrons? Am I trying to, you know, have a high voltage that I'm trying to
build up across it? What am I trying to do? So, engineers have to take that into account. So, if I
separate the two plates, that means my voltage that I could store will go up. If my voltage goes up,
what's my capacitance going to do? It's going to drop. So, engineers are faced with this compromise.
Higher voltage I could store, but I'm going to get less capacitance out of it. Why is capacitance
going to go down too? Well, when I separate those plates, that electrostatic field is going to diminish
because the plates are physically further away from each other. So, you separate the plates, get a
higher voltage on it, higher voltage, lower the capacitance. The type of dielectric material,
what effect is that going to have? Or what's that going to affect? There's a type of dielectric
material. Is that going to affect the Q or the V? Or the C? Well, I think it's going to affect the C.
Yeah. Why? Because of Q or V. Think about this one. What's it going to affect? Q, B, Z.
It's going to affect the voltage. Because if I've got two plates separated by air, and then now instead
of the air, I slip in a piece of mica. Mica has a higher dielectric constant than air, does it not?
Remember what I, you guys are deceiving me, man. Remember those lectures, early in the quarter?
We talked about different types of insulators. Mica was at the top of the chart. So, if I slip a piece
of mica between those two plates now, I could actually have those plates real close to each other
and slip some mica in there and really get a high voltage across those plates. Get a higher voltage
for the distance, because I'm using a dielectric material that has better dielectric properties.
So, that's how that's going to affect V. Effect V, it's going to affect C. And then temperature.
How is temperature going to affect this?
What changes with temperature? Yeah, but we're not talking about resistance here, so.
It's actually simpler than that. Something probably that you all knew even before you walked in here.
Things expand and contract with temperature. That's why there's expansion joints on bridges.
Because bridges expand and contract, and if not, they'd break. Oh no, it got over 70 degrees today.
The bridge broke. No, expansion joints, because things expand and contract.
Capacitors are going to expand and contract. So, as the plates expand, it can hold or affect Q
as the distance between the two changes, it's going to affect V. So, the bottom line is the amount of capacitance
will vary with temperature. For some circuits, like at room temperature, it's not that big of a deal.
For some stuff, I don't think in your wildest hallucinations, you've ever really thought it through
where a lot of electronic systems are used. I mean, it's a pretty harsh environment.
My favorite aircraft of all time, military aircraft, of all time, I just get so jazzed when I see one,
is the F-15 Fighting Falcon. These things were designed as high-altitude interceptors.
The closest to us right here are Portland, Oregon, the Oregon Air National Guard.
So, if you've ever flown commercially in and out of Portland or been down there, you might be on an Alaska Airlines jet
that has to give way to two F-15s that are taken off in front of you.
The F-15 still holds the unclassified time-to-climb record, 45,000 feet in one minute.
That basically means you're sitting at the end of the runway at Portland International Airport.
They give you the thumbs up, clear for takeoff. You advance the throttle as you kick in the afterburner.
And next thing, one minute later, 60 seconds later, you're passing through 45,000 feet.
These things are so good, they used them last summer when President Obama was in town.
And there was a small plane that penetrated the airspace up here.
The guy was flying into Kenmore in a float plane.
And they're watching them on radar, and they got concerned.
So, they called up the Oregon Air National Guard, and they said,
we know you've got a couple of fighters there and ready to stand by.
I think it's time to scramble them. And these guys were like, woo-hoo!
Because what they did is they not only got to take off, but they got to go supersonic.
They had to go on an intercept call. So, what they did is they went supersonic.
I'm sure you all heard about it, with the windows getting knocked out and the sonic booms.
Where I'm going with this, though, is imagine that airplane sitting on the runway down there in the middle of summer.
Sitting on the tarmac, 115, 120 degrees.
And then 60 seconds later, he's at 45,000 feet, where it's negative 45.
If electronics are not all in heated areas of that aircraft,
so if you've got a capacitor that is in an area that is prone to temperature change,
you're going to get different results.
Hopefully, that's not part of a targeting system on that aircraft,
where all of a sudden, you know, the military is smarter than that.
The reason temperature that it always strikes a chord with me, I was not always the best student.
Especially when I was in a lot of military schools.
I went to over 4500 hours of military schools, different systems.
I was in a great position, because as soon as the Russians came up with something,
we had to come up with something to detect it and counter it, and I was constantly in school.
I traveled to 46 of the 50 states on official business going to school, a lot of factory schools, a lot of stuff.
Long schools, and it was not a school day like yours. These are 8-hour days.
8-hour days, 5 days a week.
And it was back in the day, old school, so we used to go out for liquid lunches.
I used to sit in the back, and I was sitting there one day, and I'm like, you know,
falling asleep and hopefully not snoring too loud.
And I wake up, and the instructor is showing me this, you know,
they have the presentation, and they had, not PowerPoint, they had the view foils.
And they're showing this oven-ready light coming on.
And I'm like, oven-ready light, oven-ready light.
I like, I'm in electronic intercept and analysis.
Why is he talking about an oven-ready light coming on?
I mean, if this is like, I picked the wrong time to wake up,
because I don't have a freaking clue what he's talking about.
An oven-ready light, and I'm just trying to wrap my mind around it.
And actually what happened is this equipment was so sensitive,
it was very secret special equipment for measuring these very specific emissions from Soviet equipment,
that they put key sensitive temperature components in what was called an oven.
And what it was is a small metal box inside the piece of equipment.
And it had a heating coil, and it had a thermostat,
and it would keep that temperature stable,
so that the readings would be stable.
And if that oven-ready light was not on,
that told the technician that the oven wasn't on,
and the numbers, the results, could not be trusted.
So that was a big thing before you use that equipment,
is verifying that oven-ready light was on.
It was like, it's funny, because even though I slept through the lecture,
I still remember it like it happened yesterday.
This is not an endorsement to fall asleep in class.
But it was a blue light, it was this blue light.
And I always remember, because I'll tell you what,
we had, our labs were written tests,
and then we had practical labs that you had to go in and troubleshoot that equipment.
And I remember that the day I went into, you know,
I was basically being evaluated.
I had two instructors standing in there with clipboards,
and you know, let's see how Petty Officer Greenock evaluates this problem here.
So I walked in, and the first thing I noticed is the blue oven-ready light was not on.
So I knew immediately where the problem was.
And I, you know, I told them, oven-ready light's not on.
There's a problem with that circuitry, it got in there,
and basically it was like a fuse that was blown,
replace the fuse, boom, fix the problem.
If you're not a vigilant technician paying attention to that,
oh yeah, you could run through all the tests, oh everything's working okay.
So some key components like capacitors that are in real critical roles in circuits
may be put in a circuit or in a box called an oven
where they keep that temperature really stable.
For most stuff like this, you know, inside buildings and, you know,
whatever industrial controls, it's normally not an issue.
Normally even an automotive application, I've never heard about anybody, you know.
And actually cars are pretty freaking robust when you think about it.
I mean from, you know, I've been down in Arizona in the summer, you know,
it's like stuff is melting, plastic is melting, you know,
tires are melting on the cars, just nuts, you know.
And I went up to Alaska here in February,
and you know, that was like the week before I was up there, it was negative 47.
So you go to Fairbanks Airport, you land, you're going to rent a car,
and it's buried in snow, but you just follow the extension cord from the post
and it's all on a block heater, you dust it all off.
It's all powder snow up there because it's so cold and so dry.
Turn the key, fire it up.
Every place you go, the hotel's all have a place to plug into though,
I mean it's just, you know, but still that extreme cold is like, wow,
the electronics work reasonably well from Arizona to Alaska.
Keep these four factors in mind, they're critical.
Dielectric constant, this is the measure of the effectiveness of a material as an insulator.
Some materials of dielectric constant, paper, has a dielectric constant between two and three.
Typically what they're talking about here is wax paper.
Wax paper, wax paper used to be used as the dielectric, as the insulator
in a lot of capacitors prior to World War II.
I've actually restored many an antique radio by simply going in,
removing the paper caps that have deteriorated,
and putting in mica caps of the same value.
Right, just that easy, remove it.
Everybody always gets an old radio, and oh yeah, it must be them, they're tubes.
Them tubes there need to be replaced.
Every start a handful of radios haven't replaced one tube.
Got in there, replaced the capacitors, why paper capacitors?
What happens to paper over time, deteriorates?
If deteriorates, loses its dielectric constant, capacitor shorts out, doesn't work.
Micah, dielectric constant between five and six.
This should be tantalum, not titanium.
Titanium, they're using that in golf clubs, in Soviet submarines.
This is tantalum.
Tantalum is a material that has a high dielectric property.
So by putting it in a tantalum capacitor, it gives you a big bang for the buck.
Some of the best capacitors that money will buy, tantalum.
Electrolytic capacitors, these are large capacitance for size and weight.
Consist of two metal foils separated by fine gauze saturated with a chemical paste
called an electrolyte.
They're polarized, having a positive and negative lead.
If you put an electrolytic capacitor into a circuit backwards, it will explode.
Literally.
If you put one of these in a circuit backwards, it will explode.
Some of the smaller caps actually have, where like there's an X etched on the top
so when it blows, it'll blow outward and not necessarily build.
I knew a guy that played around with explosives and stuff in the past.
It's all about keeping it compressed.
Those gases are compressed and it's going to give you a bigger bang.
Some of those small caps that don't have a little release mechanism on it,
you can throw some shrapnel.
Some of the big caps actually have a release valve on it.
So if you put it in backwards, pow.
But I've seen smoke pouring out on like a smoke bomb.
If you ever want to blow up caps, let Peter and myself know.
And we want to do it in a controlled, contained environment.
You just do it for kicks in the lab.
Somebody could lose an eye. Seriously.
You know, there's a little metal cans and you put it in backwards.
These things blow.
Shrapnel is going to go flying.
You guys actually have to pull the area?
I've done it before out in the back.
You know, we rope off an area and it was actually funny.
We were doing that one evening, years ago.
Blown up capacitors, you know.
And pow, pow, pow.
Put them in series of parallel and doing all kinds of wacky stuff, you know.
And literally, I had, we were doing it in the back here.
And you know the second floor up above the restaurant,
that patio area between the two buildings?
I had debris raining down on that.
So nobody really cared about it until I went to the custodians
and I asked for like some, you know, brooms and stuff to clean it up.
And then it was kind of like, well, they all got puzzled and stuff
because they were like, oh, union here?
And they were like, if it's a mess, you know, we need to clean it up.
It's like, well, my students made this freaking huge mess out here
from blowing up crap.
No, no, we'll clean it up, you know.
Oh, I'm sorry, you know, it's file of grievance
because we're going to clean up the mess we made, you know.
It was just an odd time.
I guess it's still an odd time, you know, here.
But my personal collection of capacitors.
These are all electrolytic capacitors.
And on the electrolytic capacitors,
you've got to look for the markings here
to find which lead is the negative lead
and which one's the positive lead.
And there will be some discerning mark on it.
Some manufacturers identify the negative lead,
some identify the positive lead.
You just got to pay particular attention.
This here, like with the band on it,
that would signify the negative lead.
See that solid band?
You just got to look and be observant.
Put it in backwards.
It will explode.
Paper and plastic caps, construction by a rolled foil technique.
Plastic film is often used more often.
Basically, if you went and got two rolls of aluminum foil
and a roll of wax paper or a roll of saran wrap, right,
laid out one roll, put the insulator on top of it,
laid the other roll out, we rolled it all up,
dipped it in wax, attached leads to it,
dipped it in wax, you just made yourself a capacitor.
So if you want to roll your own, you can roll your own.
You make it out of paper, same thing.
And that's exactly what paper caps were.
Two pieces of foil with wax paper between them,
the leads attached, dipped in wax.
And that wax didn't prevent that paper
from deteriorating over time.
These are plastic caps here.
Basically, if you sliced that open with an exacto knife,
you'd find nothing but rolls of aluminum foil
wrapped around plastic.
Ceramic disc capacitors are popular
because they're inexpensive to produce.
They're used for values 0.1 microfarad and smaller.
Ceramic is the dielectric.
They're reliable general-purpose capacitors.
This is my personal collection.
I get all my ceramics from Mexico.
A lot of them manufactured there.
It's not electrolytic.
Ceramic, these don't have a positive or negative lead.
It's only the electrolytic that does.
Check out the value of this.
This is 3KV.
It'll hand up to 3,000 volts.
You exceed that, you destroy the capacitor.
You operate all day long underneath that.
Variable capacitors are also known as
patterns, tremors, or tuners.
This is a tuning capacitor.
This is something you'd find in a 1960s, 50s, 60s, 70s radio.
Elegant.
Elegant in design.
They don't make stuff like this no more.
How many of these went to the landfill?
A lot of these, the shaft right here,
this would actually be a ball bearing movement right there
with a heavy grease in there,
and you turn it ever so slightly.
And actually what they would do with this,
they'd put a big pulley on here,
and then there'd be a string that was attached to your tuning dial.
So when you move that knob just a little bit,
it would ever so slightly move that tuning cap.
And that's how you would adjust,
by adjusting the capacitance, you would tune your radio.
Now it's done all electronically.
So this is something kind of from a bygone era.
Which is good and bad in some ways, I don't know.
I don't think these new tuners have the sensitivity
that those old tuners had.
And I saw the transition of the military.
When I first got into electronic intelligence gathering,
they were manually operated tuners.
I used to have to sit there and manually tune through,
find a target of interest, intercept the analyzer.
I saw the transition to computer operated systems,
and it boggled my mind.
I was actually, I rode my submarine out here,
and my sub was going to get a new system.
So I rode it here, the work was being done in Bremerton,
then they flew me back to Connecticut for the summer.
I actually drove.
It was kind of funny, I used to tell the Navy I had a fear of flying.
That's why I'm in the Navy.
So because I rode to so many schools,
they would always, they'd pay me to travel.
So it was like, I don't know, 300 miles a day,
per diem and hotels and whatever.
So I used to get like 14 days off the drive to Connecticut.
So I'd like go to San Diego and goof off for a week and a half.
And I like marathon across the country or whatever, you know.
But anyway, I was getting sent to this school
where there's going to be computer controlled receivers.
And my computer controlled receivers,
I mean, it was like, it's like some robotic arm is going to come out
and like tune the dial.
I mean, how do you do that?
I mean, I'm serious.
I was just, I had no freaking clue what they were talking about.
And that's not what they were talking about.
But I just don't think we ever had the sensitivity
that those old manual tuners had.
The newer systems, of course, were much more efficient.
And they, you know, once you integrate computers,
you can process the data.
The data is only getting processed as well as it was programmed.
But yeah, those old tuners, boy, I could listen to some stuff way out,
way out there.
We'd be a way to heck out in the middle of nowhere
and I could tune stuff in with a good antenna and good receiver.
Series capacitors.
Yeah, you're not looking at a tight ball.
When you have capacitors in series, you treat them like resistors in parallel.
Does anybody know why that is?
Why do you suppose?
It's a good try.
Okay, these three capacitors are in series, are they not?
What am I really limited to here?
I'm limited to this plate area here, am I not?
And this plate area here.
What am I actually doing?
I'm increasing the distance between the plates,
which means that my voltage goes up,
that means my capacitance has to go down.
Makes sense?
That's why that formula works.
Plus, I got now, I've gotten one, two, three times the insulated material,
as opposed to one time the insulated material.
Makes sense?
So everything always goes back to this formula.
Everything in electronics always is explained away with the formula.
In parallel...
What am I doing here?
I've got this plate, this plate, and this plate.
Now here, I triple the size of my plates.
I triple the size of my electrostatic field that I could build up across the two.
So what am I doing?
I'm increasing my Q, which increases my C.
That's why that formula works.
So, I don't know if that helps you,
but it helps me remember formulas if I understand how the formula works.
If I just give you a formula, C is equal to Q over V.
Okay, I'll remember that.
That's not going to do you any good.
If you remember, C is equal to Q over V.
Increase the area of the plates.
I could store more Q.
Q goes up.
C goes up.
Distance between the plates increases.
V goes up.
C goes down.
Inverse proportional relationship.
Makes sense?
RC time constant reflects the time required for a capacitor to charge 63.2% of the applied voltage
or to discharge down 63.2%.
It's not a tight boat.
It's the way I worded it intentionally on this slide.
You're decreasing down 63.2%.
236.8%.
This is what the circuit's going to look like.
This is the formula.
T is equal to R times C.
It's going to take five time constants.
And physically, what's happening with this?
What kind of circuit is this?
Series.
Series RC circuit.
It's a series RC circuit.
And when I close this switch, this capacitor here is going to be at zero volts,
and it's going to start charging up to 100%.
How long is it going to take to get to 100%?
Five time constants.
How do I figure out what one time constant is equal to?
T is equal to R times C.
When this capacitor is at 100%, what voltage is going to be across R1?
When capacitor C1 is at 100% after the passage of five time constants,
what voltage is going to be present across R1?
Zero.
Zero.
When 63.2% of the voltage is across C1, where's the remaining voltage going to be?
R1.
Across R1.
So basically, as the capacitor is increasing in voltage,
the resistor is decreasing in voltage.
Because this is not only a series circuit, it's also a voltage divider.
It's a voltage divider.
After five time constants, this voltage will be equal to this voltage.
Voltage rise, voltage drop.
After five time constants, this is equal to this, which means there's zero left over.
Kirchoff's voltage law.
Everything always goes back to what we talked about.
I'm really not talking about a whole lot of new stuff here.
I'm getting paid to talk about the same old stuff.
Just every week I introduce a new word.
This week it was inductance.
Capacitance.
What is it five times?
Why?
Why not B2?
Because in five times, you basically get close to 100%.
That's why we call it five times.
It's really between five and six times.
Some books say six time constants.
Some say five.
But you're so close to 100%.
Because the six would be 63% of 99.3% for the sixth constant.
Because on the fifth constant, it would be 99.6%, right?
After five time constants, we call it even.
The books that you say do sometimes have a sixth time constant.
If you're dealing with real high power stuff, that could be a difference.
If it was high power and a high voltage, it could be the difference of a couple of volts.
That's a small percentage.
But generally, it's accepted five time constants.
Every exam you take here, it would be five time constants.
In summary, capacitance is that property that stores energy in the form of an electrostatic field.
A capacitor is a specific device designed to possess the property of capacitance.
Fixed capacitor symbol.
On the top, variable capacitor symbol on the bottom.
Capacitance is measured in farads, developed by a guy by the name of Joe Farad.
Microfarads, picofarads are typically the most often used values.
Instead of nano, you may see milli-micro, or you may see tens of thousands of picot.
The letter C represents capacitance, four factors affect capacitance.
Area of the plates, distance between the plates, types of materials, and temperature.
Capacitor types include electrolytic, paper, plastic, ceramic, or variable.
To add up capacitance in series, you use the parallel formula.
To add them up in parallel, you use the series formula.
And to determine capacitive time constants, we use the formula T is equal to R times C.
Any questions?
Alright, let's go ahead and take about a ten minute break.
And when we come back, section two of the book, AC circuits.
