In the previous lecture, we looked at the schools of the 12th century and the development
of universities as well in the 13th century, particularly the University of Paris, an outgrowth
of the Cathedral School of Notre Dame from about 1200.
Now the fertile schools of Chartres, L'Ion, Saint Victor and all the others were flourishing
before the Aristotelian Corpus made its way into the Latin West from translations either
from the Arabic first and then from the Greek.
The arrival of the Aristotelian Corpus transformed the intellectual landscape of the Latin West
in very fundamental ways.
On the one hand, the Platonism of the schools, what we saw at Chartres, for example, or Saint
Victor, was gradually displaced.
It did come back later, but for a while it was displaced by more Aristotelian views.
Most notably, the combination of university education and the Aristotelian Corpus gave
rise to the system of scholasticism.
And this lecture we're going to talk about scholasticism and the reception of Aristotle's
works.
By about 1260, the arts curriculum at Paris was basically a course on Aristotle.
Now to moderns, this may seem to be restrictive somehow, yet the impressive nature of Aristotle's
achievement, at least as seen by the Middle Ages, was the fact that he gave a comprehensive
system.
The man said something about everything.
So it was easy to develop courses around the reading of Aristotelian texts.
Now the Trivium and the Quadrivium were still fundamental, but they were no longer read
through the lens of Neoplatonism.
They were no longer platonically influenced and depended upon writers like Boethius, Isidore
of Seville, and other writers of the early Middle Ages, the late Latin Digests of late
antiquity.
Instead, the Trivium and the Quadrivium were expanded to take in the Libri Naturales, as
they were called, of Aristotle.
That is the natural books.
In fact, we have a list of the kind of books that were required reading for arts students
at Paris in the 1260s.
They had to read Aristotle's physics, his work on animals, his work on the heavens,
their astronomical cosmological material, on generation and corruption, which deals
with matter theory, among other things, and also the on plants.
Now on plants is not actually by Aristotle.
Medieval generally thought that it was, and so it was taught as an Aristotelian work,
but we now know that it's not his at all.
So this combination of the Aristotelian corpus and the didactic traditions of the medieval
university, produce scholasticism.
Well, what is scholasticism really?
Scholasticism is a method.
It's a method for studying any subject, theology, natural philosophy, medicine, whatever you
like.
It is based upon not only Aristotle's writings and Aristotle's logic in particular, but also
upon the format of medieval university instruction.
The basic unit of the scholastic method is the question.
The basic format of the writings is the commentary, so the question and the commentary.
These are basic to scholasticism.
Now let's start with the question.
Students at university heard lectures, but these lectures were supplemented regularly
with disputations, and the disputation is what is so fundamental about scholastic method.
It works something like this.
The master formulates a question very carefully so that there's a binary answer to it.
That is to say, it's a yes-no question.
They tend to begin with the word utrum in Latin, weather, so they can be answered yes
or no.
A very clear answer is possible, in other words.
The master's question is then answered by one student called the respondent, or the
respondent, and he gives his answer to the question.
After he's finished giving his answer, another student gets up, taking the role of the oponents
or the opponent, and tries to demolish the argument of the respondent and answer the
question in another way.
After that's over, the floor goes back to the master who gives a vera soluzio, a true
solution, or a resoluzio, a resolution to the question, and then gives his reasons for
his answer.
Now all students had to participate in these kinds of disputations.
They took place in the classrooms, we can use the word classroom, but in the class setting
I suppose, but there were also more public disputations that higher level students had
to engage in.
For example, twice a year at the University of Paris, and at other places, there were
held disputations called quote libita.
Now quote libita literally means whatever you will.
And these worked in the following way.
At Lent or at Advent, those were the two penitential seasons and the two seasons at which quote
libita were held.
On the first day, the candidate would take questions from the general university community,
in some cases people from the town were also there.
On the next day, he would come back and give his answers to them.
So a person could ask anything they wanted, and often these questions were sometimes even
on the edge of either heresy or treason.
So that's why they're called quote libita, anything you want.
Now the candidate gets to choose the questions he's going to answer.
He doesn't have to answer them all, but any questions are able to be asked.
In a sense, some people have said with some degree of accuracy that these quote libita
were the medieval equivalent of the varsity sports events at modern universities.
They were very, very well attended.
Now the same disputative method was employed in writing.
First in the written forms of the master's lecture notes.
If you were a student at the university, you could go to the stationers, the equivalent
of the university bookstore, and rent or buy a copy of the master's notes.
Not all students had that much money to do that.
Books are very, very expensive in the Middle Ages.
Sometimes they would make their own copies.
They would just have to listen and not have written forms of the master's notes.
In addition to the master's notes, there were also published texts that use the same kind
of format.
For example, all of St. Thomas Aquinas' somateologica, which eventually became a basis
for Catholic theology, is written in a strict disputational format.
For example, questions and answers and responses.
One example, utrim deus sit, whether God exists.
At first St. Thomas answers the question, it seems that God does not exist and then
gives the list of reasons why God does not exist.
At the end of that, he says, but I respond saying that and then argues God does exist
and here are the arguments for it, then goes back to the points that argued against the
existence of God and refuted them one by one.
So very rigorous, very stylized, if you will, method of carrying on inquiry into a question.
Now, the questions could be drawn as interpretations of authoritative text.
Could be the Bible, could be Augustine, and very often it was Aristotle.
In terms of natural philosophy, rather than theology, one way to undertake a study of
astronomy, let's say, would be to write a commentary on Aristotle's decilo on the heavens.
So you would say, Aristotle says blah, blah, blah, and then give your commentary your interpretation
of it, where you would get to disagree with Aristotle and put in your own opinions.
I mean, Thomas himself actually wrote a commentary on Aristotle's on the heavens.
There's one book that every theology student certainly had to write a commentary on and
that was Peter Lombard's Four Books of Sentences.
Perhaps a better translation of the title is Four Books of Opinions.
Basically these were questions about theology based upon Scripture and the Christian faith
written in the middle of the 12th century.
Now originally these topics were entirely theological, but over time more and more and
more natural philosophy was introduced to the discussion of these questions in the commentaries.
Now the interesting thing here, something that I have to emphasize, is that everyone
who wrote a commentary on Peter Lombard's Books of Sentences maintained what were called
the distinctiones, the distinctions, we would call them chapters.
That means that you could line up all the commentaries on Peter Lombard, and if you
were interested in a particular question, particular issue, you could just go to each
one of them, Book 3, Distinction 24, and find out what each one of the people who wrote
the commentary had to say about that very specific point.
In other words, the building up of a systematic commentary literature worked out to be a medieval
data storage and data retrieval system.
Huge amounts of materials being produced at the universities, how do you organize it?
Well it's organized based upon the divisions in an authoritative text, so it makes it much
easier to find what your contemporaries and your predecessors are saying about things.
Also, we shouldn't underestimate the contributions of the scholastic method to the development
of a methodology of scientific inquiry.
I tell my students all the time that they're not able really to answer my questions, this
is when I'm teaching science courses, they're not able to answer my questions until they
can figure out how to formulate their own questions, because you don't really understand
a question or how to answer it until you know how to formulate one.
Well that's what the scholastic method was extremely good at, it required that scholars
be able to ask the right questions, to formulate the questions in a logical way where you get
an unambiguous answer, to chop up a question into its parts, to chop up words into their
individual parts so you know exactly what the question means.
Then what you do, then you go through a rational and exhaustive method of answering the questions
in all the ways that it can be interpreted, to divide up distinctions to solve the problem
in an orderly and thorough fashion.
This is a methodology, this is one of the legacies of scholasticism, this kind of rigorous method.
And I would argue that that cannot have failed to impact the way scientific studies are carried
out.
As late as the 17th century, we find people whom we recognize as important characters
in the history of science using what are basically scholastic methods to, even though
they often don't admit it, using scholastic methods to make their research progress.
Fine.
Well, the fervent embrace of Aristotle by the universities and the adoption of scholastic
methods soon provoked criticism.
Why?
Well, first of all, the big problem is Aristotle's a pagan.
He maintains positions which are clearly contrary to the Christian faith.
Most notably, the world is eternal.
We can't have that, the God created the world out of nothing in the beginning.
That's an article of faith of Christianity.
How do we deal with this pagan Aristotle that supports contrary positions?
This had already been a problem in the Islamic world.
The theory by the 9th century al-Kindi in Baghdad was using logical argument to show
where Aristotle went wrong and how Quranic revelations were correct, for example, about
the eternity of the world.
But later, one of the most important Muslim Aristotelians, Ibn Rushd, known to the Latins
as Averroes, in fact, he was such an important commentator on Aristotle that Latins often
refer to him simply as the commentator without actually using his names, how important he
was.
However, he actually rejected some Islamic articles of faith in favor of Aristotle.
So he became a persona known grata, certainly in the Islamic world, as he would do in the
Christian world, an unusual distinction for Averroes.
Well, official denunciations of Aristotle appeared at Paris in the early 13th century
by 1210, in fact, but these didn't have very much effect.
It's part of the loose structure of the early university.
A major strike against Aristotle, however, began when an investigation of the teaching
of arts masters was initiated in early 1277.
Let me give you the background to this investigation.
The investigation was called by Pope John XXI.
Now I'm going to go through Pope John XXI biography a little bit to give you an idea
of the social and intellectual trajectory of a 13th century intellectual.
His original name was known as Peter of Spain.
He was no outsider to the University of Paris.
He was born in Lisbon, sometime in the second decade of the 1200s.
He first attended a cathedral school at Lisbon.
He then went to the University of Paris.
He was there at the same time as St. Albert the Great was lecturing on Aristotelian topics.
St. Albert particularly interested in Aristotelian natural philosophy.
We'll talk about him in a little bit.
Peter studied medicine and theology.
In 1247 he took up a position as professor of medicine at the University of Siena in
Italy.
So already we can see that he's been in three different parts of Europe, this sort of international
structure of the intellectual community of the Middle Ages.
He also wrote something called the Sumilai Logicales, which was a textbook on logic.
It became the most popular and most widely used textbook on logic for the next 300 years,
so a very important contribution to the scholarly world.
He also wrote on natural philosophy, on medicine, and on alchemy, and even on some other subjects.
Now you might say, well, using modern terminology he sounds like a real Renaissance man, in
other words that a person who works on a lot of different fields and gains a great deal
of expertise in a lot of fields.
Well to some extent Renaissance man's a bit of a misnomer, perhaps we should call such
people medieval men because this was not unusual in the Middle Ages at all, it's certainly
not something novel that appears in the Renaissance.
Well at any rate, on the 20th of September in 1276 something very unfortunate happened
to poor Peter of Spain, at least he thought it was unfortunate.
He was elected pope.
So he had to leave his academic life to take up residence at the papal quarters in Viterbo
just north of Rome.
At this point he was 60 years old, but he was still going strong as an intellectual,
still writing and reading and commenting, and so he asked to have a study built onto
the papal palace in Viterbo.
And this was hastily constructed for him, his books were moved there, and he apparently
from what information we have spent a lot of time there because he certainly liked the
company of his books and scholarship better than dealing with the papal curia.
Well, on the 14th of May in 1277 Peter of Spain, now Pope John the 21st, was sitting
in his study, studying when it collapsed on him, apparently it had been built a little
bit too hastily.
He was buried in the rubble, rescuers came, dug him out, he was still alive though barely,
and despite the best efforts, six days later on the 20th of May 1277 he died of his injuries
after being pope for just eight months.
So scholarship could sometimes be a slightly dangerous thing in the Middle Ages.
Well before that collapse of his study, Peter of Spain asked the Bishop of Paris, Etienne
Tampier, to organize an investigation into certain disputes and confusions and teachings
that were going on at the University of Paris, particularly in the arts faculty, the large
general faculty, the lowest faculty, by the arts masters.
Well Etienne Tampier investigated duly and very shortly thereafter, working on his own
authority, he issued on the 12th of March in 1277 what has come to be called the Condemnation
of 1277.
This condemnation cited 219 propositions that were condemned, generally these were drawn
from Aristotle or from Averroes, but it's interesting to point out that some of them
clearly come from St. Thomas Aquinas himself.
St. Thomas Aquinas, regardless of the high regard in which he is held nowadays by theologians,
in his own time was on the borderline, was on the borderline of orthodoxy.
The condemnation specifically said that none of these 219 propositions could be held as
true under penalty of excommunication.
Now what were these 219 propositions?
Well most of them had to do with putting limitations on divine power.
Others dealt with what is called the error of the double truth, that something could
be true in philosophy and false in theology or the other way round.
Also others dealt with a limitation of human free will.
Now let me read you some of these propositions.
For example, one of them was that God could not move the universe in a rectilinear motion
because it would leave a void space behind it, and Aristotle says there's no vacuum.
Another condemned proposition was that there was no first man, nor will there be a last
man, so that's an eternity of the world problem.
Also says God could not create more than one world, another limitation put on God's power.
The celestial bodies determine our actions, that's a limitation on human free will, that
our actions are actually determined by the cosmos, by the motions of the stars.
We certainly, that's certainly an unorthodox position.
Well what was the effect of the condemnation?
First of all we have to realize that it was local, it affected only the University of Paris.
It is true that later, shortly thereafter, a similar set of theses was produced at the
University of Oxford, however the condemnation at Paris was actually partially retracted
about 50 years later, some of these propositions were rehabilitated.
Now moderns tend to dislike the idea of some authority figure telling them what they cannot
or can believe.
Putting certain propositions off limits under pain of excommunication is jarring to modern
sensibilities.
But what in fact was the effect of the condemnation?
Well it has been argued that the condemnation of 1277 was actually a good thing for the
history of science overall.
Why?
It forced people to think beyond Aristotelian claims, to speculate about what might happen,
what could happen outside of what Aristotle said did happen.
Certain Aristotelian formulations were clearly declared false, they could not be held.
So what are the converse of these?
Let's take an example.
God cannot create more than one world that was condemned, therefore you can hold God
can create more than one world.
God can create more than one world, well that's very interesting, what would that other world
be like?
It would certainly be outside of the cosmos that we know, outside the sphere of the fixed
stars.
Would we be able to communicate it with it in any way?
Would it be put together exactly like ours?
Would it be different?
Would it be populated by rational beings?
This is actually one of the origins of the extraterrestrial life debate, it starts in
the Middle Ages.
Can there be other worlds, if there are other worlds, are there rational people on them?
If there are rational people on them, did they undergo a fall like here on earth?
And if they underwent a fall, did Christ have to go to redeem them as well, or was one crucifixion
enough for all the worlds taken together?
So a lot of speculative theology can be produced from this, but a lot of speculation about
natural philosophy as well.
We know that the worlds are spherical, well think about packing spheres together.
Spheres only touch each other at one point, right?
That means there must be some space between different worlds, what's it filled with?
Could it possibly be a void?
The thing that Aristotle absolutely positively says cannot exist?
Well let's talk about the void a little bit more, the vacuum in other words.
If it's condemned that God cannot move the world in rectilinear motion because it leaves
a vacuum, then we must adopt instead the idea that God can move the world, and what would
be left behind.
In other words, if you don't quite see what's going on, imagine the entire world, that is
the sphere of the fixed stars, and God moves it, say one diameter to one direction or the
other.
What's left in the space?
Clearly there was space there before, is it just a vacuum, is it just empty space, does
it cease to exist as space, is it not even explicable as a place, what is it?
Well if God can now create a vacuum, what are the properties of that vacuum?
How do bodies move in it?
Remember Aristotle said that the reason a vacuum, one of the reasons a vacuum can't
exist is that a body moves with a speed inversely proportional to the resistance of the medium,
so in other words an object moves faster through air than through water.
Vacuum there's no medium, therefore according to Aristotle an object must have infinite
speed, which means it would get to where it's going the same time it departs, which doesn't
seem logically possible.
So if there can be a void what is motion like in it, what's the nature of a void, could
people live in it, what would it be like, could we see through it, all kinds of questions
get developed in the comment literature of the later Middle Ages asking about these kind
of questions.
So in some the Aristotelian methods overcame the condemnation of 1277 because it was about
asking questions, it wasn't just about the authority of Aristotle himself.
Now in later periods the claim has been made that the Middle Ages followed Aristotle blindly.
This is not at all the case, it's far from the truth.
Aristotle was frequently no more than a point of departure.
He had enormous authority, there's no questioning that.
He was appealed to for his logical arguments, his logic was pervasive throughout medieval
intellectual culture, but his specific arguments about natural philosophy were not always taken
to be true.
The Medieval's did not, as is sometimes said, have an excessive respect of authority.
Aristotle was disagreed with as often as he was agreed with, didn't mean they threw out
Aristotle, it meant they have tried to amend Aristotle, Aristotle's system was so comprehensive
that it would have been inconceivable just to throw it out, so you fix parts of it.
The Medieval's not only disagreed with Aristotle himself, but they disagreed with each other's
interpretations of Aristotle, and this went on for a very, very long time.
They often also struck out in new directions, and as we've seen the condemnation of 1277
helped this, that's one theory.
Now before leaving the university, I should stress how the universities and the schools
themselves provided a home for learning, a home for the new knowledge that was flooding
in to the Latin West, a home for scholars, a home for the pursuit of intellectual enterprises.
It's been argued that the presence of such an institutional home for natural philosophy
is one reason behind the success of natural philosophy or science in the Latin West, as
opposed, for example, to the Arabic West.
In the Islamic world, although there were in fact various institutions of learning,
the mosque, the mosque schools, the madrasas, these did not develop into the autonomous
collective institutions that the universities did.
So it's been argued that one of the reasons, again, behind the collapse of Islamic civilization
is there was not a home, not the collapse of the civilization as a whole, but the collapse
of a scientific study in the Islamic world is that there wasn't an institutional home
that was really dedicated to this kind of inquiry.
Finally, there's one aspect of university culture which I think is crucial to the development
of later scientific culture, and that is its disputative nature.
Development and confrontation was the norm of the medieval school, of the medieval university.
This required the development of rules and orderly methods of formulating questions, of
supporting one's own opinion, and of refuting the opinions of others.
Surely, this is a crucial element in scientific research today, and it draws its origins,
I think, from this medieval disputative format.
A smooth, peaceful acceptance of authority or received opinion is death to natural inquiry.
Dispute and argument is its life.
Now in the next lecture, we're going to look at some specific contributions of medieval
natural philosophy to the history of science.
In particular, for next time, we're going to look at the medieval equivalent of creation
science.
