In the previous lecture, we encountered Thales of Miletus, and we noted how he stands at
the head of a tradition of Greek natural philosophical inquiry. The kind of inquiry, the kind of
questions, and the kind of assumptions that Thales, and more importantly his successors
created were not only novel relative to what we know about Egyptian and Babylonian thought,
but also formed the foundation for the subsequent history of Western science.
In this lecture, we're going to look at Thales' successors, the Presocratic philosophers.
Now, what are the Presocratic philosophers? Well, fairly simply stated, it's a group of
thinkers that lived between the time of Thales, about 600 BC, up until the death of Socrates,
in 399 BC, so about a 200 year period. But, you know, I always feel that when I start a lecture
like this, someone is going to ask, why do we care about these guys? Don't they belong in a history
of philosophy course, not a history of science course? Well, there are really three responses
to that. First of all, you have to remember what I said in the introductory lecture, that we have
to transcend the narrow modern definition of science if we really want to understand the
foundations of science. That definition is relatively modern, and so we would cut a lot of
material out of the history of science. It's important to aid our understandings if we used
just that. Second of all, the Presocratics, many of them were involved in natural philosophical
investigations, so astronomy, for example. Third, they were at least the first we know of
to ask questions that have been asked ever since by scientists. What is the world made of? How is
it put together? How do we gain true knowledge about the natural world? How much do we trust our
senses? How do we get a handle on what the world is made of and how it's put together? So in this
sense, these early Greek philosophers set the philosophical frameworks for the study of nature
that we've been using with obvious adjustments ever since. So they really are the crucial starting
point for the history of Western science. Now, there are two other things I need to say about
the Presocratics before we begin. First of all, as interesting as they are or seem to be to us,
we have no full texts from them. All we have are fragments, quotations made by later writers
citing, quoting, paraphrasing their ideas. And it gives scholars a great deal of
joy and fuddlement to try and sift those fragments to see how they go together.
Well, that means that it's often very difficult to get a really clear handle on what they were
trying to say. It's as if you only had a few segments out of a long book and tried to figure
out what the whole book was about. Nonetheless, those fragments are tantalizing. The second
thing is that talking about the Presocratics can sometimes degenerate into something like a laundry
list. So and so said this, such and such did this, and so forth. So they can be a little bit atomized.
We want to avoid that. Well, the way to do that is to remember that most of the Presocratics were
aware of each other's writings. They tended to address the same questions. It's like they were
having a conversation over a 200 year period. Plato and Aristotle in due course joined that
conversation. And in fact, it's not too much to say that some of that conversation is still going on
today in laboratories around the world where scientists are still trying to find out something
about the natural world. So let's go back now and eavesdrop a little bit on the beginning
of the conversation. Well, one of the significant things that Thales of Miletus did was to attract
some followers in his hometown of Miletus. And together they form what's called the Miletian
school. One of the early associates of Thales was Anaximander. Now Anaximander, certainly like Thales
knew about Babylonian and Egyptian eclipse records, mathematics and that sort of thing.
Anaximander flourished around around 570 BC. One of the things he's reputed to have done
is to introduce the gnomon to the Greeks. Now what on earth is a gnomon? A gnomon is just a stick.
Very simple scientific instrument. The way it's used, stick it in the ground,
make sure it's perfectly perpendicular and you can use it to measure the direction of the sun
and its altitude. You measure the height of the gnomon and the length of the shadow and then you
can calculate the angle of the sun above the horizon or the moon for that matter. It's used
for surveying. It's also used in time reckoning, the thing in the middle of a sundial that sticks
up that casts the shadow. That also is a gnomon. There's also a story that Thales of Miletus
measured the height of the pyramids in Egypt by waiting until the point of time in the day
that the length of a shadow was equal to the height of the thing. So he probably used a gnomon to do
this. He was probably watching the length of the shadow of his gnomon changing and when it was
the same he went out and measured the pyramids, the shadow of the pyramids at least. Now the other
interesting thing that Anaximander did was that he gave a physical description of the earth and
what's around it. The earth is shaped according to Anaximander like the drum of a column.
It's circular in cross section and flat on both faces and we live on one of those faces.
Now this may sound awfully simplistic however there's an inventive leap in it.
The earth is not supported by anything and Anaximander says it hangs in the middle of the
heavens the way it does because it's equidistant from everything else. So he subverts this
common sensical idea of up and down and says no there's just center and outward from center so
nothing needs to hold the earth up. He also tried to provide a structure of the cosmos. He says that
there are three solid rings surrounding the earth and these rings are filled with fire.
The smallest ring is nine earth radii away and it has lots of little holes in it that allow
the fire to shine through and those we see as the stars. The next ring is 18 earth radii around
and it has one large vent in it as he calls it that allows us to see the interior fire
and that's what we see as the moon and likewise at 27 earth radii away is a similar ring with a vent
that we see as the sun. Eclipses are caused when those vents get partially or entirely blocked.
Now again this may seem to be a very simplistic idea but nonetheless there are a couple of things
in it that merit notice. One of them is that he gives an idea as to why eclipses occur,
a naturalistic explanation of the origin of the eclipse. Second of all what about those numbers
9, 18 and 27. Where in the world do those come from? Well we can be pretty sure they don't come
from any kind of calculation. They presumably come from some kind of importance that Anaximander
attached to the number 9 because they're the multiples 1, 2 and 3 of 9. But the idea that he
used those numbers says something. It says that he imagined that there should be some kind of
elegant and mathematical way of describing the cosmos. It's not put together randomly or
unintelligibly. It's that there are mathematical unities in it somehow. Well that's about all
we know about Anaximander. A still younger colleague at Miletus, Anaximonies, we know even
less about. He flourished around 550 BC and about the only thing I need to say about him
is that he, like Thales, posited a universal material substrate of all things. And for him
it was air. He said air can thicken and become clouds and vapors, water, mud and earth, or it can
be rarefied into fire. So everything is really air according to Anaximonies. That attempt
was an attempt to locate some kind of uniformity and stability amid the diversity of substances
and the diversity of changes in the world. And it provides a background to the second pair of
Presocratics I want to talk about. One of these is Heraclitus of Ephesus. I'll be perfectly frank
with you and tell you that I really like Heraclitus. He's my favorite of the Presocratics. He seems
to have been quite a bit of a curmudgeon. He says some wonderfully nasty things about his fellow
Ephesians and we have quite a large number of fragments from him. The other one that I want
to contrast with him is his younger contemporary Parmenides. These two, Heraclitus, Parmenides,
held largely opposing views of the nature of change in the physical world and the value of
sense perception for studying it. Central to Heraclitus' thought is the idea that everything
flows. That is, everything is changing constantly. Now you may have heard of one of Heraclitus'
most famous fragments. That is, you cannot step twice into the same river. What does that mean?
What it probably means is that even a simple repeated action is impossible because there's
so much change in the world. The waters of the river flow on and so between your first and second
step, it's a different river. Turn it around a little bit. You cannot step twice into the same
river. So between the first and second step, you've changed too. Thus fire is central to
Heraclitus. It is the source and the end of everything and it is emblematic of constant change.
Well, with this idea of change, did Heraclitus actually give up the notion of there being any
constancy in the world? If he had, he would have been radically antithetical to scientific thought
because scientific thought depends upon certain constants, certain fundamental unchanging principles
or laws in the world. Heraclitus argued that beneath the constant change, there was a principle
of uniformity, what he called the logos. Now logos is a hard Greek word to translate. It can
mean a lot of things. It can mean simply word or argument, but it can also mean reason, principle
and proportion. And it's probably that way that Heraclitus uses it, that there are constant
unchanging principles and proportions in the way the world is put together beneath the changes.
How does Heraclitus think we should discover the principles underlying change in nature?
Well, he does value the senses for giving us information of the natural world, but the crux
of the matter is that those senses have to be rightly interpreted. If we don't interpret them
rightly, we are led astray. One of his fragments says, eyes and ears are bad witnesses for men
with barbarian souls. In other words, if your mind is not disciplined and ordered in a rational way,
the testimony of the senses will lead you astray. They will be bad witnesses. Now it takes patience
and it takes wisdom to uncover what is beneath the apparent change in nature.
And Heraclitus sums this up in another wonderful fragment. Nature loves to hide.
Now any modern scientist that's worked in a research laboratory for any period of time will
know exactly what Heraclitus means by that. The meanings, the hidden meanings of things are not
to be found on the surface. Nature is playing a game with us. She loves to hide and we have to
go and catch her. Now, although Heraclitus valued rightly understood sense perception,
his near contemporary Parmenides did not. Parmenides lived around 475 BC in Elia,
one of the Greek colonies in southern Italy. It's unclear if he'd ever heard of Heraclitus
far away in Ephesus at about the same time. But the point is that for Parmenides,
the change that is everywhere present for Heraclitus is mere illusion. Nothing changes.
This means that sense perception that tells us that things are changing, the sense perception
that's key to the observation of nature is useless and vain. Now Parmenides divided everything
into two categories, that which is and that which is not. And he says that one never moves
into the other. Nothing comes out of nothing ever. That which is always is. So when we sense that some
things come into existence or go out of existence, that's an illusion. Now don't just smile and think
of Parmenides as being trite, dividing things into existent and non-existent things, because
Parmenides' questions really troubled his successors and every later Presocratic,
Aristotle and Plato as well had to respond to Parmenides. He was incredibly influential.
In fact, he was working on the same theme as his predecessors,
trying to find some constant principle in the world. He just did so not by saying
change is everywhere and there's some underlying constancy. He does it by dismissing
the possibility of change, dismissing it as an illusion. What's perhaps so important about
Parmenides in the eliatrics, the people who followed him, Zeno for example, is the willingness
to give up the testimony of the senses. Now this sounds a bit strange because we're going to give
up the testimony of the senses. Well wait just a second. Modern science asks us to do that constantly.
Feel the ground under your feet. It feels pretty solid to me. Yet I'm supposed to believe that
this ground underneath me is moving at over 700 miles an hour, just from the rotation of the earth,
not to mention the earth speeding through the heavens around the sun. Modern atomic theory
tells me that this lectern is 99.99999% nothing. But you know, as far as I can tell,
it feels like something more than nothing to me. If I go running towards the wall,
modern science tells me that my head and that wall are mostly void space, but I think I'm
pretty certain that I'm going to crack my head if I run against that wall. And I think I'm going
to feel that if I try it. So there's a lot in modern science that asks us to pass beyond
sense perception. So it's the validity of the senses relative to the validity of disembodied,
logical or mathematical, abstract logic. They lie at the core, I think, of modern science.
Well the pre-socratics we've dealt with so far can be classed as monists. They held that although
physical substances seem to be diverse, there's really a unity among them. They share a commonality.
This is water in the case of Phthales or air for Anaximetes or simply being for Parmenides.
An opposing school of pluralists held that instead of just one, there are many realities,
many substances underlying the diversity of observable things. The most important of these
was Empedocles. Empedocles' traditional dates are 484 to 424 B.C. And like Parmenides, he lived in
one of the western Greek colonies. In this case, Agrigento in Sicily. Now if you go to the current
Italian town of Agrigento in Sicily, you can still see their impressive remains of the ancient
Greek colony, wonderful temples, quite well preserved. At Agrigento, Empedocles practiced
medicine and purportedly started a school of medicine there. Empedocles' views on matter
and the changes of matter strike me as being a compromise between Parmenidian and Heraclitian
ideas. Empedocles is credited most with the concept of the four elements, fire, air, water,
and earth. He called them the four roots of things and what he meant exactly by that is not always
clear. But the elements allow him to reject Parmenides' dismissal of change but preserve
the impossibility of coming into being and passing out of being. How does it do that? Well,
change occurs when the elements come together, mixed together in one proportion to form one thing,
then fall apart, separate, and recombine to form something else. So the elements remain,
they go neither into being or out of being, but the individual objects caused by their
mixtures do. In Empedocles' words, he says there is no birth and death of things but rather only
the mingling and the exchange of parts. Why do the elements combine and separate? Well, he says
the two forces act on them, one he calls love or friendship and the other he calls strife. Now,
these rather oddly titled forces, they don't sound very scientific to us, but they're part of
Empedocles' language. Empedocles writes in verse, for example, he's a poet. How does love and strife
work? Well, he says at the beginning of the universe, the four elements were separate and the
power of love or friendship, filias, the Greek word he uses, brings them together and they combine
and generate the world. At some point, strife is going to gain the upper hand, though, over love,
and the universe will collapse, will come to an end, and the elements will retire to their
original places. And Empedocles also says that at some point the whole process will begin again.
Now, later Christians, to jump ahead several centuries, sometimes found Empedocles of interest
because of his view on the end of the world. And there's one beautiful example of this. If you
see the wonderful 15th century frescoes painted by Luca Signorelli in the Cathedral at Orvieto,
they show, for example, the last judgment and the resurrection of the dead, but there's also
a fresco of the end of the world. And it shows the stars falling out of the skies and the angel
of the apocalypse blowing his trumpet. People are dying everywhere. The world is dissolving into chaos.
Well, if you look at the frame that's painted around this fresco, there's a little portal
and there is a man who is Empedocles, leaning out, looking up at the fresco to watch the
dissolution of the world that he had theorized. Well, Empedocles' cosmogony,
that is, how the world is created, implies a certain level of randomness. The elements come
together in various ways, but they don't always produce something good at first. And this becomes
very clear in his description of the origins of living creatures. Let me read you one of the
fragments. He says, there sprang up on the earth many heads without necks. Arms were wandering
about unattached to shoulders, with eyes rolling around in want of foreheads. Well,
depending on the state of one's stomach, this is either amusing or revolting as an image,
but it implies that there's a level of randomness, of random mixing, and it takes time to get it
right. The next person we want to look at, Anaxagoras, who lived from about 500 BC to
about 425 BC, partly in Athens, would have none of this randomness. For him, the origin of the
world is not the blind forces of love and strife, but rather noose, that is, mind. Randomness doesn't
play a role. Now, here, between Anaxagoras and Empedocles, we have an important division
in Presocratic thought, one that Plato and Aristotle again would pick up on. It's the debate
over the randomness of nature or the design in nature. Is nature a product of chance? Is the world
a product of chance or a product of a design? Clearly, this is something we're still arguing
about today, and the roots of this debate, some of the answers to those debates, some of the arguments
for it, date back to the Presocratics. Now, the union of many of these foregoing ideas appears
in the work of the last set of Presocratics I want to talk about, and these are the Atomists.
Luchipus, who flourished about 430 BC, is generally seen to be the founder of this school,
but we have very little information about Luchipus. We have a little bit more about his student,
Democritus, Democritus of Abdurah, a little bit younger. The two of them postulated that there
were only two things in the universe. Atoms, which were invisibly small particles of stuff,
moving in void space. In a sense, it's a combination of parmenides, two kinds of things,
being the Atoms, non-being the void. The Atoms are minute, indivisible particles of various shapes
and sizes, and they're in constant motion. The word Atom comes from the Greek Atomos,
which literally means uncuttable, so these are indivisible bits of matter. Visible things are
created when clumps, hordes of Atoms clump together into something big enough so that we can actually
see it. Things cease to be when they fall apart back again into their Atoms, and the Atoms congregate
into some other object. So again, both Heraclitian change, the falling apart and the coming together
of Atoms is preserved, as well as parmenidine constancy. The Atoms are eternal. There are also
monists, Democritus and the Atomists, because there's only one kind of stuff the Atoms are made out of.
Atomism involves something else, though. It also involves a rejection of sense perception. We can't see
the Atoms, we can't taste them, we can't smell them. In fact, the differences that we do perceive,
the color of a table, the taste of honey versus the taste of vinegar, the warmth of a summer day
versus the cold of ice, these are all just conventions. They're not actually real qualities.
They come about only because of the shapes and the arrangements of the Atoms. Our senses sense
shapes and arrangements of Atoms, and we perceive this as being colors and smells and tastes,
but that's not really, there's no taste in honey. It's only the way we perceive it.
Now, the Atomic View is a classical case of reductionism. That is, the desire to reduce
the maximum number of individual phenomena or observations to the minimum number of causes.
Well, with atomism, some of you may think that we've finally gotten to an idea that's still
held by modern science. Well, yes and no. First of all, democracy and atomism is very different
from modern atomic theory, but I think more importantly than that is that democracy and
atomism was really thoroughly rejected in antiquity for a number of reasons, a number of logical
reasons. Aristotle lined up a whole slew of logical arguments against it as did others,
and we'll talk about those in a later lecture. But moreover, and this is the historical point,
atomism picked up some distasteful baggage along the way. This often happens with scientific
ideas. Often we can have an idea which is quite good that may explain some phenomena,
has some backing from various observations or reasonings, but it picks up something distasteful.
That's what happened to atomism because the biggest popularizer of atomism in Greek antiquity
was Epicurus. And for Epicurus, atomism was at the core of his ethical system.
In an atomistic world that's totally random, things are created by the random motions of
atoms, there is no good or bad luck, there are no gods to placate. Epicurus is sort of the
don't worry, be happy school of ancient philosophy. You can't do anything about the world, you can't
placate gods, there is no such thing as fortune, it's all just random, so just live your life and
don't worry about it. Well, the avowate atheism of Epicureanism, and particularly the hedonistic
excesses of later self-styled Epicureans that Epicurus himself would not have liked,
made atomism distasteful to a lot of people in subsequent centuries, particularly to Christians.
So by the end of the ancient world, atomism was fairly well rejected as an idea to explain the
natural world. Nonetheless, about 2,000 years later, Democratian and Epicurean atomism were revived
in the 17th century, where they became part of a new and important history, but that's far in the
future for us, that's about 20 lectures ahead. Let me say something about why atoms were bad,
not their moral connections, but why they were rejected. Well, there are two parts to Aristotle's
rejection, for example. One is that you have to have void to have atoms, and Aristotle would
have nothing to do with the void for a number of reasons. One was that he said that a moving
body moved in proportion to the thickness, the density of the medium. So we know that this
is true if you take a billiard ball and you drop it through the air, it drops quite quickly,
drop it through water, it drops more slowly, drop it through molasses, it drops considerably
more slowly. Well, with a void, you would have no resistance, therefore the speed of an object
would be infinite. It would end its journey at the same moment it began it, which is impossible.
The atoms are another problem. What are they really? How can they have shapes and sizes
and yet be indivisible? That doesn't make any sense for Aristotle. Either they have shapes and sizes,
and they can be divided, at least logically they have parts, or they are mathematical points.
And if they're mathematical points, well then you could put an infinite number of them together
and it would still never amount to anything. So they can't be decent building blocks.
Fine. Well, that's a quick survey of some various pre-Socratic schools. By the time Socrates,
and more importantly, his pupil Plato appeared on the scenes, Greek thinkers had chewed over a
number of important issues, and I think there are four of them to mention. One is the origin
of the world. How did it come to be and in what way? The second one, what is the nature of change?
Is change real? Is change an illusion? How do we rationalize how change happens? The third has
to do with the reliability of the senses. How far do we trust our eyes and ears? And the fourth is
what is the underlying reality of the world? Plato and Aristotle would both respond to these
formulations on their own, but in a sense many of the basic questions they addressed,
and which modern science continues to address, had been formulated in this pre-Socratic conversation.
Now in the next two lectures what we're going to do is look at Plato and his responses to the
pre-Socratics, and at one other pre-Socratic school we haven't mentioned yet the mysterious Pythagoreans.
