In the previous two lectures, I discussed the nature of light, electromagnetic radiation,
consisting of oscillating, self-propagating magnetic and electric fields that sort of go
along their waves that support each other and propagate through space. But at the same
time, I said that light, in its quantum nature, was a particle, kind of a package of energy
that is detected discreetly under certain circumstances, a very weird combination of
two physical principles. In this lecture, I'll discuss the spectrum
of light given off by various types of ideal or nearly ideal radiators. It turns out, stars
are a type of radiator of this sort, and the kinds of approximations I'll discuss in
this lecture are useful in the description of the physical nature of stars.
Stars are these huge, opaque, luminous balls of gas held together by gravity. We'll discuss
stars in detail later on in this course. There are something like three or four hundred billion
such objects in a big galaxy like our own. This isn't our Milky Way galaxy, but this
is another galaxy seen from the outside that resembles our Milky Way. So it's filled with
these stars. And when you look at stars in detail, you see that they have different colors,
and it turns out that the hottest stars are bluish in color, and the coldest stars are
reddish in color, and the ones at intermediate temperatures are white, okay? Our sun is a
white star, not a yellow star, but a white star. And I will quantitatively discuss these
relationships between color and temperature in this lecture. Here you can see some stars,
and the colors are a bit hard to discern. There you can see a kind of an orange one.
That's Betelgeuse in Orion, and that one is kind of bluish. That's Rigel in Orion, but
most of them look sort of white or various shades of white or light yellow or orange,
slightly bluish in some cases. You can see the colors more clearly if you allow the photograph
to expose on the star while the Earth is rotating and let the stars sort of drag across the
sky, as we've seen in previous lectures. In this photograph, you can see quite easily
that the stars don't all have the same color. Some are blue, some are orange, some are white.
These colors are an indication of the temperature of the surface. Now by the surface, we mean
the photosphere. That part, which is completely eclipsed during an eclipse of the sun, for
example, is the photosphere, and the outer part that you see is the corona. So the photosphere
is the apparent surface of the star, and it's that temperature that gives, it's the temperature
of that surface that gives the star its color in the sky. Now what's happening in a gas
is that particles are moving around, jiggling around randomly, jostling to and fro, and temperature
is a measure of how much jostling, how much jiggling around there is. The particles are
bumping into each other, hitting each other, bumping into other things, you know, they're
all kind of jiggling around, they're being accelerated because they're changing their
direction of motion, they're all grooving around, and accelerated charged particles, electrons
and the nuclei of atoms, emit radiation. So all this jostling around causes an object
to emit light, electromagnetic radiation. And if an object is opaque, that light remains
trapped for a while, participating in the jostling around of all the little particles,
and it only later then escapes from the surface, in the case of a star, the photosphere. But
temperature is a measure of the amount of jostling around. The higher the temperature,
the more random jiggly motions there are. The lower the temperature, the smaller are the
jiggly motions, and at least classically, at a temperature of absolute zero, all motion
ceases. Now in quantum physics there's a little bit of residual motion, but we won't discuss
that right now. So if you touch a hot stove, for example, you feel pain, and that's because
the stove particles, the metal, is, you know, the little atoms are jiggling around, and
when you touch them, they hit your nerve endings more strongly than they do when the stove
is cold, and that transmits, you know, some force to your nerve endings and you feel pain.
That's what the pain is due to. It's due to the microscopic motions of those atoms in
the stove, all right? The stove emits radiation, and the hotter it is, the more radiation it
emits, and a stove might look like it's glowing a dollarad, if you've got this iron filament
and it's glowing a dollarad, whereas when it's cold, it's not glowing at all, or so
you think, it actually turns out it's glowing even when it's cold. It's just not glowing
in the forms of electromagnetic radiation that you can see. It's glowing in infrared
light when it's cold. It's glowing with visible light when it's hotter, and if it got hotter
still, that light would become white and then blue. It's kind of like if you heat an iron
poker in the fire. You can see it glowing different colors and different intensities.
That's because the particles inside are jiggling around more and more and more as you're heating
the thing up, and the nature of the radiation that is emitted changes. It shifts from one
part of the electromagnetic spectrum to another. So, when things are glowing due to their own
jiggly motions, hot is blue, cold is red. Hot stars are blue, cold stars are red. Now
you might think, wait, wait, this is totally contrary to common experience. Isn't ice,
which is cold, blue, and aren't coals, which are hot, orange, or even red, you know, sometimes,
you know, if you heat an iron poker in the fire? So here's some blue ice of a flowing
glacier, and there it is, emptying into the ocean. It looks blue, so does the water and
the air, by the way. They all look blue, but in the case of ice, we're taught from grade
one that it's blue because it's cold or something like that. And we all know that coals look
orange and they're hot. So don't we associate hot with red and cold with blue? Indeed, you
know, you go to a hotel room and you look at the air conditioner and hear the labels,
heat is red and cool is blue, low and high settings, and here, in fact, you can set the
temperature in your room, warmer is redder and cooler is bluer, the opposite of what I
just told you. And you know, here's a shower head, which has the same convention, blue is
cold, hot is red. I mean, we're just taught this so much that we don't even need the labels.
Look at that. Here's a shower head where they don't even have the blue and the red label.
It's assumed that you know that blue means cold and red means hot. Here's one in an airplane
bathroom that has no label. What if I didn't know? What if I were an alien and I didn't know
what to do? Here's an air conditioner in a car. Again, no label. We're all conditioned.
We're all taught from early ages that blue is cold and red is hot. And here I am telling
you something exactly the opposite. Well, let's reconsider coals. As I said, they're glowing
due to their own internal jiggly motions and they're glowing orange. That's because they're
pretty hot. They're hotter than room temperature. Room temperature material doesn't emit at
all, or hardly at all, at wavelengths that you can see. Coals are hot enough that though
they emit most of their energy in the infrared, heat radiation we call it, but just sort of
longer wavelength electromagnetic radiation than visible light. So though they emit most
of it in the infrared, some of it has shifted into the optical, the visible window, and you
can begin to see it as a reddish or orange color. If the coals were even hotter, they
would glow white. And hotter still, they would glow blue. Indeed, you take an oxy acetylene
torch and you heat up a piece of metal and it glows dull orange, then a bright orange,
then white, then blue if you heat it up enough. So the hotter something gets intrinsically,
the more its light shifts to bluer parts of the spectrum. And in the case of coals, they
are sufficiently hot that they don't just emit in the infrared like room temperature
objects do. They emit partly in the visible part of the spectrum and that's what you see.
Now, blue ice is blue for an entirely different reason. It's blue not because it's hot, but
because it's reflecting sunlight and it reflects blue light better than red. So it's similar
to the reason that the sky is blue. We've already discussed that. And water is blue as well
because all of these substances reflect incoming white light in such a way that preferentially
favors the blue over the red. So the ice is visible not because it's glowing intrinsically,
not because like the coals were, they're glowing because of jiggly motions. The ice is visible
due to reflected light. It is not itself emitting light that we can see. Now, it turns out that
the jiggly motions within the ice are emitting some light, but that's way off into the infrared
where you can't see it at all. So the ice glows not because of its own intrinsic motion as far
as we can see, but rather because of the reflection of blue light. And similarly, a basketball,
for example, looks orange not because it's red hot or orange hot. It's not jiggling around
that much. I mean, gosh, that would be hard to hold. It's glowing orange or it looks orange.
It's not glowing. That's not really the right term for it. It looks orange because it's reflecting
the orange part of white light better than the blue part. And so the mixture, the balance
has changed and orange is favored. So my shirt is green not because it's hot. You might think
it's stylish or something, but it's just a regular shirt at room temperature and it is reflecting
green light better than it reflects other colors. Various balls and stuff are different colors
not because they're at different temperatures, but rather because they have dyes within them
that preferentially reflect green light or blue or yellow or red or orange or violet. These are all
room temperature balls. They appear different due to reflection. So now let's not consider reflection,
but let's go back to the radiation that a body emits due to the jiggly jostling motions of particles
within it, the so-called thermal radiation. Thermal because the jiggly motions are a measure
of temperature. They're a measure of the amount of movement of particles within a substance and that
amount of movement is dictated by the temperature. Temperature, thermal, thermal motions, thermal
radiation coming out of an object as a result of those thermal motions. That's what I want to talk
about now because that's how stars emit light. So going back to stars, I said that the color
of a star is related to the temperature of its surface or its photosphere. Now if you look at these stars
then in this trailed image, I would claim that the bluer one has a higher temperature than the orange one
and the white ones are somewhere in between. It turns out that stars are what we call nearly ideal
radiators. That is, they emit light in a nearly ideal way where the mathematical shape of the spectrum,
the precise shape of the brightness versus wavelength or color is dictated only by the temperature
of the substance, not by its chemical composition or its shape or anything else. It's only dictated
by the temperature of the material. It's not at all dependent on the chemical composition of the material
or its intrinsic properties. And these materials which are ideal radiators don't reflect any light
and they don't transmit any light. They don't transmit light like a window does, for example. They only
generate light of their own. That's what an ideal radiator is, a purely thermal emitter and a star is like this
and it has a spectrum that looks something like this. If you plot the brightness versus the wavelength of the radiation
that's emitted, there's not much in the violet at short wavelengths and it peaks at some wavelength,
okay, in this case somewhere in the blue maybe, and then it drops down toward the red. So there's not much ultraviolet,
there's a fair amount of violet and blue, drops off in the green, orange, red. So this shape is the shape of the spectrum
emitted by one of these purely thermal emitters and the precise details of the shape are only dependent on the
temperature, not on the chemical composition or any other property. So let's go back to the temperature and ask
which kind of temperature do I mean, you know, where do I put my zero point? And the kind of temperatures I'll be discussing
in this course are what's called absolute or Kelvin scale temperatures. So on this scale, zero is the lowest possible
temperature, water freezes at 273 degrees on the Kelvin or absolute scale and water boils at 373 degrees on this absolute
scale. The absolute Kelvin scale is very similar to the centigrade or Celsius scale where water freezes at zero,
boils at 100, and the lowest possible temperature is minus 273. You'll notice that the Kelvin scale is simply the Celsius
scale with 273 added to it, so that simply zero is the lowest possible number. Now Fahrenheit, which we're used to using
in the United States, is different from both Celsius and Kelvin, it's not as natural in a sense, and the relationship between
Fahrenheit and Celsius is that Fahrenheit is 9 5th Celsius, roughly twice, but 9 5th Celsius plus 32. So here you can see these
scales and we won't have to deal with Fahrenheit very much in this course. And indeed, in general, you won't have to memorize
temperatures and stuff, but I wanted to tell you that astronomers generally use this absolute or Kelvin scale. So now let's look at several
different thermal emitter, ideal thermal emitter curves of brightness versus wavelength, four objects having different
temperatures. Here's one having a temperature of 4500 degrees on this absolute scale, the Kelvin scale. You see there's not much
ultraviolet or violet light, it peaks somewhere in the orange part of the spectrum and then it starts dropping down in the red
and the infrared. A hotter object at say 6000 degrees has, first of all, notice more radiation at all wavelengths. So for a given
sized object, a hotter one emits more light at all wavelengths. And the peak of the spectrum is shifted toward shorter wavelengths or
bluer colors. It was orange for the 4500 degree object, it's more like greenish yellow for the 6000 degree object, that's like the sun.
And if we go up to an even higher temperature, 7500 degrees, you can see that the peak of the spectrum shifted to bluer wavelengths and now there's a
lot more violet and ultraviolet. So we can see this very nicely in a little animation where I show the curve as a function of
temperature for different temperatures. So here is a temperature of 5000 and 25 degrees and you can see the peak is peaking somewhere here in the
yellow part of the spectrum. If I go to a higher temperature, 6675 degrees, it shifts toward the blue. And if I go to an even higher
temperature, in this case almost 8000 degrees, it shifts all the way to the violet, not quite the ultraviolet though now there is some ultraviolet light
emitted. If I go to very low temperatures, like something like 4000 degrees, it shifts over toward the red and the infrared.
Now all of these shapes, all of these curves that I just showed have the same mathematical shape. They are called plonk curves.
After Max Plonk, who first derived the mathematical form of the curve in 1901 when attempting to solve the so-called ultraviolet
catastrophe that I discussed in the last lecture. The ultraviolet catastrophe said that, well, you know, at a given temperature there should be more and
more and more short wavelength radiation than long wavelength radiation and that was simply not what was observed. There's not much short
wavelength radiation, there's more long wavelength radiation and how much more or less is given by these curves, the observed curves which I just
showed you, and Max Plonk derived them mathematically by assuming that light comes in quantized units of energy where energy was h, Plonk's constant
multiplied by the frequency and this all got into quantum theory and all that. So if we now look at these curves quantitatively and ask ourselves, well, what if we multiply the temperature
given by any curve by the wavelength at which its spectrum peaks? So here's some examples. The 4000 Kelvin curve peaked at 7200 angstroms, the 5000
Kelvin curve peaked at 5800 angstroms, the 6000 Kelvin curve peaked at 4800 angstroms. There's this table here. If we simply multiply the temperature in
Kelvin degrees by the wavelength at which the spectrum peaked, we always get the same number, about 29 million so-called angstrom kelvins because you multiplied a temperature
with units of kelvins by a wavelength with units of angstroms. So the final answer has to have units of angstrom kelvins. But anyway, the product is 29 million angstrom kelvins, lambda at which the
spectrum peaks, the wavelength at which it peaks multiplied by the temperature is a constant. And that's known as Wien's law. It's a subset of this more general Plonk curve that Max Plonk
derived. If you look at the Plonk curves, they all have the property that they satisfy Wien's law, a simpler relationship than the full Plonk mathematical description.
So objects emitting intrinsically in this way give rise to curves that look like that and they all satisfy Wien's law. So now let's look at a human body. Let's go back to something practical.
We are sitting around at room temperature. That's about 300 degrees on the Kelvin scale, roughly speaking. So we are glowing and if you use Wien's law, you find out that the spectrum that we emit due to the jiggly motions
peaks at something like 10 micrometers, 10 millionths of a meter, sometimes called 10 microns, also equivalent to 100,000 angstroms. So we are glowing because we're jiggling around, but we're glowing at 10 micrometers. That's in the infrared.
So our spectrum, when we treat ourselves as an ideal radiator, which we aren't quite because we do reflect light and all that, but we still have internal jiggly motions. We're at some temperature. The spectrum that we emit looks like this dashed curve. It is peaked in the infrared at around 100,000 angstrom units.
On the other hand, we see each other through reflected light. So clearly there's some sunlight or room lights reflecting off of us with the amount of reflection at different wavelengths depending on the shirts and the dyes and the colors that we're wearing.
So if you look back at this spectrum of brightness versus wavelength, here is our reflected component. It's got some shape. It's not exactly this shape. My shirt peaks in the green part of the spectrum, so this thing would be more narrowly defined right around green wavelengths.
But the point is, is that this is reflected sunlight or reflected room lights. That's how we see each other. But if we had infrared vision, we would see each other as well from the internal glow caused by our jiggly motions of the atoms and molecules within us.
So for example, when we look at a person with infrared detector and that person is holding a match, the match is hot. It glows quite brightly at infrared wavelengths. Our bodies are warm. They glow as well, although not as brightly, and the wavelengths are longer, more to the red.
So they're indicated here with redder colors. This is sort of a false color representation of what a human would look like.
Glasses, this person is wearing glasses and they have not yet quite adjusted to body temperature. Body temperature is higher typically than room temperature.
So your body glows at a higher temperature than glasses, which tend to be at a room temperature. So relative to the warm body, the glasses are colder and emit not as much in the infrared.
They look colder and so this photograph unfortunately has adopted the confusing old convention that blue is cold and red is hot. But really we know that intrinsically blue is hot and red is cold.
So these pictures are very confusing, but they show you what someone would look like infrared adopting the conventional confusing picture that blue is cold and red is hot. Anyway, the glasses are colder than the body and so they're indicated here in this false color representation with a blue color.
Now there's a lot of applications to this. Tanks, for example, glow at night. They're warm and they're moving around and the military with infrared sensors can see tanks in other facilities and can bomb them at night.
Well, for better or for worse, that there's a lot of military applications in the infrared and snakes have eyes which see at visible wavelengths, but they also have these little pits which are little infrared detectors that can sense the warmth of other animals at night so they can hunt their prey at night due to the infrared emission of the prey.
So we glow ourselves due to the jiggly motions and that's an infrared, but we also reflect light and the appearance we have depends on whatever dyes we have, you know, whatever colors happen to reflect best in our clothes.
Okay, so if we look at, for example, the spectra of various dyes, you can see them here. Some reflect best in the blue, others in the green, others in the red, and I have a little package here of colors showing many different shades of yellow, green, blue.
These are not the pure colors of the electromagnetic spectrum. These don't correspond to any particular wavelength. Rather, these correspond to a spectrum of wavelengths that peak somewhere in the blue if the object looks blue and somewhere in the red if the object looks red, that kind of thing.
None of these balls has a pure color. It reflects predominantly red light or predominantly orange light or predominantly green light, but it's a spectrum of reflected colors and the overall sensation that we see then is some shade of green or orange or red.
If you've got a hot enough object like the sun, it emits rather than reflects light and that light physiologically by us is seen to be white, but that internal emission process I emphasize is very different from the reflection of white light by balls.
They reflect various colors and as shown in these graphs, what you see depends on whatever spectrum is reflected.
Now, planets shine both invisible light because they reflect sunlight in the case of our planets orbiting our sun or the light of other stars in the case of other planets orbiting other stars.
So they shine by reflected light, but they also shine because of their own internal radiation. They glow at infrared wavelengths because planets have some internal temperature causing this jiggling around and causing them to glow.
And so here in fact is a photograph of a dim star and an even dimmer planet next to it. And this photograph was taken at infrared wavelengths where for the very first time in history, we are seeing the planet glow on its own in the infrared.
See at visible wavelengths, the planet reflects a lot more light from the star than the amount of light that it is able to give off on its own. So the glare of the star completely overwhelms it.
In the infrared, where the planet's emission is somewhat higher than it is at optical wavelengths, at visible wavelengths, because the planet has some jiggly motions that cause infrared light, you are better able to see the planet in its own glow because you're emphasizing that very part of the spectrum where it's best able to glow given its temperature.
So this is believed to be the first direct picture of a so-called extrasolar planet, a planet around another star, orbiting another star. I should add that this might actually be an extremely low mass star called a brown dwarf.
And I'll have a lot more to say about extrasolar planets later on in this course.
Okay, before I close in this lecture, there's one other aspect of the Planck curve that I wanted to emphasize. And that is that at higher temperatures, the area under the curve is larger than at lower temperatures.
That means that per unit of emitting area, a hot object emits much more radiation than a cold object. The area under the curve is much greater for a hot object than for a cold object.
And this is now known as the Stefan-Boltzmann law. It too, like the Wien law, is a subset of the more general Planck mathematical curve for emission from a glowing body.
But it says that the energy emitted per square centimeter per second is proportional to or equal to a constant of proportionality sigma multiplied by the important variable temperature to the fourth power.
So an object that's twice as hot as another object emits per second per unit of surface area of this opaque object, 2 times 2 times 2 times 2, or a factor of 16 more energy than the colder object.
So twice as hot, but emits 16 times as much energy. We will see many examples of this later when we consider the luminosities of stars, the total amount of energy that they emit.
And we will even see it very soon when we consider sunspots. Sunspots are cooler spots on the surface of the sun, that is on the photosphere.
And because they are cooler, they emit less energy per second, and they look less bright compared to the surrounding areas. That makes them look dark.
That's just one example of the Stefan-Boltzmann law, and we will see many, many examples of it when we consider stars in detail later in this course.
