Having completed our brief survey of the giant planets, I turn now to Pluto, traditionally
known as the Ninth Planet.
I'll also discuss a swarm of icy, rocky objects out beyond Neptune, near where Pluto is.
It's called the Kuiper Belt, and we think that comets come from the Kuiper Belt.
There's another region far beyond the Kuiper Belt called the Ork Cloud, from which we also
think that comets originate.
The Kuiper Belt has been in the limelight recently because some of the so-called Kuiper
Belt objects, or KBOs, are comparable in size to Pluto.
Indeed, they can be thought of as cousins of Pluto because they're nearly the same size
and have about the same orbits.
Their presence has caused many astronomers to question the planetary status of Pluto.
Is Pluto a genuine planet or not?
Well, in fact, in late August of 2006, Pluto was officially demoted, at least temporarily,
from the status of being a genuine planet, and it is now considered a dwarf planet.
And I'll discuss that to some extent in this lecture, and much more extensively in the
next lecture.
Now, several astronomers had predicted the presence of another planet, Planet X, they
called it.
Based on the fact that, even after taking into account Neptune's presence, Uranus's
observed orbit wasn't quite what was predicted, okay?
So you can observe where Uranus is as a function of time, and you can predict where it should
be based on gravitational perturbations of Neptune, and it's not quite in the right place.
And so people said, well, there's something else out there tugging on Uranus a little
bit.
And Percival Lowell, after whom the Lowell Observatory in Flagstaff, Arizona is named,
he was especially interested in the presence of this Planet X, and he made detailed calculations
of how massive the perturbing body should be and where it should be in order to make
Uranus's orbit and trajectory what it's observed to be.
And various people looked for this, for this Planet X, but didn't find it.
Now Lowell died in 1916, but in 1929, the Lowell Observatory hired a skilled amateur
astronomer, Clyde Tombow, to search for Pluto.
And he looked at the positions predicted by Lowell, and he searched very carefully with
a new kind of an instrument that allowed him to compare the positions of stars in two photographs
taken over the course of several weeks, and he found it.
He found one object moving among the backdrop of fixed stars.
Indeed, here you can see his photographs with which he discovered Pluto.
There are all these fixed stars, which remain in the same relative positions over the course
of several weeks, but there is this one here that seems to have moved.
It's marked with an arrow, of course, Clyde Tombow didn't have that luxury.
He didn't have an arrow pointing toward the object in the sky, but here's this little
star that's within this grouping in this photograph, and in the next photograph, taken
a few weeks later, that grouping is devoid of a star, and yet there's a star over here
where previously there had been none.
So this little thing had moved, and Clyde Tombow could tell because he used this blink
comparator, a machine that allowed him to blink two photographs and look for tiny motions
among some of the objects.
Now you might think that, wow, this prediction of Lowell's was a great triumph of celestial
mechanics.
Look, he predicted where it should be, and Clyde Tombow looked, and there it was.
Clyde Tombow found it within a few months of beginning his search.
But no, it turns out that now that we know the mass of Pluto, it's woefully inadequate
to have produced any of the observed or perceived perturbations of Uranus's orbit.
Moreover, it turns out that those discrepancies in Uranus's orbit weren't even real.
The wrong mass had been assumed for Neptune when calculating the expected position of
Uranus, and so it's sort of the saying goes, garbage in, garbage out.
If you calculate where Uranus should be based on gravitational tugs of something that's
the wrong mass, you'll get the wrong answer.
And so, in fact, it turns out that Uranus's orbit is not discrepant, and Pluto wouldn't
have been big enough to have caused whatever discrepancies they thought there were.
So, Tombow was lucky that Pluto happened to be in the place where he searched, but he
was also a very skillful and thorough astronomer.
You have to give him credit for having found Pluto.
Now, Pluto is named after the brother of Jupiter and Neptune, the Roman god of the underworld.
And that's kind of appropriate because Pluto is way out there, and moreover, the god of
the underworld had this ability to render himself invisible for some periods of time,
so that's really an appropriate name.
And it was suggested, in fact, by an 11-year-old British schoolgirl, Venetia Birney, a number
of people had submitted suggestions for the name of Planet X, but people really liked
this suggestion because of the Roman and Greek mythology, and also because Pluto begins with
the letters PL, and that's sort of a fitting tribute to Percival Lowell.
Shortly thereafter, the Disney character Pluto was named after the planet, so the planet
came first, and then the Disney character came shortly thereafter, it's not vice versa.
Well, for three quarters of a century, Pluto was considered to be Planet Nine, and that's
in part because it's farther from the sun than Neptune is, and in part because it was
the ninth one found.
But in fact, it turns out that Pluto is sometimes closer to the sun than Neptune is.
You can see the relative orbits right here for a 20-year period out of the 250-year
orbital period of Pluto.
Pluto is actually within Neptune's orbit, it's closer to the sun than Neptune is.
However, they don't actually collide because it turns out that the orbital plane of Pluto
is tipped by 17 degrees relative to Neptune's orbital plane, so that tipped configuration
plus the fact that Neptune and Pluto are in a three to two resonance, that is, Neptune
goes around three times for every two times that Pluto goes around the sun, those two
things together make it so that Pluto and Neptune are never even remotely close to each
other.
I mean, they're at vast distances from one another in general.
So they're not going to collide.
Pluto is very distant and small, and you don't get a good image of it.
Even with the Hubble Space Telescope, you can see that there are not many details to
be seen.
There are some bright and dark spots, but nothing much else has been seen, and these
are by far the best photographs.
So we'd really like to send a spacecraft to Pluto, and indeed, there's a NASA spacecraft
called New Horizons, which should reach Pluto in 2015, and that'll be very exciting when
that happens.
Well, being so distant and faint and small, historically, it's been difficult to determine
Pluto's parameters, you know, just how physically big is it, and how massive is it?
What are its basic characteristics?
And Lowell predicted that Pluto is 6.6 times the mass of the Earth, almost 7 Earth masses,
in order to produce the apparent perturbations of Uranus' trajectory, but that was way off.
We know that Pluto's mass is a lot lower than that, but nevertheless, for decades,
Pluto's mass was thought to be comparable to that of Earth, and its radius was thought
to be comparable to that of Earth as well.
Turns out that those were highly overestimated quantities.
Pluto is much smaller than the Earth.
It's 1,500th of the mass of the Earth, and 1,5th of the radius of the Earth.
It's, in fact, smaller than the Moon, smaller than our own Moon.
And the parameters of Pluto were first measured accurately when James Christie discovered that
Pluto has a Moon, which he called Sharon.
Now you would classically pronounce it Karen, but he preferred Sharon because his wife's
name was Charlene.
Now in this Hubble Space Telescope photograph, they're well separated.
And even in ground-based photographs, you can separate them quite well if you use the
technique of adaptive optics.
And here you can actually see that by golly, they eclipse each other.
They cover each other up every once in a while.
And that allows you to learn about the masses and the radii of both Pluto and Sharon.
So this is a very nice circumstance.
You've got Pluto here, and its axis of rotation and the orbital plane of Sharon are tipped
120 degrees away from the perpendicular to the orbital plane around the Sun.
So they're tipped 120 degrees like that.
And that means that from the perspective of someone on Earth, the planet and its Moon
can pass in front of each other like this, eclipsing each other.
And by measuring those eclipses, which occur over a 6.4-day period, you can learn about
the radii and masses really well.
Now it turns out that these eclipses only happen twice every 250 years.
Pluto has 40 astronomical units from the Sun.
It orbits in 250 years.
And here's the Sun and the Earth.
From this perspective, the person on Earth would see eclipses.
But sometime later, there would be no eclipses visible.
And then 125 years later, eclipses would be visible again, assuming that the Earth is
pointing at Pluto and so on.
So there's two six-year intervals every 250 years during which these eclipses are visible.
And this happy circumstance allowed the mass and size of Pluto to be determined.
And so Pluto turns out to be this little diminutive planet with not much mass and a density of
around 2 grams per cubic centimeter.
That's sort of like a mixture of rock and ice.
It's higher than the density of the giant planets, which are around 1 gram per cubic
centimeter, but substantially lower than the density of the terrestrial planets, which
were around 5 grams per cubic centimeter.
So probably ice and rock.
That's the composition of Pluto and Charon.
There's a thin methane atmosphere.
We've actually detected methane in the atmosphere of Pluto, so that's kind of interesting.
But I see type substances, frozen methane, frozen ammonia, frozen nitrogen, some water
ice, things like that.
Well, Charon is not the only moon of Pluto.
There are two others, little tiny ones, called Nixon Hydra.
They were found in the year 2005.
And from the position of one of these little tiny moons, an artist has shown us what Pluto
and Charon might look like.
Here's this almost double planet, because it turns out Charon is about half the radius
of Pluto.
And that's quite large compared to the relative radii of other moons and their planets.
So Charon and Pluto, in a sense, are almost like a double planet.
And you can see them here from one of these little moons, and I think that's the other
moon right there.
But that's, of course, only an artist's view.
We've never been out there.
If you look at how big these little tiny moons are compared to Pluto and Charon, boy, they're
pretty puny.
I mean, you could hardly call them moons, but they are.
They orbit Pluto, and so they're moons.
Well Pluto is generally beyond Neptune, as I've said, around 40 astronomical units.
And so it can be considered as the first trans-Neptunian object, or TNO.
But there had been speculations that many such objects exist beyond Neptune.
Indeed, a number of astronomers over the past half decade have speculated that there's
two classes of icy, rocky objects out beyond Neptune, one the Kuiper Belt and the second
one the Oort Cloud.
Now the Kuiper Belt is named after Gerard Kuiper, who suggested it in 1951.
But at least two other astronomers had suggested it one or two decades earlier.
And indeed, Kuiper actually even felt that there aren't many objects in the belt that
is named after him.
He thought there might have been a lot of objects there, but he thought they were all
cast away by gravitational interactions with Neptune and Uranus.
So he actually thought there aren't many objects there, although the few that are there might
contribute to the short period comets that are seen in our solar system, those comets
that have periods of 200 years or less.
This Kuiper Belt would be reminiscent of the asteroid belt, which I'll discuss in the
next lecture.
The asteroid belt is between Mars and Jupiter and is a swarm of lots and lots of little
objects, in this case mostly rocks, not ices, because the asteroids are relatively close
to the sun, not far from the sun, like the hypothesized Kuiper Belt.
But if you draw what the Kuiper Belt might look like, here between the orbits of Neptune
and Pluto, you have all these little objects.
And a number of astronomers had suggested that that belt is out there and that Pluto might
just be a big object among a cast of thousands.
Well, all right, if there's this cast of thousands out there and if Pluto was discovered in 1930
and it wasn't that hard to see once we knew where it was, why haven't we found lots of
other objects out there?
Well, in fact, in 1992 astronomers did start finding Kuiper Belt objects.
The first one was found in 1992 and now over a thousand are known.
They were just hard to find.
They're faint and they're distant, but they're out there.
And this plot shows the actual positions of the Kuiper Belt objects that have been found
in the past decade or so, and they haven't moved very far since they were found.
So these are approximately the positions at which they exist right now.
So how do you actually find them?
Well, like Tombow, you take a series of photographs of the same part of the sky and you look for
the motion of one object amongst all the other fixed stars.
And here you can see that quite well in this pair of photographs.
This has even been done with the Hubble Space Telescope.
Here are three faint Kuiper Belt objects that were found with Hubble by taking a sequence
of photographs and looking for minute motions.
Well, it turns out that studies of the Kuiper Belt objects show that some of them have moons.
In fact, quite a few have moons.
And in at least a few cases, we've even found objects that appear to be double KBOs.
This one, 1998, WW31, consists of a pair of Kuiper Belt objects having nearly the same
mass.
So let's zoom through our solar system past the orbits of Jupiter and Saturn.
And we see way out there in the Kuiper Belt, these two Kuiper Belt objects that are orbiting
one another, orbiting their common center of mass, and they have nearly the same mass.
It's kind of a neat system, a double Kuiper Belt object.
When you plot the trajectories of the Kuiper Belt objects, you find that most of them are
somewhere between Neptune and Pluto.
And in fact, quite a few of them, like Pluto and Neptune, have the so-called 3-2 resonance.
That is, they go around two times for every three times that Pluto goes around.
And the red orbits here are those Kuiper Belt objects that have the 3-2 resonance.
There are also ones marked in green here which have a 2-1 resonance, and that is, they go
around once for every two times that Neptune goes around.
And then the blue trajectories here are non-resonant Kuiper Belt objects.
They don't have an integer ratio of orbital periods relative to Neptune.
But in any case, these gravitational resonances tend to make Kuiper Belt objects congregate
in certain subclasses or families.
And then there are the weird ones here, the so-called scattered Kuiper Belt objects, which
have very eccentric orbits.
And if you look at them from the side or edge on, you can see that they go way out of the
plane of our solar system.
So that makes the Kuiper Belt thicker than just the regular plane of the solar system,
because these things go way out there.
They have weird orbits.
They've been scattered, presumably, through gravitational interactions with other bodies.
Well, for a long time, people didn't know about the Kuiper Belt objects that are scattered
way out of the plane, because people didn't look outside the plane of the other planets
orbiting the sun.
Everyone just looked in the ecliptic, in the orbital plane of most of the planets.
But if you scan the sky far away from the plane, you can come up with unexpected objects.
And in particular, a group led by Michael Brown at Caltech has been scanning the sky
for much of the sky's area looking for faint, slowly moving objects among the stars.
Michael was initially a member of my research group when he was just a first-year graduate
student at Berkeley, and he was working on exploding stars with me on Supernovae.
But I guess he didn't find them exciting enough, because he went from way out far away to studying
solar system objects very nearby compared to distant stars.
And now he's a very famous guy, because he's found so many large Kuiper Belt objects.
And he's found them by using a 48-inch Schmidt telescope, the Ocean Schmidt Telescope at
Palomar Observatory, with which you can take wide-angle pictures of the sky.
Now with photographic emulsions, you can take very wide-angle pictures.
With CCDs, you only get a small area of the sky, because one typical CCD gives you an
area much smaller than that of the full moon.
With mosaics or arrays of CCDs, you can get an area roughly equal to the full moon, but
that still does not completely fill the focal plane of this wide-angle Schmidt telescope.
But a group collaborating with the Caltech Group has built a camera called the Palomar
Quest Camera, which consists of about 100 CCDs altogether, and they produce a very wide-angle
picture of the sky.
And by taking many such pictures over the course of a night, you can actually scan much
of the sky searching for these slowly moving objects.
And here's one of them, 2004 DW, where you can see an object moving back and forth, we're
just blinking between the three photographs.
Normally of course it just moves in one direction from one night to the next.
So with this technique, Brown and his group have found lots of large Kuiper Belt objects.
And some really are quite large indeed.
Here's one Kwaowar, which is about half the diameter of Pluto, and you can see it shifting
from one night to the next here, back and forth, if you just blink one night against
the other.
But in a Hubble Space Telescope series of photographs, you can actually see that it's
moving in a single direction in the sky among the stars here.
So that's Kwaowar, and we don't know what it looks like.
We've never been out there, but an artist's impression is shown here.
It might have some striations on it and some craters.
Obviously we'd love to go out there and actually see what some of these things look like.
A few are really weird.
2003 EL61, nicknamed Santa, is one of the strangest known objects in the solar system.
It's about as big a cross as Pluto is, but it's shaped like an American football, and
it actually spins on its axis kind of like a football that's been kicked end over end
like this.
It's spinning very quickly, and it has two moons on either side of it too.
It's a very highly reflective object.
We think it's mostly rock, but something probably collided with it long ago, and that collision
allowed a layer of ice to form on the rocky surface, on the icy rocky surface, and this
highly reflective layer of ice reflects a lot of light.
And the collision presumably caused this Santa object to spin so rapidly, but it's really
weird.
It's oblong like this because it's spinning so rapidly.
It has a spin period of only four hours.
So it's really kind of a weird object, very strange.
Well the most interesting one from the perspective of the question, the big question, what are
these things, was found in 2005.
It was first detected in 2003.
It's called 2003 UB313.
I won't go into the arcane nomenclature of how these things are named, but anyway it
was confirmed in July of 2005, and this object generated incredible excitement because in
fact it's larger than Pluto.
We don't know exactly how much larger it is, but it's perhaps 10 to 30% larger than Pluto.
It's nicknamed Xena, the warrior princess, and it's currently 97 astronomical units
from the sun.
You can see it here when it was found, again, using this little blinking technique from one
night to the next.
One star moves, the others don't, and a Hubble Space Telescope picture actually just barely
resolves it.
That is, shows its disk, and it is from this picture that you get one of these size estimates,
although there are other estimates that give slightly different numbers, so we don't know
exactly how big it is, but it's bigger than Pluto.
That's amazing.
Let's put it here in context with the other cousins of Pluto, the big Kuiper Belt objects.
Here it is Xena 2003 UB313.
It actually has a moon nicknamed Gabrielle, and it's bigger than Pluto and bigger than
these other Kuiper Belt objects, but it suggests that in fact Pluto is just part of a swarm
this Kuiper Belt swarm, some of whose members are really quite big, and Pluto has a moon
and you might have thought that that makes it a genuine planet, but gosh Xena has a moon
as well, Gabrielle, and it was discovered with the Keck Laser Guide Star Adaptive Optics
System, where you get incredible clarity by essentially monitoring the turbulence in the
Earth's atmosphere and correcting for it, so there's Xena and there's Gabrielle.
Xena has been now formally named Eris, and Gabrielle has been formally named Dysnomia,
for reasons I'll tell you in a few minutes, but at least originally they were nicknamed
Xena and Gabrielle after the warrior princess and her sidekick Gabrielle, so there they
are Xena and Gabrielle.
What would they look like?
We don't really know, but from an artist's view they might look something like this.
The sun from that distance is just a bright star.
There it is, there's the sun from the distance of Eris or Xena.
The orbit of this thing is very, very weird.
It's quite eccentric and it's inclined by 45 degrees relative to the main plane of the
solar system, so had Brown and his team not looked over the whole sky, they would never
have found this thing.
If they had only looked in the ecliptic plane, the plane of the other planets, they would
never have found this thing.
It's currently as faint as it is because it's at its, or near its furthest point from
the sun, near Apelian, so here it is, way out there at around 97 astronomical units
in this highly eccentric orbit that actually crosses the orbit of Pluto and almost gets
in as close as Neptune does.
From the side, look at this thing, it's way tilted, I mean you thought Pluto was tilted
a lot at 17 degrees, well Eris is tilted by 45 degrees relative to the, to the plane
of the solar system, so it's presumably one of these scattered Kuiper Belt objects.
Well, what are we to make of Eris?
Is it a planet or not?
I heard Michael Brown give a public talk earlier this year and he called Eris the 10th planet.
But then he said, well maybe we should call it the 10th planet because maybe it's not
really a planet, maybe it's something else.
Or maybe we should call it the 10th planet because if you count all the other big Kuiper
Belt objects as planets, then it's not really the 10th one, it's the 20th one or whatever.
Or maybe you could call it the 10th planet because we're going to say that there's only
Eris, that's the 10th planet and none of the others are planets.
Or maybe you can say, well it's the 10th planet because we don't know what we're talking about
and it's all controversial.
Indeed, Eris has heightened the controversy about Pluto.
Is Pluto a planet or not?
That depends on whether you call Eris a planet.
To most astronomers, the presence of Eris shows that Pluto in fact is not a genuine
planet but rather is one of the largest known Kuiper Belt objects and I'll discuss this
more in the next lecture.
But it's very controversial and a lot of people do think that Eris is the 10th planet and
that Pluto remains the 9th planet.
This controversy has generated a lot of heat, a lot of discussion.
Indeed, Eris and its moon have brought the whole debate to a fervor rarely seen among
astronomers.
Well Pluto was officially demoted just in August of 2006 and Eris and Dysnomia were part
of the reason for the demotion of Pluto.
So given this controversial decision, a lot of people don't agree with it and given the
commotion and all the fury that Eris and Dysnomia have caused, the formal names Eris
and Dysnomia are really quite appropriate because Eris is the Greek goddess of chaos,
discord and strife and Eris has caused all this discord and strife and chaos among astronomers.
And Gabrielle was officially named Dysnomia, the daughter of Eris, known as the spirit
of lawlessness.
So here Eris and Dysnomia causing all this ruckus among astronomers and you know I think
those names are really quite, quite attractive.
Well I'll discuss them more in the next lecture.
I'd like to end this lecture with a preview of what might come in the future of astronomy
where we can explore the even more distant icy bodies in the Oort cloud.
In 2003 an object called Sedna was discovered and you can see here that Sedna is quite large.
It has perhaps two thirds of the diameter of Pluto and it's even bigger than Kwaowar.
Now unlike the other Kuiper Belt objects which are mostly here between Neptune and Pluto,
Sedna has a really wacky orbit.
It has an orbital period of 11,000 years inclined by 12 degrees relative to the plane
of the solar system.
It's currently at 90 astronomical units from the sun, nearly its closest approach to the
sun, but it sometimes goes out as far as 1,000 astronomical units.
Now you might think that puts it well beyond the Kuiper Belt and it does.
Maybe that puts it in the Oort cloud?
Not really.
The Oort cloud is thought to be much farther away.
You can see here the Oort cloud compared with Sedna's orbit.
Yet Sedna's orbit is far beyond the Kuiper Belt.
So maybe Sedna is an object that was at one time scattered from the Oort cloud.
Jan Oort had predicted the presence of all these icy bodies way out there because he
thought they were the source of some of the comets.
Well Sedna may be an escapee from the Oort cloud.
And it's so far away from the sun that as viewed from Sedna, the rest of the solar system
looks really far away.
I mean the sun looks like a pretty bright star in the sky and you can barely see some
of these other planets in the inner part of the solar system orbiting the sun.
You can see them marked right here.
And they don't look very bright as seen from Sedna because Sedna is so far away.
Standing on the surface of Sedna, you could actually block the entire sun with the head
of a pin held at arm's length.
That's pretty amazing.
So let's take a journey through the solar system.
We go out past the asteroid belt to the outer planets, encounter the Kuiper belt.
And then finally we get to the inner edge of Sedna's orbit and then a thousand astronomical
units away the outer part of Sedna's orbit.
And then much farther out we get to the inner edge of the Oort cloud.
But most of the Oort cloud we think is even farther out.
Well the discovery of Sedna suggests that maybe the technology for studying at least
some members of the Oort cloud is already at or close to what we need to extend our
view of the solar system and really begin to study its outer limits.
That's really exciting.
