The Kuiper Belt objects discussed in the previous lecture, those objects in a swarm beyond Neptune,
can be thought of as planetary debris that never accumulated into a major planet.
A similar swarm, known for a much longer period of time, is the asteroid belt.
Most of the asteroids are between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter, and they never formed a full planet.
In this lecture, I'll discuss how the Kuiper Belt, the asteroid belt, and some related objects
show that astronomers don't really have a good definition for what a planet is.
That's become abundantly clear, actually.
I'll also explain the rationale behind the recent demotion of Pluto from genuine planethood.
So let's start with the asteroids.
The asteroid belt is between Mars and Jupiter, where there's a big gap in the spacing of the planets.
In fact, it was suspected that there might be a planet between Mars and Jupiter,
and people looked for a planet there, and an 1801 series was found between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter
at about 2.8 astronomical units from the Sun.
And people hailed this as, you know, the planet that should have been there all along,
and then they realized that, gee, it looks pretty faint and small.
It's kind of a bit weird.
And then, oh boy, in 1802 another one was found, and in 1804 and 1807 additional ones were found,
so suddenly there's a bunch of them.
Who wanted that?
People only wanted one planet between Mars and Jupiter.
Then dozens were found, then hundreds were found, all of them were small.
You could tell that they were small because they're faint, and yet they're not that far away from the Sun.
The largest ones are series, 914 kilometers in diameter,
Pallas, 504, Vesta, 502, and Hygia, 430.
Well, although series was originally called a planet, the rapid discovery of these other fellows in the vicinity of series
led to the demotion of series and the other objects.
Astronomers settled on the terms minor planets, or asteroids.
Well, we now know of about 400,000 asteroids, and we estimate that there are maybe 1 to 2 million total with diameters greater than 1 kilometer.
And about 5,000 new ones are found each month, so, you know, these things are a dime a dozen.
Most are very small.
Only 7 are larger than 300 kilometers in diameter.
Most are smaller than 10 kilometers.
And a picture of a typical asteroid, Gaspera, is shown here during a space flyby.
You can see it's oddly shaped with many craters.
It's clearly been hit throughout its history by other objects in its vicinity.
Now, the asteroids come in three major varieties.
Some are stones.
They're rocky things, silicates.
Some are made primarily of metals, iron and nickel.
And then there's some that are carbon rich.
And it's probably the case that material in the asteroid belt was in the process of accumulating into planets, into a few fairly big objects that had a chance to differentiate.
That is, the heavy things fell to the center, as in the case of Earth.
But then they got blasted apart.
They got broken apart through collisions.
And it's thought that Jupiter is basically a big bully who causes the trajectories of the asteroids to be somewhat eccentric and to move faster during some of their collisions than they would have otherwise moved if they were all in nice, stately, circular orbits.
If everything's in a circular orbit, the collisions aren't very violent.
But if the orbits are eccentric, then you get these violent collisions that tend to break objects apart.
And so, presumably, these objects never were allowed to come together to form a full-fledged planet because of these violent collisions induced by the gravitational tugging of Jupiter.
But these asteroids provide clues, certainly, to the solar system's origin and early history.
Now, not all of the asteroids are between Mars and Jupiter.
There's a set of asteroids known as the Trojan asteroids that are in the orbit of Jupiter, but 60 degrees away from Jupiter, as seen from the Sun.
So here we have Jupiter and the Sun, and at an angle of 60 degrees to the west of Jupiter, and also at an angle of 60 degrees to the east of Jupiter, there are little groups of asteroids known as the Trojans.
And they are at the so-called Lagrangian points.
These are regions of space where objects can accumulate and, in a stable way, orbit the Sun.
Some asteroids come quite close to the Earth.
These are called the Near-Earth asteroids, and a few of the Near-Earth asteroids have even been studied by spacecraft in some detail.
The most famous spacecraft is named Near, the Near-Earth asteroid rendezvous mission, and here are some photographs that Near took of the asteroid Eros.
In fact, it landed on Eros on February 12, 2001, and here you can see an image as it was getting close to Eros, and then it landed on Eros just as the next image was being read out, and at the bottom here you can see that, in fact, the data were lost when the spacecraft crashed into the asteroid.
So that's kind of fun.
Now, some asteroids, like the Kuiper Belt objects, have moons, and here's an example of an asteroid, Ida, with a little tiny satellite, Dactyl.
It's kind of hard to hang on to such satellites when you're only a small object pulling on them to begin with.
Small perturbations can cause the satellite to be lost, but at least temporarily, some asteroids can have satellites, and occasionally probably gain satellites as well.
Collisions have clearly shaped the properties of many asteroids.
I mean, you can see from their shapes that they're all pockmarked, they've had a lot of craters and stuff, and moreover, astronomers can tell that from the density of some of these things, their mass per unit volume, they're little more than rubble piles.
They're just collections of rocks, gravitationally held together in a very loose way.
They are not solid throughout.
They're not heavy-duty rocks that are dense and solid throughout.
They're kind of like rubble piles, and an example of that is Matilda, which is only loosely held together, and if you went there with a hammer, you could probably knock pieces off of Matilda pretty easily.
Besides the asteroids and the Kuiper Belt objects, there are some classes of objects with fewer known members, but they still show that our solar system is a bit more complicated than just the major planets and these groups of asteroids and Kuiper Belt objects.
There are these things that kind of go floating around in other parts of our solar system.
For example, between the orbits of Saturn and Neptune, there's a class of objects known as the centaurs that go roaming around, and Kyren was the first centaur discovered in 1977.
A centaur known as Aspolis is shown here.
This is actually an artist's reconstruction based on Hubble Space Telescope data.
We don't actually know that it looks this way, but from the reflectivity of Aspolis and other properties, they think that it might have a big crater on it like this, and perhaps that crater was caused by a collision of Aspolis with something else back when Aspolis was perhaps part of the Kuiper Belt.
Some people think that the centaurs come from the Kuiper Belt, and as a result of collisions, they ended up in these other areas of the solar system.
Well, the asteroids and Kuiper Belt objects and centaurs lead us to consider an interesting question. What is a planet?
Remarkably, astronomers don't have a consistent, sort of well-defined, generally accepted definition for what a planet is.
It would be easy if there weren't objects in the gray areas, you know, that is, asteroids and Kuiper Belt objects and centaurs.
If it were only Mars and Jupiter and Saturn and obvious planets like that, then there wouldn't be any problem.
Now, the history in the case of the asteroids is quite clear.
Ceres was the first one found, and it was called a planet for a while, but it was realized that it's only 900 kilometers in diameter,
and moreover, other asteroids were found shortly thereafter, Pallas and Vesta and a few others.
Now, only seven are larger than 300 kilometers in diameter. Most of the others are really very small objects,
and altogether, the collective mass in the asteroid belt is less than the mass of Earth's moon, so they don't have much stuff,
and most are really, really small, and all are smaller than the smallest known planet at the time, Mercury.
So, in fact, given that all of them are so small and none of them is dynamically dominant,
that is, none of them is a big bully like Jupiter that either clears its path by flinging objects away
or forces other objects to be in certain locations like the Trojan asteroids are forced to be there by Jupiter,
but none of the asteroid belt objects are that way, none of them is dynamically dominant, a swarm exists,
so astronomers soon settled on the terms minor planets or asteroids.
Well, in the case of the Kuiper Belt objects, you could draw some pretty close parallels.
Most of the Kuiper Belt objects are small, some are big.
Quauar is over half the diameter of Pluto, and others are even bigger,
and, you know, you could have called them planets.
For a while there, people were thinking of calling the biggest Kuiper Belt objects planets,
but physically it sort of makes more sense to admit that neither those large Kuiper Belt objects nor Pluto is a true planet.
You look at these things and, well, they're all kind of similar, none of them is dynamically dominant,
so maybe none of them should be called a planet.
And then when Eris, or Xena, nicknamed Xena, was found in 2005,
this sort of brought this whole question into the limelight because most astronomers said,
well, look, now that we've found a Kuiper Belt object that's bigger than Pluto,
we really should demote Pluto and not call any of those things out there planets.
So people were beginning to consider the possibility of a demotion even before Eris was found,
and, you know, this rubbed some people the wrong way.
They were saying, no, we shouldn't do that.
And so the International Astronomical Union, the governing body that makes these decisions,
sort of held off in 1999 and didn't make any final decision because there were protests,
yet it was already clear that astronomers were considering the demotion of Pluto.
And this led to some interesting headlines like, in the weekly world news,
we have the headline, Pluto and Uranus are missing.
Oh, wow, that's a good one.
Neither Pluto nor Uranus is missing, of course.
Pluto was just possibly being demoted.
And Uranus, I don't know about that.
Space aliens are stealing the outer planets, and scientists warn that Earth may be next.
Well, don't believe everything you read in magazines, especially the tabloids, of course.
So what I think we should draw from this is that Pluto's planetary status is sort of a historical accident.
If the other Kuiper Belt objects had been found shortly after the discovery of Pluto,
as was the case for the asteroids, you know, Ceres and the others,
and if Pluto's small mass had been recognized at the time of discovery,
I don't think Pluto would ever have been called a planet.
You know, it would simply have been called, you know, a minor planet or something like an asteroid
or a Kuiper Belt object, even though, you know, Kuiper had not yet discussed these things.
But the point is it would have been called something else, had a bunch of them been found,
and had we known that they are small objects.
So based on these kinds of arguments, astronomers have really said,
well, many astronomers at least have said that Pluto doesn't deserve to be called a planet.
But on the other hand, there are lots of intense feelings involved,
and after all, the better part of a century has gone by with people knowing or thinking,
being used to the idea that Pluto is a planet.
You don't want to demote something after 70 years.
There's a lot of emotion.
We feel an affinity toward Pluto, especially children do,
because it's the smallest planet and the kids are small, and they kind of like it, you know.
The real problem is we don't have a good definition of a planet.
I mean, if we had a solid definition, we could just say,
okay, either it is or it isn't, and, you know, culture and history aside,
let's just go forward from there.
So what's the definition of a planet?
Well, you could ask yourself, perhaps a planet should have a spherical shape.
Anything with a diameter over, above three or four hundred kilometers
will have enough gravity to force it to overcome its own internal strength of materials
and shape it into a sphere.
For example, this little slide clicker is not a sphere and it's not a planet.
I probably didn't need to tell you that, right?
You know that this isn't a planet,
but at least according to some astronomers, a key definition of a planet should be
that it has enough material to shape itself into a sphere or nearly a sphere.
I mean, it can be a little bit oblong if it's rotating quickly like that one object, Santa.
But the point is, is that its own gravity is the dominant force.
It overcomes the internal structure of the rocks and stuff.
Well, okay, that would mean that most asteroids are clearly not planets
because most of them are misshapen.
They're smaller than 300 kilometers in diameter,
which is roughly the dividing line for an object that has enough mass to turn into a sphere.
So, you know, if you say that the spherical property is the most important one,
then maybe, you know, we should call Aris a planet.
We should call Pluto a planet.
Maybe we should call Ceres and Vesta a planet and Pallas planets
because they're all, they're all spherical.
And by the way, they don't primarily orbit another object.
That is, they can't be considered a moon like Earth's moon.
I mean, Earth's moon is spherical, but it primarily orbits Earth, not the Sun.
The Earth-Moon system orbits the Sun, but the moon primarily orbits the Earth,
and so you wouldn't call it a planet.
So people thought, as long as it's spherical and primarily orbits the Sun,
maybe we should call it a planet.
But in that case, a number of asteroids, half a dozen or so, would be called planets,
and about half a dozen to ten known Kuiper Belt objects would be called planets.
And we think that there'd be at least 50 or 100 more that will be found using techniques
similar to those that Michael Brown has used.
And so a lot of people have said that, well, you know, if you've got 50 or 100 of these things,
you don't really want to call them planets, genuine planets,
because that dilutes the importance of the true planets, Earth and Jupiter and Neptune
and things like that.
So a number of astronomers, including my colleague Gabor Basri
at University of California at Berkeley, have said, OK, well, let's call them planets,
but let's have a generous use of adjectives.
We will call the eight classical planets, we will call them the major planets,
and we will call Pluto and the big Kuiper Belt objects and the biggest asteroids,
what we'll call them minor planets.
So in that case, all these things are planets, but some are major planets and some are minor planets.
Indeed, the asteroid belt historically has been known as the belt of the minor planets,
kind of informally, you know.
So he said, well, we shouldn't demote the planets,
we should just have several different categories.
Some astronomers were unhappy at that suggestion because they said that,
well, that's still demoting Pluto from the list of nine classical planets
and they've always considered Pluto a planet and so why demote it?
But if that's your philosophy, then you kind of have to include Eris as well
because Eris is bigger than Pluto.
But some people didn't want to include Eris because they said that there's really only nine planets
and that's the way it's always been and that's the way we want it.
And we have this great mnemonic, my very energetic mother just served us nine pizzas
and we want to keep that mnemonic.
Well, a mnemonic is not a very good scientific reason for not changing one's mind about something, you know.
I don't know, I don't go along with that reasoning.
Michael Brown said, well, let's just agree to call Pluto a planet
because of its cultural and historical significance.
But if we call Pluto a planet, then really we should call Eris a planet.
So let's call Eris Planet 10 and the other big Kuiper Belt objects,
we won't call them planets.
So that's kind of arbitrary.
Pluto is a planet for cultural and historical reasons
and since Eris is bigger, it's a planet as well.
Obviously that way, you know, Michael could say that he's the discoverer of the 10th planet,
which is a much bigger deal than telling people that you've discovered the biggest known Kuiper Belt object.
Most people at a dinner party would say, you know, say what, you know,
Kuiper Belt object, what's that?
But if you say that, oh, well, I discovered the 10th planet,
then people think that you're a hero or something.
And I know Mike really well, so I'm kidding him a little bit here.
He actually agreed that first and foremost, both Pluto and Eris are Kuiper Belt objects.
They're not really planets, but he simply said that why don't we call them planets
given that he didn't think Pluto would ever get demoted.
And if Pluto doesn't get demoted, then Eris should logically be called a planet as well.
But he himself says that this is all arbitrary.
I mean, if you call Pluto a planet, then if something 10 kilometers in diameter smaller is found,
do we not call it a planet?
I mean, it's lame, you know, it doesn't make sense.
If it's one kilometer smaller, do we not call it a planet?
And he gave a good analogy.
He said that, you know, we shouldn't worry about this too much
because after all, geologists don't have a good definition for what a continent is.
Why are Europe and Asia two different continents?
You know, they're the same plate.
Why is Australia continent and Greenland, which is not too much smaller, is an island?
You know, continents are kind of arbitrary, but geologists don't worry about that definition.
They think about the physical aspects, and that is these tectonic plates.
And that's what they talk about, and they don't really care that they don't have a good definition of a continent.
They don't spend sleepless nights worrying about this.
And so Michael Brown really said that, all right, let's have this arbitrary definition.
You know, Pluto is a planet, and Eris is a planet, and the other ones that are a bit smaller are not.
And that doesn't make complete logical sense, but let's not worry about it
because the geologists don't worry about not having a good definition for a continent.
Well, you might say, what are some other physical characteristics that we can focus in on?
Can we have a consistent definition that isn't so arbitrary that most astronomers can agree on?
And the International Astronomical Union, at its general assembly in August of 2006
in Prague in the Czech Republic, decided to try to come up with a definition
that a committee, a subcommittee first came up with, and then all these astronomers at the assembled meeting
were supposed to vote on it.
And there were over 2,500 astronomers at this meeting, which is about a quarter of the International Astronomical Union,
and perhaps an eighth of all astronomers.
So it's a representative sample.
Well, the first proposal that this committee came up with was that an object to be called a planet has to primarily orbit the sun.
That's good, so moons don't count.
And it has to be roughly spherical.
It has to be massive enough to overcome the material strength of its rocks so that it basically forms a sphere.
And then they said that if it's in a binary system, the center of mass of the system has to lie outside the surface of this object.
Now, I'll talk about the center of mass concept later when discussing binary stars and the search for extrasolar planets.
But basically it's like a seesaw.
If you have a planet and a moon, the center of mass is much closer to the more massive object than to the less massive object.
And the committee basically said that any object that's orbiting another one should be considered a moon if the center of mass of that system
is within the primary object, and it should be considered a planet if the center of mass of the system is outside of the surface of the primary object.
But if that's the case then, then Pluto and its moon Sharon would both be planets,
because the center of mass of the Pluto-Sharon system is outside the surface of Pluto.
So they came up with this diagram.
Pluto and Sharon are planets.
Aris is a planet.
And Ceres is a planet.
So they came up with 12 planets.
And there were big headlines, 12 planets, before the vote was actually taken.
Yet there were dozens of others waiting to be officially blessed with planethood,
because Ceres is not the only spherical asteroid, and Aris is not the only spherical Kuiper Belt object.
You know, there's Kualaar and there's Sedna and all these things.
So if you really take that definition, then there's not going to be just 12 of them.
Sooner or later, we're going to have dozens of them.
And again, that sort of detracts from the importance of the classical planets.
And Mike Brown even quipped, this is sort of the no ice ball left behind philosophy.
If you call all these things that are big enough to be round planets, then there's just too many of them.
And moreover, the problem was with the center of mass definition of a planet that, well, gee,
right now the center of mass of the Earth-Moon system is within the Earth's surface.
It's underneath the Earth's surface.
But the Moon is gradually receding away from the Earth out a few centimeters per year.
And in about 100 million years, the center of mass of the Earth-Moon system will have moved outside the Earth's surface.
So would we suddenly then call our Moon a planet?
That doesn't make much sense, right?
So astronomers are really pretty unhappy with this initial proposal.
So they came up with a counter-proposal.
In fact, there were many counter-proposals during the 10-day period of this meeting.
And they basically retained the first two parts of the definition.
That is, the object has to primarily orbit the Sun and it has to be roughly spherical.
And they added, well, they subtracted this criterion that the center of mass of the system has to be outside the surface of the planet.
They said, forget that.
Pluto is whatever it is.
Pluto's Moon, Sharon, is a Moon, not a planet.
So they said, forget that.
But they said that, well, the third criterion is that the object has to have gravitationally cleared its path.
No other objects nearby.
And according to that criterion, none of the asteroids can be considered a planet.
And Pluto is not a planet.
And Eris is not a planet because they're in the Kuiper Belt.
And so Pluto got demoted.
Pluto got demoted to the term dwarf planet.
And the biggest asteroid series was called a dwarf planet as well.
And it's OK that there are lots of other dwarf planets waiting to be officially blessed.
All these big Kuiper Belt objects are waiting to be blessed by the committee that decides that, OK, they're finally, we know that they're big enough to be spherical and all that.
So there could be dozens of dwarf planets and that's fine.
And everything else, all the little rocks that are misshapen and are not spherical, we call small solar system bodies.
That's the other category of objects now.
So gasper and Ida and all these asteroids and the small Kuiper Belt objects, those that aren't spherical, we'll call everything else a small solar system body.
So in that case, you have eight planets, three dwarf planets that have been named so far, but many other dwarf planets that will soon be blessed with this title.
OK, well, this led to huge headlines like a Newsweek magazine.
They said the new solar system are changing view of the universe and in particular, Requiem for a Planet Pluto 1930 to 2006.
You know, so Pluto is no longer a classical planet.
And in the San Francisco Chronicle, a cosmic shakeup, Pluto's demotion forces gift shops, hobbyists, planetariums to make some adjustments.
Well, you have to adjust the mnemonic as well.
Instead of my very energetic mother just served us nine pizzas, you would say my very energetic mother just served us nothing or perhaps nachos, whatever you like.
So we need a new mnemonic, but that's OK.
All right.
Well, the problem with this whole vote was that there were so many different changes in the way that the proposal had been worded,
because there were so many astronomers that were unhappy with various aspects of the wording,
that they didn't settle on taking a vote until the last day of the meeting.
And by that day, most astronomers had left the General Assembly of the IAU and only about 400 people were left,
which is only 4% of the membership of the IAU, and they didn't allow votes in absentia through electronic voting or whatever.
You had to be there.
So 4% and even fewer than that of all astronomers participated in that vote.
And many people were frankly unhappy at the process and also at the fact that, you know, in the end Pluto got demoted.
Even some astronomers who agree that Pluto is a Kuiper Belt object wanted to preserve the planetary status of Pluto for historical and cultural reasons.
And then there was the problem that it's really a flawed definition.
This business of having gravitationally cleared out your path.
Well, Jupiter has the Trojan asteroids.
It hasn't cleared them away.
It's forced them to be there.
You know, it's the big bully.
It's dynamically dominant.
What they should have said is dynamical dominance, not clearing away stuff.
Earth hasn't cleared away all the asteroids that happened to pass by it.
Neither has Mars, neither has Neptune.
I mean, Pluto crosses Neptune's orbit, so to speak.
And so in that sense, Neptune hasn't cleared Pluto away.
So lots of the classical planets under this definition don't qualify.
Moreover, this definition doesn't immediately become applicable to planets around other stars because they said that the object has to orbit the sun.
So it's sort of too restrictive.
And the definition doesn't preclude the possibility that this big spherical object at some point had nuclear fusion in its core, in which case it should be called a star.
And then finally, the whole term dwarf planet, well, they meant it to be a double noun, a dwarf planet.
But it sounds like an adjective in a noun, kind of like terrestrial planet and giant planet.
So kids ask me, oh, is Pluto a planet?
I say to them, no, it's a dwarf planet.
They go, yeah, it's a dwarf planet.
So it's a planet.
I say, no, it's not a dwarf planet.
It's a dwarf planet, if you get what I mean.
So, well, there is a historical precedent.
You know, the word minor planet is a double noun.
And for the better part of a century, that's how we've called all these little things flying around in the solar system.
The committee clearly wanted to preserve some of Pluto's historical and cultural past.
But I think they could have found another name.
And a name that I like is Mesoplanet.
And that was actually coined by the science fiction writer, Isaac Asimov.
He suggested that we call Mesoplanets anything between the sizes of Mercury and Ceres.
And Pluto under that definition would be the first Mesoplanet.
And now there are many others known.
So I think that would have been a good thing to call them.
Well, anyway, they call them dwarf planets.
I think this conclusion could be overturned in the near future.
But for the time being, I'd like to just sort of tell a joke.
You know, did you catch the headline about Pluto's recent demotion?
Dog gone.
Ha, you know, dog, the Disney character Pluto.
Well, Pluto's reply would be this new definition sounds kind of goofy to me.
So anyway, you can joke around about these things.
But my personal view is that the motion makes sense scientifically.
And it's okay to change the classification of an object based on new knowledge.
I mean, this is part of the process of science.
Our understanding evolves with time.
Now, I would have preferred that a name other than dwarf planet be given for the reasons I just mentioned.
But the demotion itself is not a bad thing.
But there are technical flaws in the IAU definition.
There's no doubt about that.
So these should be fixed.
But the spirit of the new definition is on the right track.
I disagree with how the voting was done and how other people weren't allowed to vote.
And for the hasty decision that was made while the definition kept on changing as proposals and counter-proposals were being made,
they shouldn't have taken a vote on the last day when only a small number of astronomers remained.
The controversy is clearly not over, though.
You know, I mean, a lot of astronomers are complaining.
They refuse to adopt the IAU definition of a planet.
They refuse to demote Pluto regardless of whether they considered a Kuiper Belt object.
And so the decision could easily be overturned at the next IAU meeting in 2009, or perhaps even sooner.
I mean, this is likely to be a big story in the future again.
So stay tuned.
No doubt about it.
The case for Pluto is not yet closed.
I'd like to end this lecture with a brief discussion of meteoroids.
Now, meteoroids are small chunks of rock, typically 10 meters in diameter or less,
that are wandering around in the solar system.
They may have come from disintegrated comets or from the asteroid belt,
but they're wandering around and occasionally they go through the Earth's atmosphere.
And when they do that, they burn up and you see the phenomenon called a meteor or a shooting star or a falling star.
Basically, this rock goes flying through the atmosphere.
It heats up due to friction and it essentially burns up.
And you can see it going through the atmosphere, burning up, causing this glow of the air around it.
Now, occasionally these things go all the way through the atmosphere and hit the Earth.
In that case, they're called meteorites.
So you can pick them up, you can find them, and those are the meteorites.
And my son, Simon, whose tan says, well, if the ones that hit the Earth are called meteorites,
then the ones that miss the Earth must be called meteorongs.
Anyway, kind of a funny thing.
You often find them if you're looking around for them in the Antarctic,
because basically they're these giant ice sheets and there aren't typically other rocks on those ice sheets.
So a rock that you find in the Antarctic is likely to be a meteorite.
Occasionally meteorites are found in other parts of the world, of course,
and sometimes they even land on houses and cars.
So here's one that crashed through a house.
And look at this guy.
He's all just completely astonished to see this big gaping hole in the ceiling.
And a woman in Peekskill, New York, once heard a loud bang outside,
and she came out and found her car smashed by this large meteorite.
And it's now in a museum somewhere.
Chemical analysis of meteorites can tell us about their origins.
And some are quite interesting.
This one, for example, came from the moon.
And that one there came from Mars.
That's the one in which there was some evidence for primitive bacteria,
as I discussed in the Mars lecture.
But most came from the asteroid belt or from disintegrated comets.
And analysis of these meteorites can tell us then about the origins of our solar system,
because the asteroids in the comets are thought to be primitive material,
4.6 billion years old.
And by studying it, we can learn something about how our solar system came to be.
