At the end of the previous lecture, I discussed places in the solar system other than Earth
where life might have formed on its own, microbes, bacteria, things like that.
But it's hard to detect that life, especially if you don't go there, and even if you go
there, it can be hard.
For example, we've gone to Mars and we still don't really know whether there ever was or
is microbial life there.
Now, are there some conditions under which life might be detected from a distance?
Indeed there are.
For example, an alien looking at the Earth from afar could deduce from the atmospheric
composition that there might possibly be extensive life on Earth.
For example, the alien taking a spectrum of the Earth would notice that there's free
oxygen in the atmosphere, O2, and that comes from photosynthesis, although not necessarily
so.
But the alien would also notice the presence of free methane, and that comes from decay,
though not necessarily so.
Well, methane is a highly reactive substance.
It reacts with oxygen to form other compounds, and it basically disappears.
So methane and oxygen together in an atmosphere suggest that there's some process by which
the methane is being continually replenished.
That process could be life.
Life forms methane through decay.
Carl Sagan eloquently put it, bovine flatulence.
So if there weren't living creatures here on Earth, any initial methane in Earth's atmosphere
would quickly react with the oxygen, leaving no methane.
To see methane continually in an atmosphere like that of the Earth, there has to be some
source of the methane, and it could well be life.
It's not necessarily life, but that would be one reasonable deduction.
Now note that Uranus and Neptune have lots of methane.
We discussed the methane in the atmospheres of these planets.
But the difference is that Uranus and Neptune don't have free oxygen, so there's nothing
with which the methane would react, and that's why it hangs around for a long time.
Well we found no evidence for intelligent life elsewhere in our solar system.
But it may have evolved elsewhere on exoplanets or their moons in the galaxy, in our Milky
Way galaxy.
And now that we know of at least 180 extrasolar planets around other stars, we should seriously
reconsider the possibility of intelligence elsewhere in our galaxy.
Indeed, the discovery of extrasolar planets led to headlines in Time Magazine.
Is anybody out there how the discovery of two planets brings us closer to solving the
most profound mystery in the cosmos?
There's intense interest in this subject.
Two planets, the discovery of two planets generated headlines like this, but of course
we've been interested in the subject of intelligent life in the universe long before any exoplanets
were found.
Witness the extreme success of science fiction movies and books and comic books and things
like that.
Star Wars fans know that Yoda and his cohorts have been around long before exoplanets were
discovered and the War of the Worlds and other great science fiction stories existed
long before we knew of these exoplanets.
So it's a topic that people are interested in.
We would love to know whether there is intelligence elsewhere in the universe.
Now you might say, well, we already have good evidence for intelligent life out there.
After all, one sees published photographs in reputable journals supposedly showing aliens,
in some cases even interacting with humans.
Look at that one here in the Weekly World News.
Alien backs Clinton.
I'm happy he saw through Bush and Ross Perot, Clinton said.
Space visitor tells Democrats how to rebuild US economy.
Wow, we can learn a lot from these creatures.
Well this alien seems to have changed political allegiances a few years later because here
he is endorsing George W. Bush.
Endorsement makes Texas governor a shoe in this November, ecstatic aides say.
Well these aliens often pick the winners.
There's another alien backing Arnold Schwarzenegger for governor of California, so they always
seem to pick the winners.
But remember, these are the same tabloids that reported that Noah's Ark had been found
on Mars after reports had come out that water had been discovered on Mars in the form of
ice near the polar caps and in the subsurface regions.
So obviously you can't believe everything you read.
You should seriously consider the source of your information.
Well suppose we want to find intelligent life.
We could wait for their spacecraft to reach us, but the odds of success are pretty low.
Again, contrary to what's often reported in the tabloids, here's a headline UFO base
found in New Mexico.
And aliens visited Fergie's baby, says stunned British press.
I don't know where they get all this stuff, you know.
Here's another one.
Gal snatched by space aliens because she liked Ali McBeal.
Oh man, you know.
All right, well, okay, UFOs, the existing evidence for UFOs is pretty weak by the standards
of science.
I won't categorically deny that any UFO has ever visited the Earth, but all of the evidence
I and other scientists who have examined this in some detail, all the evidence that we've
examined in some detail suggests that all of these phenomena, or almost all of them,
are easily explained in terms of more mundane sort of effects like flocks of birds or stars
twinkling in the sky when they're low over the horizon, or Venus near the moon is sometimes
reported as a UFO.
There are lots of more mundane explanations for UFOs, and we just don't think that the
evidence is very good that any UFOs have visited us during the time that we've been
looking in the past, you know, century or more.
Anyway, well, we could look for electromagnetic signals from extraterrestrials instead of
waiting for their spacecraft to come here.
And that seems like a much better way of searching for extraterrestrial life, because you don't
have to require for them to have traveled these giant distances to get here.
All that they had to have done was intentionally or unintentionally sent out light or radio
waves or other types of signals that we could perhaps intercept.
So what kinds of electromagnetic signals should we look for?
Which ones are easiest to produce and travel most freely through the galaxy?
Probably radio waves are the best bet, because radio waves are cheap.
The photons have a low energy per photon, so you can produce vast amounts of radio
radiation for a small price.
And moreover, the radio waves travel through gas and dust in our galaxy in a relatively
unimpeded way.
They're not blocked by clouds of gas and dust the way optical or ultraviolet photons are.
Then you could consider gamma rays and x-rays, but they're expensive to produce, and they
too are blocked by sufficiently thick clouds of gas and dust.
So all things considered, radio waves seem like the best bet, although recently astronomers
have been looking at some stars using optical radiation to try to find evidence for extraterrestrials.
Most of the studies that have been done with radio telescopes concentrate on trying to
detect some sort of an unnatural pattern in the signals.
By that I mean a pattern that couldn't have been produced by a star rotating or a disk
of gas and dust forming planets or something like that.
You look for something that shouldn't have been produced by any process not associated
with life.
And one such pattern, for example, would be, say, the first 100 digits of pi.
Here's a lot of them on a t-shirt that I own.
Pi, of course, is a fundamental number.
It's the ratio of the circumference of a circle to its diameter, and it's an irrational number.
It appears all over the place in mathematics and nature.
You wouldn't expect normal stars or galaxies or planets to repeatedly broadcast the digits
of pi into outer space.
Instead, you might expect it to be produced by something intelligent trying to broadcast
the existence of that intelligence.
So if we were to find the digits of pi being repeated over and over again, out to a high
of 100 decimal places, and if we could determine that this is not a hoax, I think it would
just be a mind-blowing experience, because we would say that is an intelligent creature
producing these radio signals broadcasting its existence.
That would be fantastic.
Well we've deliberately sent radio signals to other stars in patterns that give not just
some random number like pi, but in patterns that actually try to convey some real information
about us.
And for example, in 1974 a set of radio waves was sent by this great radio telescope, Arecibo,
in Puerto Rico, to a globular cluster of stars.
We'll discuss clusters later, but they consist of a few hundred thousand or up to a million
stars.
If there's life, intelligent life on planets circling those stars, and if in 24,000 years
they happen to be listening, because that's when this light will actually reach the stars
of the globular cluster, they might see, they might detect, the set of signals that we sent
1,679 characters, basically zeros and ones, characters of the binary system, which if
interpreted in the right way, give lots of information about us.
For example, 1679 happens to be the product of two prime numbers, 73 and 23.
So if you align these signals in a rectangle with 23 columns and 73 rows, and the zeros
are given, say, just a white color, and the ones are given a black color or some other
color.
You would then see a pattern emerge where it looks like some sort of intelligence may
have produced it, and indeed if you interpret this the right way by recognizing this pattern
up here as being the binary numbers, and this one there as being the atomic numbers, those
are fairly fundamental things, then you could interpret the rest of the diagram to mean,
for example, here's the structure of our DNA and here is the size of a human, the height
of a human, and here's the population of the Earth, and here's Earth's location in
the solar system, and there's even a drawing of the Erisibo radio telescope.
So an intelligent creature could deduce a lot about us from the signal that we intentionally
sent there.
Now I should mention that this sequence of ones and zeros was given to a bunch of scientists
before it was sent, and unfortunately none of them correctly interpreted it, but maybe
the aliens will be smarter than we are.
So the potential is there for letting them know about us and giving them some real information
about us.
Well we ourselves are searching, and here's a famous telescope, or set of telescopes,
the very large array in New Mexico that does search for signs of extraterrestrial life,
and there's even been movies based on this concept and based on Carl Sagan's book Contact
where Ellie Arroway, being impersonated here by one of my former graduate students, Allison
Coyle, listened to radio signals with this large set of telescopes hoping to find extraterrestrial
intelligence, and I should point out that radio astronomers don't sit there with headphones
listening to the signals.
The signals are collected on tapes and on computer chips and analyzed using complicated
software.
They don't hear the signals, or it doesn't do you much good to listen to the signals,
so this is a bit far-fetched here.
But Jill Tarder, leader of the SETI Institute in California, the institute where the search
for extraterrestrial intelligence is concentrated, she does these kinds of studies, and indeed
the character Ellie Arroway in the movie Contact was based on the work and life of Jill Tarder
in the sort of science she does.
Another form of looking is with the Arecibo radio telescope where signals are being collected
from outer space during the time that normal science projects are going on, like some astronomers
studying a galaxy and the radio waves from the galaxy.
Well you can analyze those radio waves and others collected during the time that you're
staring off in space, and you can search for patterns that might have been emitted by
intelligent creatures.
And one of the leaders of this search using the Arecibo radio telescope is Dan Wertheimer.
You can look him up at the SETI at home website, and he releases data from the Arecibo radio
telescope to people whose computers can then analyze those data during their downtime,
for example when you're asleep or something.
You have this screensaver running effectively, which is doing something useful.
It's analyzing the data, searching for patterns, for signs of intelligence.
And he has six million people contributing to this effort by now, and they have contributed
a total of two million computer years of computations to this grand project.
And no clear cut signals from intelligence have yet been found, but if you choose to
participate, which you can if you go to the SETI at home website, your computer might be
the one that first detects signs of intelligence.
So that would be a glorious thing.
You would get your name above the fold in the New York Times if you were to do this.
Now we have a set of radio telescopes at Berkeley, co-run by the SETI Institute, that is going
to look for radio signals from intelligent creatures.
Only about 20 of the dishes have been completed by now.
We expect to have 350 in an array like this.
And this array will search for these signals, and it's being funded in part by Paul Allen
of Microsoft fame, because he is intensely interested in the discovery of intelligence
out there elsewhere in the universe.
Well we don't really know how many communicating civilizations there might be in our Milky Way
galaxy.
And I suppose we could just guess, maybe there's three, maybe there's three billion, maybe
there's 14, but those guesses aren't really worth anything.
You can guess anything you want.
It would be better to make an educated guess, an estimate based on some sort of reasoning
that examines each of the factors that influence the number of communicating civilizations out
there, and evaluates the uncertainties to which we know each of these quantities.
So for example, the calculation might be analogous to estimating, rather than just guessing,
the number of perfect restaurants in your city.
Now maybe you like all kinds of food, but maybe you especially like sushi, for example,
when you want to estimate how many restaurants have sushi and serve it at the right times
and at the right prices and all that in your city.
You could just say, well there are 14, or you could say, well let's try to guesstimate
it with a sort of a calculation that evaluates all of the factors involved.
That should be a better estimate than a pure guess, so it's called a guesstimate, all right?
So the number of perfect restaurants in your city would depend on the rate at which new
restaurants open, the more that open, the greater is the chance that some of them will serve
the right kinds of food.
You then have to multiply that by the fraction that actually have the right kinds of food,
in this case say sushi for your perfect restaurant.
You have to multiply that then by the fraction with the right location.
You love sushi, but you're not willing to drive more than 10 miles to get it, for example.
And you have to then consider what fraction of these restaurants have convenient hours.
If you only eat dinner between three and five in the morning, you might not find that many
open restaurants.
If you eat between six in the evening and eight or nine, you'll find that a much larger
fraction is open.
Then there's the fraction with the right prices.
In some cases, the sushi prices are just out of this world.
Other places, they're more reasonable.
You may be willing to pay any price, but you have to evaluate which fraction has the right
set of prices.
And then there's, of course, the atmosphere of the restaurant.
Maybe you don't care.
Maybe they're all fine, as far as you can tell, as long as the food is good.
Or maybe you like the right atmosphere, you like the kinds of things that might be associated
with a Japanese restaurant, an authentic one.
So the fraction might not be 100%.
And then another reasonable thing to consider is the fraction that have a pleasant and helpful
service staff.
If they're not very pleasant and helpful, you might not want to go there.
Or maybe you don't care, again, as long as the food is good.
And finally, it's important to consider how long typical restaurants stay in business.
If they're only open overnight and then they're gone in a flash, at any given time in any
given city, there aren't going to be many restaurants, period, much less perfect restaurants
serving the kind of sushi that you like.
So if they're open for a long time and they exist for a long time, well, then a whole
bunch of them will coexist in a given city at a given time.
So there will be many choices.
So for example, if we say that restaurants form at a rate of four per year, and 80% of
them serve the right kinds of food.
I would say that's a bit high for sushi.
It might not be high if you just include hamburgers or meat or something like that.
And maybe 30% have the right location.
And maybe 80% have convenient hours.
And maybe 90% have the right prices.
I mean, we'd like the food to be free, but it never is.
Maybe 40% have the right atmosphere.
And maybe 80% have a pleasant and helpful staff.
And perhaps typical restaurants stay open for, say, 10 years before folding.
Well, you multiply all those factors together and you'd say, ah, there are two perfect restaurants
in my city, two that serve the right kind of food at the right times, at the right places,
at the right prices, et cetera.
Now I would say that in this calculation, probably the 80% for the fraction that serves
sushi is probably wrong.
So your guesstimate might be wrong if any of the factors are incorrect.
But at least you have some idea of what went into the calculation.
And you can fiddle with the numbers and see what answer results upon fiddling with them.
And then you can evaluate the uncertainty in the numbers and say, ah, if I want to refine
this estimate, what factor should I concentrate on in order to get a more accurate final answer?
Maybe it's the number of years that they typically stay open.
Maybe that's the most uncertain term in the whole calculation, for example.
All right.
Well, several decades ago, Frank Drake came up with an equation much like this sort of
reasoning.
And it's now known as the Drake equation.
And it highlights our sources of uncertainty in an estimate of the number of communicating
civilizations in our galaxy at any given time, say, right now.
Frank Drake said that the number of communicating civilizations is a product of a bunch of factors.
The rate at which stars form are f sub s, the fraction of stars that are good suns that
don't, for example, live such a short time that life can't develop on planets that orbit
them.
Then f sub p, the fraction of good stars that actually have planetary systems.
And then n sub e, the number of planets or moons per star in what's called the ecosphere,
the habitable zone.
Pluto is pretty far from the sun.
It's probably not habitable.
Mercury isn't all that habitable as well.
Mars and the earth are habitable, and some of the moons of Jupiter might be habitable.
So there's some number of moons or planets that might be habitable, and you have to take
that into account.
Then f sub l, the fraction of those habitable planets and moons on which life actually develops.
And then f sub i, the fraction of living species that develop intelligence.
And finally, in terms of these fractions, the fraction f sub c that reach the electromagnetic
communicative phase.
Those are all important fractions.
But another important factor is l, the lifetime of the communicative phase.
If the civilizations don't last very long while they have the ability to communicate,
there's not going to be many out there at any given time whose signals we could detect.
It's as simple as that.
The longer they live, the greater is our chance of finding them.
So let's put in some best estimates into the Drake equation and see what numbers we get,
and perhaps even more importantly, see where the greatest sources of uncertainty are.
For the rate of star formation, maybe 10 stars per year form in our galaxy on average.
The fraction that are good stars, the ones that don't last too short of time or are in
complex multiple systems where planets might not have stable orbits or whatever.
Let's just say 1 in 10 stars is a good star in terms of having planets that might then
develop life.
What fraction of the stars actually have planets?
Well, you know, maybe all of them do, or maybe only 1 in 10 does.
How many planets or habitable moons are there per planetary system?
Well, maybe there's 10, or maybe there's only one tenth on average.
Here in our solar system, there's at least the Earth, so it's at least one, but I would
argue Mars is pretty good, Europe is pretty good, and Salatus is pretty good, at least
for the development of primitive life.
So you know, having a few per planetary system is not all that unreasonable.
These are a little bit uncertain, but not all that uncertain.
Now we get to the really uncertain factors.
The fraction of planets or moons that are habitable on which life actually does develop.
Well maybe it's all of them, maybe primitive life is so easy to produce that it forms on
any habitable moon or planet, or maybe it's a chance in a thousand.
We really don't know, maybe it's in between.
And then, given primitive life, how often does it really develop intelligence?
Maybe it's inevitable, in which case f sub i would be one, or maybe it's one in a million.
Might even be worse than that, maybe it's one in a billion.
We don't know how often intelligence develops given simple microbes and bacteria, we just
don't know.
So these are very uncertain.
And then given intelligence, what fraction of these civilizations develop and exploit
a communicative phase?
Again it might be inevitable, the fraction might be one, or it might be one in a thousand
or something.
And then, perhaps most importantly, how long do these intelligent communicating civilizations
last?
A hundred years, a thousand years, a million years, a billion years?
I hope it's not a hundred years because if that's typical we're near the end of our
rope, right?
Because we've been communicating with radio and TV for about a hundred years.
Maybe it's a billion years.
Well if you multiply all these factors together, and you're a pessimist, then you find that
there's only one chance in ten to the twelfth that intelligent communicative life forms.
One chance in ten to the twelfth per galaxy, that's a chance in a trillion.
Well there's only about a hundred billion galaxies in the visible parts of the universe.
If the chance per galaxy is one in a trillion, that's even worse.
That means we're the only ones.
That's pretty pessimistic.
Let's take a look at the optimistic view.
If you multiply all the big numbers together, then you find that there may be ten billion
communicating civilizations in our galaxy at any one time.
Now this range is vast, from one part in a trillion up to ten billion.
It doesn't really tell us how many communicating civilizations are out there.
But it shows us where the greatest uncertainties are, the lifetime of an intelligent communicating
civilization.
The fraction of the time that life develops intelligence, those are the kinds of things
that are of greatest uncertainty.
In a sense the biological factors and the sociological factors are of greater importance
or uncertainty than the astronomical ones.
My personal opinion is that primitive life, or slime, bacteria and microbes is pretty common.
Microbes and bacteria formed on earth shortly after the earth formed.
Shortly after the era of bombardment ended, 3.9 billion years ago.
But intelligence at or above our level may be very rare.
I don't think we're completely alone in our galaxy.
I think we're somewhere in the middle of this range, maybe a few of us in our galaxy, maybe
ten, maybe a hundred.
I don't think it's ten billion, nor do I think it's one in a trillion.
And the reason I think that we are fairly rare is that on earth during its history there's
been something like ten billion species.
As far as we can tell, only one, we have reached this level of intelligence and the mechanical
ability to build machines and radio telescopes and communicate.
Dolphins and whales are pretty intelligent, I'm not knocking them, but they don't have
an opposable thumb, they don't have the curiosity and the ability to produce machines with which
to communicate.
So they're just not what we are, they're different, we're more advanced.
And we arrived only relatively recently on earth.
Over most of the history of the earth, an alien looking at the earth would have said there's
not much of anything interesting there, intelligent, you know, there's nothing communicating.
We arrived recently, we may have been a fluke.
And finally, intelligence at our level, though an evolutionary advantage in many ways, might
actually be detrimental.
You know, we can control other species and even wipe them out.
But by the same token, we're the first species known on the face of the planet that has the
capability to destroy itself and most other complex forms of life.
The simple things will keep living, the cockroaches will survive and the amoebas and paramecia
will survive, but the complex things are dependent on a very stable environment.
And we can mess that up in many ways, not just nuclear war.
Moreover, a number of scientists have said that there had to be a lot of pretty amazing
conditions on earth for it to have developed intelligence, for it to have had the stability
needed for long periods of time to develop intelligence.
For example, if we didn't have a large moon orbiting us, our axis of rotation would undergo
chaotic variations and that would lead to huge changes in the climate over rapid timescales.
If we didn't have Jupiter in a nearly circular orbit clearing out stuff around us, there would
be meteoroids still hitting us, causing extinctions, you know, before communicating intelligence
has a chance to develop.
By the same token, if Jupiter had had a highly eccentric orbit, such as being found in many
of these planetary systems that we find around other stars, then this big bully Jupiter would
knock the small terrestrial planets out of the solar system eventually.
Jupiter would just sort of meander around these elliptical orbits precess, they rotate
around, it would knock out of the solar system or absorb within itself most if not all of
the terrestrial planets.
And finally we needed heavy elements like carbon and oxygen and calcium from which to form.
The earliest stars in our galaxy did not have those heavy elements because there hadn't
been enough time for other stars to form those elements and eject them into the cosmos in
the way that I'll describe in a few lectures.
So it could be that conditions like those of Earth are very rare and there are arguments
against that rarer Earth hypothesis and I understand those arguments and appreciate them
and there are also arguments against this idea that intelligence is rare just because
it's not happened very often here on Earth.
Nevertheless, I think that these are sobering possibilities that intelligence at our level
is really very, very rare and perhaps we will never detect it using radio telescopes.
Of course, we should continue trying because unless we continue trying, it's almost certain
that we'll never detect other intelligent civilizations.
