We come now to lecture 42, which of course provides the answer to the question of life,
the universe, and everything.
Well, at least according to the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy it does, and I'm sure
Douglas Adams would have liked to watch this lecture.
Our galaxy of course is huge, you know, the Hitchhiker's Guide even says that.
The distances between the stars are vast.
It may seem that we could never get from our sun to another star to explore whatever planetary
system there might be there.
These distances might be impossible to traverse.
So is interstellar travel only in the domain of science fiction, or could it be possible
if we had the right sort of equipment?
Well interstellar travel is possible, in fact, even at relatively slow speeds.
For example, at the escape velocity from Earth, about 11 kilometers per second, you could
have a huge spaceship traveling for about 240,000 years in the right direction and it
would reach one of the nearest stars, Sirius, the brightest star in the sky, 8.7 light years
away.
So at 11 kilometers per second, the escape velocity from the Earth, it would take only
240,000 years, okay?
Now you wouldn't want to do this in a small spaceship because at least for the current
human lifetime you'd need something like 10,000 generations of 24 years each to traverse
this vast distance in 240,000 years, nearly a quarter of a million years.
So you could imagine a giant spaceship that has a colony of pioneers that explores on
it and they never expect to return home and they have all their supplies with them and
they just, you know, this is their home for 240,000 years and they reproduce and all that
and finally they reach another planetary system, say, around Sirius and they settle there.
So it's possible.
You can do it.
It would just take a very, very long time and you'd need an awfully big spaceship to
have all of your supplies and everything, of course.
Well our own spacecraft that we've sent on a much smaller scale will reach some stars
in the future.
For example, Voyager 2 is heading towards Sirius in the constellation Canis Major and
will pass close to it in about 160,000 years.
So it's going a little bit faster on average than the escape velocity calculation that
I just gave.
Voyager 1 is heading toward another constellation, Camelopardalis, the giraffe, and it'll pass
close to a star in that constellation in about 300,000 years.
The pioneer spacecraft, which went past Jupiter in the early 70s, are also going toward other
stars and they will reach them in about 2 to 3 million years.
So perhaps our descendants will be based on computers, on silicon ships, and they might
be able to traverse these vast distances in a single lifetime and they might not be so
affected by cosmic rays, charged particles that tend to cause mutations in living cells.
But if you're a computer with a lot of protective covering, you might be able to traverse these
distances and if our descendants are computers, then they might be able to do this even without
having a large community of people with living flesh.
So who knows what's possible, but I just wanted to point out that these distances are not
so large that they can never be traversed.
It is possible, just not with current human life.
Well, what about if you wanted to travel to another star within your lifetime?
You just really want to do it and you're not a computer-based silicon ship, you know, you're
living flesh and blood and you want to go to Sirius and back again and tell your friends
what it's like over there.
Can you do it in principle?
Maybe not in practice, but in principle.
In principle, it turns out you can do it, though there are big challenges, you can do it.
And we have to turn to Einstein's special theory of relativity to see how it would be
done.
Now, Einstein, of course, developed much of early 20th century physics.
He's very famous, easily the most famous physicist aside from perhaps Newton, but I think he's
probably got Newton even beat.
And he did a tremendous amount of great work that affects all of life right now.
All of our high technology is based on the physics that Einstein and others developed
largely at the beginning of the 20th century.
And indeed, that physics was so important that Time Magazine chose Einstein as the single
most important and influential person of the entire 20th century.
And it's great that a physicist was chosen for this honor.
Well, for the special theory of relativity, it turns out Einstein was not alone.
There were other physicists working on similar concepts, namely Poincaré and Lorentz were
working on similar sorts of ideas, but Einstein usually gets the credit these days because
he sort of brought it all together and he motivated the theory through his studies of
other forms of physics, electromagnetism and Newtonian mechanics.
And as I'll describe in a minute, he brought it all together in such a way that it gave
a consistent overall framework for the theory, not just a few mathematical equations as some
other mathematicians and physicists had come up with.
So that's why I think Einstein often gets the credit for special relativity, even though
he wasn't alone in developing it.
Einstein considered an outstanding problem in early 20th century physics, and that is
that Maxwell's equations of electromagnetism shown on this t-shirt were incompatible with
Newtonian mechanics that was based on Galileo's observations.
We have this t-shirt.
There are these beautiful equations, God said, here are these equations and then there was
light.
And indeed, Einstein felt these equations are so beautiful that they must be right, yet
they're incompatible with Newtonian, Galilean mechanics.
One of the big problems was that in the equations of electromagnetism, the speed of light, C,
is always the same, regardless of the motion of the source of the light or the observer,
the speed of light is always C.
In Newtonian mechanics, velocities add up in a linear way, and it didn't seem compatible
with electromagnetism.
So there was a problem with either electromagnetism or Newtonian mechanics.
Einstein decided that the problem is with Newtonian mechanics, and he tried to find
a way to fix it.
Now it turns out that there was even experimental evidence that the speed of light is a constant
regardless of the motion of the source or the observer, but it's unclear whether Einstein
knew about that result or how much he was influenced by it if he did know about it.
So the special theory of relativity is special in the sense that it deals with constant speeds
and no gravitational fields.
I will later discuss briefly his more general theory, appropriately called the general theory
of relativity, where you deal with warping of space and time due to gravitational fields
and accelerations.
Einstein made two fundamental assumptions in developing the theory of relativity.
The first was the so-called principle of relativity, and it says that basically the laws of physics
are the same for all observers moving at constant speeds relative to one another.
Now any of you who have been on an airplane know that when the airplane is moving smoothly
and there's not a lot of turbulence, you can't tell very easily that you're moving,
you eat your meals in the same way, if you're playing cards with your neighbor, you don't
have to take into account your motion.
It's only when there's turbulence, when there's accelerations, when there are changes in the
constant velocity, only then can you tell that you're moving.
Now you might say, oh, I look out the window and there's all the cities going by.
Well, you know, how do you know that the plane is moving?
How do you know that the Earth isn't moving out from underneath the airplane?
That's the principle of relativity, okay?
The second is that the speed of light really is the same for all observers, regardless
of their state of motion.
And that was consistent with electromagnetism, perhaps inconsistent with your intuitive notion
of how speeds add up, but nevertheless, Einstein assumed it, and there was indeed some observational
evidence supporting this assertion.
There are a number of important consequences to these two simple assumptions.
I'll go through them briefly right now.
There's a whole teaching company course on relativity that I suggest that you watch
if you're interested in this subject in greater detail.
The first consequence is time dilation, moving clocks slow down.
The second is length contraction.
Objects moving in a certain direction contract in that direction of motion.
The third is a lack of simultaneity.
People in different reference frames will not necessarily see two events as being simultaneous.
And then finally and most famously, E equals MC squared.
Now let's look at time dilation.
Let us construct a particular kind of clock where the clock is defined as two planes here
with a mirror at one end and a light source and a detector at the other.
We send a light pulse from the source to the other side of this contraption.
It bounces off the mirror and comes back down and is detected by the detector.
That round trip time, we will call T sub zero, physicists call it T naught.
And since the distance between the two ends is L, the time it takes for light to traverse
that distance is simply two L over C.
We know that distance is speed times time, so time is distance divided by speed.
Time in this case is two L over C. That's at least the case for an observer at rest
relative to this contraption.
Now suppose we let this clock move in the laboratory and we're watching it move.
The light still has to go from the source to the mirror and back to the detector.
But in the laboratory frame of reference where this clock is moving, the light must
go along a diagonal path.
And the length of that diagonal is clearly larger than the distance between the source
and the mirror at rest.
That is the hypotenuse of the triangle defined by the motion of this mirror and the length
of the apparatus.
That hypotenuse is longer than the length of the apparatus.
But since the speed of light is constant, that greater distance must be traversed in
a longer amount of time.
That's the gist of the idea.
T1 as measured in a frame of reference where the clock is moving relative to you is longer,
is greater than T0, the time interval measured in the frame of reference at rest.
And you can go through the mathematics and you find out that in fact T1 is a factor known
as gamma, the lower case Greek gamma times T0, where gamma is a very interesting function.
It's the reciprocal of the square root of 1 minus V squared over C squared, okay?
Now similarly, you get length contraction.
If a meter stick is moving past you, you will say that the meter stick looks shorter,
and it'll look shorter by a factor of 1 over gamma.
So it'll be the reciprocal of 1 over the square root of 1 minus V squared over C squared,
so it'll simply be the square root of 1 minus V squared over C squared, all right?
I'll show a plot of this function in a few minutes.
Next there's the lack of simultaneity.
Einstein considered a thought experiment where he had two trains passing one another, and
he asked whether an event that is seen, or he asked whether two events that are seen
to be simultaneous in one frame of reference are simultaneous as seen from the other train,
and he found that they are not simultaneous as seen from the other train.
Here's an example.
You've got these two trains passing each other.
O' is moving with speed V relative to O.
We set the experiment up such that explosives go off right when the ends of the trains are
aligned, and they leave marks, they leave smudges at the ends of the two trains.
They also emit pulses of light, and this light then reaches the two observers.
Now, while the light is in transit, O' is moving to the right, so O' sort of meets this
light head on from the explosion on the right-hand side, and he hence sees the explosion on the
right as having occurred earlier than the explosion on the left, whose light has not
yet reached O'. It reaches O' later.
So, O' says that these explosions were not simultaneous, because he says, well, look,
the distances between him and the two marks are the same, yet the light from the explosion
on the right reached him before the light from the explosion on the left.
Therefore, the explosion on the right must have happened earlier than the explosion on the left.
But the observer O, who is at rest, says, well, look, no, the two light pulses reached
me simultaneously, and the two distances are the same from me.
Therefore, the two explosions must have been at the same time.
So, frame O sees the two events as having been simultaneous, whereas frame O' which is
moving relative to O' sees them as having occurred at different times.
So, there's a lack of simultaneity. And finally, there's the famous E equals
mc squared. More correctly, E equals this factor, gamma, times m0, the so-called rest mass,
times c squared. Now, the rest mass is simply the mass of an object that is at rest.
If it's moving, the mass can change. It changes by a factor of gamma.
But if it's at rest, that's the rest mass. So, we simply usually just say E equals mc squared,
where it is understood that the mass that you're talking about is the moving mass,
because it's gamma times the rest mass. All right, well, this equation is incredibly famous,
almost certainly the most equation, the most famous equation in all of physics.
The only competitor I can think of is Newton's f equals ma. And I don't think it even really
comes close. If you ask people on the street about f equals ma versus E equals mc squared,
I'll bet you more people know about E equals mc squared. It's a really important equation.
And we will soon see, in fact, that it's of fundamental importance to the lives of stars
and to the vast quantities of energy that they radiate during their lifetimes.
Well, let's look at this function, gamma, the 1 over the square root of 1 minus v squared over c
squared. We plot the gamma factor on the vertical axis and v over c on the horizontal axis. So,
an object at rest has speed v of zero, whereas an object traveling at the speed of light,
which turns out to be impossible except for light itself, there v over c is one.
So, you can see that for v over c that's close to zero or even getting up pretty high,
20% of the speed of light, 40%, even 50% of the speed of light, the gamma factor doesn't
differ from unity very much. In fact, here's a table and you can see that even at 50% of the
speed of light, which is a darn fast speed, gamma is only 15% bigger than one. And at 70% of the
speed of light, which is a really great speed, gamma is only 40% bigger than one. So, it initially
grows very slowly with increasing speed. But as you come to speeds of 90% or 95% or 99% of the
speed of light, gamma grows quickly from around 2.3 to 3.2 to 7.1. And if you go at 99.9% of the
speed of light, gamma grows to 22.4. And if you go at 99.99% of the speed of light, gamma grows
to 70.7. And you can see from this graph that as v over c approaches one, gamma approaches infinity.
So, it gets a slow start and then it really takes off at speeds close to the speed of light. Well,
could you exceed the speed of light? No, you can't, for reasons I'll tell you about in a minute.
But if you could, it turns out, you would be able to travel backwards in time. Because time would
slow down so much that it would essentially come to a stop at the speed of light. And if you were
to go a little bit faster than the speed of light, then time would actually go backwards. You could
go back and visit a long lost cousin that died in a shipwreck or something like that. I'm not
sure why. I chose that example. But anyway, you could go back in time and see the Revolutionary War
or whatever. But you can't. And you can't because of the equation E equals mc squared. Remember,
gamma enters that equation in the same way. E equals gamma mc squared. And so, if gamma approaches
infinity as the speed approaches c, then the energy required to get you up to the speed of light
approaches infinity. Okay, so you can't reach the speed of light much less exceeded. But anyway,
if you did exceed it, you could go back in time. And indeed, there's this famous limerick by A.H.
Reginald Buller. There was a young lady named Bright whose speed was far faster than light.
She set out one day in the relative way and returned on the previous night. So anyway, so.
Okay, well, let's illustrate the essence of relativity and then apply it to interstellar travel.
The essence of relativity can be shown by a beautiful little experiment involving
a particle called a muon. And there are many such experiments. But I'll choose the muon. And you
don't need to know what a muon is, aside from the fact that it's a particle that's unstable.
If it's sitting on a lab table, it decays in about 2.2 microseconds, typically. 2.2
millionths of a second. And it turns out a muon is a heavy form of an electron, and it's a fundamental
particle. And, you know, particle physicists are very interested in it. You can learn about
particle physics through other teaching company courses. But here, I don't really care what a
muon is, except for the fact that when it's sitting there at rest, it decays typically in 2.2
microseconds. Okay? All right, so now, suppose we have the National Relativity Lab. And we emit
muons from a source of muons at one end of the lab. And at the other end of the lab,
three kilometers farther away, it's, there's a detector that attempts to detect the muons.
And suppose you emit them at 99% of the speed of light. Well, a muon traveling at 99% of the speed
of light for 2.2 microseconds should only be able to travel 0.653 kilometers before turning
into something else, before decaying into other particles that won't be detected by the detector.
Well, 0.65 kilometers is a lot less than three. So, the detector in this National Relativity Lab
shouldn't be able to detect any of the muons, because they shouldn't get there. But they do.
The detector detects them. What's going on? Well, at 99% of the speed of light,
time for the muon slows down by a factor of seven. That is, more correctly, the muon,
which is at rest relative to itself, still thinks that it lives only 2.2 microseconds.
But we in the lab, watching it zoom by, think that it lives 7.1 times longer. Okay? And when you
multiply that by 0.653 kilometers, multiply 7.1 by 0.653, you find that the muon can easily
travel over four and a half kilometers, and that's bigger than three, so it can easily reach the
other end of the lab. Because here in the lab frame, we see this muon zipping by, and it looks
like it lives a long time to us, because time has been dilated. Now, what does the muon think?
The muon thinks that it's at rest. It doesn't know that it's moving. That's the principle
of relativity. It thinks that the lab is zipping out from under it at 99% of the speed of light.
So it sees a length-contracted lab by a factor of seven. The lab is three kilometers divided by
7.1 in length, which is only 0.423 kilometers, which is less than 0.653, which is the distance
the lab could have traveled in 2.2 microseconds. And so the muon says, oh yeah, the lab went zipping
out from under me, and you know, I went from one end to the other, and that's fine.
All right. The lab person and the muon disagree on how this happened, but they agree on the only
measurable results, and that is that muon was emitted and muon was detected. Those are the only
measurable things. The process by which it happened is dependent on your frame of reference.
The lab person thinks that it's due to length, time dilation, and the muon thinks it's due
to length contraction. They're both right. Okay, they're both right. And that's the essence of
relativity. They disagree about how things happen, but they agree on the only measurable
experimentally verifiable results like emission of muon and detection of muon.
All right. So now let's apply what we know to interstellar travel. Moving clocks run slowly.
So for example, a rocket zooming towards Sirius at 99.5% of the speed of light
would take 17.5 years to get there, turn around, and come back according to a person on Earth.
But at that speed, the rocket ship says that no, it only took 1.75 years to traverse the distance
and come back. All right. At 99.5% of the speed of light, the gamma factor turns 17.5 years into
only 1.75 years. That's the idea. So here on Earth, we see this guy go to Sirius and come back.
17.5 years will have passed on Earth, but our friend who made the journey will have aged only 1.75
years. The traveler won't read 17.5 years worth of books or 17.5 years worth of movies as the
people on Earth will have read or seen. The traveler will only experience 1.75 years of life,
but here she will have jumped into the future by 17.5 years. Is that cool or what?
Now, at 99.99% of the speed of light, 17.4 years will have passed on Earth,
but only three months will have passed for the traveler. So you can complete the journey in an
even shorter time in your own frame of reference if you move faster. If you go even faster, you
could complete it in one day. Now, there's the practical problem of accelerating up to that speed
and then turning around once you reach Sirius. Accelerations are painful. They break cells and
bones and stuff, so that's a practical problem. But in principle, if you could get up to that
speed without harming yourself, you can make the journey in arbitrarily short amounts of time
if you move arbitrarily close to the speed of light. And in the traveler's frame of reference,
what's going on is that the length is much contracted. The distance between Earth and Sirius
is not great in the traveler's frame of reference because in the traveler's frame of reference,
the traveler is at rest and the universe is zipping out from underneath him or her
and it looks shortened. It's all self-consistent. It all works and you can traverse huge distances.
So in the traveler's frame of reference, it's the length contraction that explains the situation.
So the vast distances between stars can be traversed at these huge speeds and this is a
consequence of the special relativity, time dilation and length contraction. However,
we're not out of the woods yet because remember E equals mc squared. To get up to those speeds and
make the journey quickly, you need truly vast amounts of energy. The energy of the rocket is
given by gamma times its rest mass times the speed of light squared. For a speed of 99.5% of
the speed of light, even if the engines in this rocket ship are 100% efficient at converting mass
into energy that propels the rocket, you would need the equivalent of 10 times the rest mass of the
rocket and its payload and everything else. At 99.99% of the speed of light, you'd need the
equivalent of 71 times the rest mass of the ship. Now you might think those numbers aren't very big.
What's the big deal? Numbers like 10 and 71 don't sound large, but the amounts of energy
we're talking about are huge because of that c squared factor. Example, big nuclear bonds that
humans have made release an amount of energy equivalent to only about two kilograms of material
being converted with 100% efficiency into energy. Two kilograms is the equivalent of the biggest
nuclear weapons that we've ever made. So if you have spaceships that weigh many tons and you
convert that into energy, that's a huge amount of energy. We don't know how to harness that kind
of energy. And if you consider the fact that no form of energy conversion is 100% efficient that
we know of other than the collision of matter and antimatter, I'll talk about that later, most
conversion processes are efficient only at the 10% or 1% or 1 1,000th of a percent level. That means
that the actual amount of fuel that you're carrying is huge. You're carrying this huge amount of fuel
which you're converting to energy with low efficiency to propel you up to these vast speeds.
And so at say 1% efficiency, the total amount of energy needed would be either 1,000 mc squared
for the speed of 99.5% of the speed of light or 7,100 mc squared at 99.99% of the speed of light.
And these are truly stupendous amounts of energy. Add that to the fact that usually you've got a
lot of contraptions there that are holding these engines together and you know the rockets are
usually bigger than their payload regardless of the fuel problem. And you have these giant rockets
carrying a few little humans and some fuel and all that and you've got to accelerate the whole thing
to nearly the speed of light in order to make these journeys quickly. We don't know how you
would get that kind of energy. Perhaps the way to do it is to pick up fuel along the way. In other
words, don't have a big fuel tank when you lift off but collect the interstellar hydrogen and helium
from the vast clouds of gas as you go along. Maybe that's the way to do it. Clearly, it seems that
some space aliens have managed to overcome this problem of harnessing the fuel and carrying it
because according to one newspaper, five of your U.S. senators are space aliens and they're named
inside. Find out if your senator is on the list. So clearly some alien civilizations have found ways
to overcome these formidable problems. I don't know how they did it, okay? And I conclude that
interstellar travel, though possible in principle, in practice, is very, very, very difficult. And
it's conceivable that the reason we have not seen any evidence for intelligent extraterrestrials
traversing vast distances is that neither we nor they have figured out how to do it.
