In the previous lecture, I showed how astronomers determine not just the apparent brightnesses
of stars, their magnitudes, but also their intrinsic power, luminosity, or umph, or their
absolute magnitude, the intrinsic property of the star.
I also showed that if you plot the luminosity on the vertical axis versus the surface temperature
on the horizontal axis, most stars fall in distinct regions of that temperature luminosity
diagram.
They don't generally fall all over the place.
And I said that there must be some physical reason for that pattern.
Now let's see how we can use the temperature luminosity diagram to infer the sizes or radii
of stars, another fundamental property of stars.
In the diagram that I showed, called the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram, or temperature luminosity diagram,
the luminosity in units of solar luminosities is on the vertical axis.
So there's one solar luminosity, one hundred, ten thousand, a million, and then one one hundredth,
one ten thousandth, one one millionth.
That corresponds to some absolute magnitude, but I prefer the units of solar luminosities
over absolute magnitudes, which are a little bit arbitrary.
On the horizontal axis, we have the spectral type, O-B-A-F-G-K-M-L, which I said is related
to the surface temperature.
And the temperature is shown at the bottom here in units of one thousand degrees Kelvin.
So O- and B-type stars might be thirty thousand degrees Kelvin, or twenty thousand degrees
Kelvin.
A-type stars might be eight or nine thousand degrees Kelvin.
And M-type stars might be three thousand degrees Kelvin.
So this is the temperature luminosity diagram, and most stars fall in certain regions.
The sun is at one solar luminosity and has a temperature of five thousand eight hundred
degrees.
Now, let's note once again that stars are nearly perfect absorbers and emitters of radiation.
So their spectrum is nearly that of a thermal emitter, a Planck curve.
And here are shown the Planck curves of stars having four different surface temperatures,
but the same area, the same size of a star.
You'll notice that the amount of area underneath each curve grows with increasing temperature
of the star.
And recall in lecture twenty-one that we discussed this phenomenon.
It's called the Steffen-Boltzmann law, and it says quantitatively that hotter stars emit
much more energy than cooler stars per unit of emitting area, and the amount that they
emit more is proportional to their surface temperature to the fourth power.
And the proportionality constant is just a little thing here called sigma, the Greek
lower case sigma, the Steffen-Boltzmann constant.
So the energy emitted per unit area, per square centimeter, for example, of the star's surface,
per second is equal to sigma times surface temperature to the fourth power.
So let's take two stars having equal area, but surface temperatures of six thousand degrees
and three thousand degrees on the Kelvin or absolute scale.
The ratio of surface temperatures is six thousand divided by three thousand, which is just two,
and you raise that to the fourth power and you get sixteen.
So a star that's twice as hot as another star emits two times two times two times two or
sixteen times as much energy per second as the cooler star does if they have the same
area.
So let me show you this on a little simulation here where we can start with a very cool star
just below four thousand degrees Kelvin, and we can see that its luminosity is quite low
below that of the sun and its color is quite red.
If we increase its surface temperature, the color becomes more yellowish, the luminosity
rises, and if I increase the surface temperature still more, the color becomes more white-like,
the luminosity rises even more, then with a still greater surface temperature, the star
begins to look bluish and its luminosity is now quite high, about a hundred times that
of the sun in this particular case.
Going up to an even higher temperature, the star becomes even more luminous and even bluer.
So you can see here how the luminosity and color of a star depend on its surface temperature.
Well along the main sequence, it turns out that the surface temperature is the main factor.
So O type stars are a lot more luminous than M type stars, primarily because their surface
temperature is considerably higher than that of M type stars.
The size or radius of the star in this case is not as important, at least not along the
main sequence.
We will see that for some other stars, the radius is an important factor.
So let's go back to the Stefan-Boltzmann law, which said that per unit area, the amount
of energy emitted per second was proportional to the temperature to the fourth power.
But of course, a star has some surface area associated with it, and for a sphere, the
surface area is 4 times pi times the square of the radius.
So the surface area is 4 pi r squared, and you multiply that surface area, some number
of square centimeters, by the amount of energy emitted per second per square centimeter,
and that gives you the total luminosity of the star.
So in general, L is the surface area multiplied by the energy emitted per unit area per unit
time, and in the case of a spherical star, L would be 4 pi r squared sigma t to the fourth,
where r is the radius of the star and t is its surface temperature.
So now let's go back to this little animation that I had where I was changing the temperature
of the star.
For a given temperature, I can now change the radius of the star, and you'll see that
at larger radii, the luminosity goes up.
The temperature has not changed in this example, but the radius has gotten bigger, therefore
the surface area has increased, therefore the total luminosity has increased, because
each unit of surface area emits in proportion to temperature to the fourth power.
Now you'll notice in this diagram, the temperature luminosity diagram, that some stars have surface
temperatures that are comparable to that of the sun, or even lower than that of the sun,
yet they have much higher luminosities.
Here's a good case where a star is 100,000 times more luminous than the sun, yet it has
about the same temperature, maybe even a slightly lower temperature.
You can even get stars that are a million times more luminous than the sun, and yet
have about the same temperature.
Well if they have the same temperature, but they're 100,000 or a million times more luminous,
what must be the case?
They must be much larger than the sun.
So these extremely luminous stars are called supergiants.
They tend to be cooler than the sun, redder looking than the sun, and so they're called
red supergiants.
The stars that are only somewhat more luminous than the sun, maybe by a factor of 100 or
1,000, are clearly bigger than the sun, because they have about the same temperature or even
lower temperatures, so those are giant stars, and we call them red giants.
Let's suppose a star is a million times as luminous as the sun, but has the same temperature.
Well the square root of a million is 1,000.
The radius of the star has to be 1,000 times bigger than the radius of the sun to make its
surface area a million times bigger.
And indeed, certain stars in the sky do have these enormous sizes.
A thousand times the radius of the sun is about 4.6 astronomical units.
That's about the distance at which Jupiter orbits our sun in our solar system.
So looking at Betelgeuse here, the upper left shoulder of Orion, we calculate that it should
be about as big as the radius of Jupiter's orbit around the sun, and in fact a Hubble
space telescope picture shows that indeed it is physically roughly the size of Jupiter's
orbit.
Can you imagine that?
If we were orbiting that star, we would be well inside it.
Even Jupiter would be on the outskirts of that star.
So Betelgeuse is a good example of a red supergiant.
Another one is Antares, the heart of the scorpion.
Here's Scorpius, right there, the stinger is there.
Watch out, don't let it sting you, and here are the pinchers.
Well there's another type of star that's about the same temperature as the sun, but much,
much less luminous rather than much more luminous.
Let's look at those stars in the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram.
Here they are down here.
They're about the same temperature as the sun, so they look white, but they emit much
less energy than the sun.
Look at their luminosity.
It's way down at a ten thousandth, or in some cases even a hundred thousandth of the luminosity
of the sun.
So since they emit the same amount of energy as the sun does per unit area of emitting
surface, their area must be much smaller, their radius must be much smaller.
A star that's ten thousand times less luminous than the sun must be one hundred times smaller
in physical radius, and such stars then are called white dwarfs.
A good example is the companion of the brightest star in the sky, Sirius.
Here's Sirius.
The companion is gravitationally bound to the main component, but you can see that it's
much, much fainter than the main component.
So Sirius B is a white dwarf, and Sirius A is a more normal main sequence star.
Looking at the sizes of white dwarfs, they're about the size of the earth, and the earth
itself is only one percent of the radius of the sun.
So these are really tiny stars.
They have about the same mass as the sun, or half the mass, or something like that, but
they're compressed into the volume of a planet, a terrestrial planet.
That is really amazing.
They're tiny stars.
We will see later that our sun will turn into one of these white dwarfs as it nears its
death.
Well, you can have a main sequence star that's white, and main sequence stars are also called
dwarfs in comparison to giants and supergiants, but a white main sequence star like the sun
is not a white dwarf.
It's white, and it's a dwarf, because it's a main sequence star, but it's not a white
dwarf.
The white dwarfs are the ones that have a much lower luminosity.
So that's just the terminology.
Go figure.
Sorry about that.
Main sequence stars are dwarfs in comparison to the giants and supergiants, and they can
even be white, but don't confuse them with white dwarfs, okay?
Sorry about that.
Even O and B main sequence stars are called dwarfs, despite the fact that O and B type
main sequence stars are actually fairly hefty in size.
They're still called dwarfs in comparison to the supergiants.
So a synonymous word to main sequence star is dwarf in this particular context.
Let's look at this diagram again.
There are stars all over the place on it.
We can measure their distances and their temperatures, calculate their luminosities, place them on
this diagram, and then calculate their sizes.
I've already illustrated this for a number of cases, but just to reiterate, we have L
equals 4 pi r squared, the surface area of the star, multiplied by sigma t to the fourth,
some constant whose value you can look up in a book, multiplied by the important physical
property, the temperature of the star to the fourth power.
So if you measure the temperature from the spectrum, and if you deduce the luminosity
from the brightness and the distance using the inverse square law, L equals 4 pi d squared,
the distance of the star squared times the apparent brightness, then you've got L, you've
measured t from the spectrum using Wien's law, for example, the only unknown in that
case is R, the radius of the star.
So this is how we deduce radii of stars.
Now it's very important not to confuse the 4 pi r squared in this formula, which is the
surface area of the star, with the 4 pi d squared that comes in in the inverse square
law of light.
Remember apparent brightness is L luminosity over 4 pi d squared.
That's a consequence of the inverse square law of light, the spreading out of the light
spherically from a source.
That gives you apparent brightness equals luminosity over 4 pi d squared.
That's different from the 4 pi r squared in the Stefan-Boltzmann law.
I just wanted to make that very clear because sometimes there is confusion on that point
because there are 2 4 pi d squareds or r squareds hanging around, and you've got to just be
very clear in what you're working with here.
When you measure the radii of a bunch of main sequence stars, you find that in fact they're
not exactly constant.
As you go from the low temperature M-type stars up to the hot O-type stars, the radius
is roughly proportional to the mass M, and we will determine masses in the next lecture.
I'll show you how we determine masses.
Actually mass ends up dictating almost all of the quantities, almost all of the physical
characteristics of stars.
The radii, the luminosities, everything, the surface temperatures are dictated at least
for the case of main sequence stars by the mass.
The mass is the key that we're going to consider in the next lecture.
You can also verify that we get the right radii for stars using the Stefan-Boltzmann
law and the HR diagram or the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram.
You can verify these sizes by, in some cases, taking direct images of stars.
Some stars are sufficiently big and sufficiently nearby that you can actually physically distinguish
their size using today's best telescopes.
I already gave the example of Betelgeuse, the left shoulder of Orion, where in this
Hubble picture you can actually resolve the star.
That is, you can see that it is not a distinct point of light, rather it's a disk.
And indeed it's a pretty big disk, it's a size of Jupiter's orbit around the sun.
Actually it's roughly spherical, it just looks like a disk in projection on the sky, of course.
You can also measure the sizes of stars, not just with the Hubble Space Telescope, but
with this technique called interferometry that I briefly discussed in connection with
radio telescopes, primarily in lecture 24.
Here I said that when waves come in from a star and reach two different telescopes,
the wave fronts reach those dishes at different times.
And whether you get constructive interference or destructive interference depends on exactly
the position of the star relative to the radio telescopes.
This also works at infrared and optical wavelengths, it's just harder to implement, okay?
It's easier with the radio waves because our atmosphere is sort of more steady, it doesn't
distort the radio waves as much, and they're easier to measure with the radio telescopes.
But you can do this in the infrared as well.
And so because the constructive and destructive interference depends on precisely where the
light is coming from, you can actually tell how big the star is by using measurements
of the star with an interferometer.
And this has been done at Palomar Observatory primarily, and here are some of the results.
Here's the sun, which looks kind of puny, and here are measured sizes of some giant stars.
Our sun is one solar radius in radius r sub sun.
Here's a star that's eight solar radii.
Here's another star that's 20 solar radii, and an even bigger giant, 50 solar radii,
and finally 90 solar radii.
Those are red giants.
The red super giants become even bigger, okay?
Well we can also, using this interferometric technique, see whether all stars are round.
And it turns out they're not all round.
Our sun is pretty round because it's not rotating very rapidly, but sun stars are rotating quite
rapidly and are distinctly oblate.
And here Altair, the brightest star in the constellation Aquila, the eagle, is distinctly
elongated along the equator, presumably because it's rapidly rotating.
So that's really cool that you can see the shapes of at least some of the nearest biggest
stars.
And in some cases the interferometric technique reveals dark spots and bright spots.
In other words, the stars are not uniformly bright throughout their entire surface.
They have bright and dark blotches.
Our sun has sunspots, which are dark blotches, but in some cases stars have vast regions that
look darker than surrounding regions.
And we think in some cases that's due to the formation of dust, little tiny particles
in the outer atmospheres of these red super giant stars.
Well we find that not all stars have a constant radius.
Some stars vary in their size.
And while they do that, they vary in brightness as well.
Their power changes, their luminosity changes, their distance doesn't change.
But if we view a changing luminosity from a fixed distance, the apparent brightness
will obviously vary as well.
And we see these variable stars.
Here's an excellent example of one of the first ones known.
It's called Myra in Cetus, the whale.
And here is the star viewed through binoculars when it was faint.
And there sometime later it looked much, much brighter than, say, these other surrounding
stars which are not so variable.
So this is what's called a long period variable.
It takes over a year to vary in brightness from bright to faint.
And here's a graph of its brightness variations measured by a whole crew, a big collection
of amateur astronomers spread throughout the world who do a great service to professional
astronomy by monitoring the brightnesses of some very important variable stars and reporting
them to other astronomers.
So here's the magnitude of the star plotted on this axis.
Remember small magnitudes mean bright.
So here's the star when it was bright.
It was fourth magnitude, easily visible to the naked eye.
And then a few hundred days later it dips down to below ninth magnitude.
And remember sixth magnitude is the faintest that you can see under good conditions with
the unaided eye.
When it comes back up, doesn't always reach the same maximum brightness.
Look at that.
This time around it was only about sixth magnitude at its brightest.
And then a couple hundred days later it became bright again and this time it was brighter
than before.
So this is sort of an unstable star that's varying in size and luminosity and it is varying
in an unstable way.
It's not even doing it with the same fixed pattern.
Some brightenings are brighter than others.
Sometimes when it's faint it's not as faint as at other times.
So this is an unstable star.
It's near the end of its life.
There's another type of variable star called a Cepheid variable which is really important.
We will encounter Cepheid variables again later in the course when we see how important
they are for determining the size and age of the universe.
Several questions of cosmology, the study of the structure and evolution of the universe
as a whole.
If you look at the apparent magnitude of a Cepheid variable over time, you notice that
over a period of just a few days, maybe five or six days, maybe ranging from one day all
the way up to a hundred days, different Cepheids do it in different amounts of time, but they
go from faint to bright rather rapidly and then they fade again more slowly.
This is a very distinct pattern or light curve and when you see a light curve like this,
you know that you've found a Cepheid variable star.
Now Polaris, the north star, actually consists of two stars at least, even three, there's
a fainter one as well.
It's what's called a binary or even a triple star system.
We will discuss binaries in the next lecture, but the bright component Polaris A with an
uppercase A happens to be a Cepheid variable star and it varies in brightness by only 15
percent over a four-day period.
So it doesn't undergo such vast undulations as some Cepheids do.
It's a short period Cepheid and it doesn't vary very much.
The longer period Cepheids vary a lot more and are more luminous, it turns out.
And this was discovered by the important early 20th century astronomer Henrietta Leavitt
shown in this photograph.
She studied a couple of satellite galaxies of our Milky Way galaxy known as the Magellanic
Clouds.
There is the large cloud of Magellan and the small cloud of Magellan.
You can see them nicely in the southern hemisphere of the Earth.
And they consist of stars orbiting our Milky Way galaxy but gravitationally bound to each
other in a collection of their own, what's called dwarf galaxies.
So all the stars of a given dwarf galaxy, either the large or small Magellanic Cloud,
are about at the same distance from us.
So let's take a look at close-ups of these clouds.
Here's the large Magellanic Cloud and you can see that it consists of many, many, many
faint stars all at about the same distance from us.
And here's the small Magellanic Cloud, again consisting of many, many, many stars all at
about the same distance from us.
210,000 light-years in the case of the small Magellanic Cloud, 170,000 light-years in the
case of the large Magellanic Cloud.
Will Henrietta Leavitt noticed a bunch of Cepheid variables in each of these clouds?
And she noticed that the apparently brighter Cepheid variables, those whose average brightness
is high, have longer periods of oscillation than those Cepheid variables whose average
brightness is low.
So the intrinsically brighter ones have longer periods than the intrinsically fainter ones.
Now I said that the apparently brighter ones have longer periods than the apparently fainter
ones, so how can we really tell that the intrinsically brighter ones have longer periods?
Well again, all the stars in a given cloud are at the same distance.
So differences in apparent brightness must correspond to differences in true luminosity,
in power.
That was the key.
That was the key insight that Henrietta Leavitt had, that all these stars are at the same
distance, so it doesn't even really matter what the distance is.
The apparently brighter ones that have longer periods of oscillation are intrinsically more
luminous than the ones that have short periods of oscillation.
And here is the famous period luminosity relationship that Leavitt discovered.
The more luminous Cepheid variables have longer periods of oscillation.
So if you've calibrated this relationship, you can go and find Cepheid variables in distant
galaxies like this one.
And here's a Hubble set of pictures of one Cepheid variable.
They're not very clear, but it was the best you could do, even with Hubble at that time.
And that Cepheid is varying in brightness.
And from the period, you can tell what its true average luminosity or power should be,
and from the apparent faintness of this star, you can deduce that it must be extremely far
away.
I'll discuss this more later, but this is how astronomers know that galaxies are so incredibly
far away, and this is how they determine the actual distances.
They measure the Cepheid variables, see how faint they appear to be, they know how bright
they really are, the intrinsic power from Leavitt's relationship, and hence you can
determine the distance.
Having determined star sizes, we can now go back and figure out the sizes of some of the
exoplanets found orbiting them.
Now recall from lecture 39 that some stars have a planet orbiting them, and it transits
across the disk of the star, as viewed from our line of sight, because the orbital plane
is nearly edge-on to our line of sight, so the planet passes in front of the star, and
conversely, there are times when the star passes in front of the planet.
During the transit, the light from the star decreases a little bit, because the planet
is covering part of the star.
And here you can see an excellent example of the dip in the star's apparent brightness
as the planet is transiting the star.
You can measure the amount of this dip from its depth.
You can get the size of the transiting planet relative to the size of the star, because
it's just the fractional area that's been blocked out.
That's the amount, the fractional decrease in brightness.
If you know the size of the star, and I told you in this lecture how we determine size
of the stars, then you directly get the size of the planet, because you know the relative
size of the planet and the star from the amount of decrease in the brightness of the star,
and you know the true size of the star using the methods that I just described, so then
you get the true size of the planet.
And this has been done, for example, in this particular case.
This is this hot Jupiter orbiting the star very close in.
And when you calculate its radius, you find that it's 1.6 times the radius of Jupiter.
Yet its mass is only 63% that of Jupiter.
You can get the mass from the Doppler-Wabble technique.
And in this particular case, you know the inclination angle.
It's zero.
Well, the inclination angle is 90 degrees, because otherwise it wouldn't be transiting.
It wouldn't be in the plane of our line of sight.
So you get accurate radii and masses that gives you a density of 0.21 grams per cubic
centimeter, way less than the density of water.
This is clearly a bloated planet.
It is so close to the star that the star's radiation is heating up the envelope, causing
it to be much more extended than it would otherwise have been.
And it also means that this planet must have formed far, far away from the star, because
there's no way it could have formed close to the star and been heated so much, because
already the atmosphere is bloating up and actually evaporating away.
Now, if we find an Earth-like transiting planet, as we hope will be done by the Kepler spacecraft,
again, by measuring the dip, the depth of the decrease in the star's brightness, you
get the relative size of the star and the planet.
If you then know the true size of the star through the techniques I've discussed in this
lecture, then you get the size of the planet.
And in the case of the Earth blocking the sun, if someone were to see that from the outside,
the dip would be only one hundredth of a percent.
But you don't know the size of the planet unless you know the size of the star whose
light is being blocked.
Once you know the size of the star, you can figure out the size of the planet as well.
It's through measurements like this that we hope to find and measure the sizes of many
terrestrial planets with the Kepler spacecraft.
