We have seen that the luminosity and surface temperature of a main sequence star, that
is a star in the prime of its life, are determined by the mass with which the star was initially
born.
The mass determines everything.
Now by using this fact and applying it to stars and clusters, we will see how the ages
of the stars in those clusters can be determined.
The ages of stars are obviously a fundamental aspect of their existence.
We want to know how old each star is in order to be able to see how stars evolve as they
age.
In this lecture I will also discuss how to determine the distances of stars that are too
far away to be measured using the trigonometric parallax method, so we'd like to find their
distances even if you can't use this blinking exercise to do so.
And finally I'll summarize the properties of the apparently brightest stars in the sky
and also of the nearest stars in the sky in order to see how typical the sun is among
all stars.
Well star clusters are gravitationally bound groupings of stars and stars often are found
in star clusters.
Stars seem to be sort of social creatures, not because they think about it and want to
be social, but they're often formed in binary systems and triple star systems and quadruple
systems and on a bigger scale they're often born in clusters of hundreds or even thousands
of stars.
There are two main types of clusters.
The first kind of cluster is called the open cluster.
It consists of a rather loosely bound set of stars from maybe a few dozen stars up to
a few thousand and they're not bound in a very tight sphere.
You can see in this photograph that they're kind of loosely aggregated and they don't
have a particularly spherical overall shape in this cluster.
That's an open cluster.
Sometimes open clusters are called galactic clusters.
I don't like that term because it can be confused with clusters of galaxies, but in any case
that's the way it goes.
In textbooks you will sometimes see them referred to in this way.
Here's another one that is even more loosely packed than the first one that I showed.
And you can see that in fact some of these stars might even escape from the cluster over
time because they're so loosely bound to the cluster.
We know of about a thousand open clusters in our Milky Way galaxy.
That's just a very rough number, but you can look in our galaxy and see them near and
far, some are more compressed than others, they have a variety of shapes and sizes.
The best known example can be easily seen with the naked eye and is a glorious sight
through binoculars.
That's the Pleiades or Seven Sisters.
And here you can see that five of the stars are really pretty bright.
Another two are somewhat fainter, but if your eyes are keen enough to see those two, well
you might be able to see an eighth or a ninth star as well.
So most people see five pretty easily and a few people can see up to a dozen.
Now this is a photograph through a telescope and a pretty long exposure and you can see
that those stars are embedded in a cloud of gas and dust, nebulosity.
It turns out that that is not the cloud from which the cluster was born, it just happens
to be passing through this cloud.
And with your naked eye and binoculars you won't see this cloud, but a deep exposure
like this does show it.
Star clusters of this type, the open clusters, often have young stars in them.
Indeed, there are very few old open clusters known.
And we think that that's because after they're formed they are gradually torn apart.
That is, stars gradually are ejected away from the cluster as they wander around through
a galaxy and encounter other stars, you know, there's this gravitational slingshot effect
that can cause the stars to become unbound from the cluster.
The clusters appear in spiral galaxies like this one and usually in the spiral arms of
the galaxies.
Now I'll discuss galaxies more formally later, but here's a representative galaxy like our
Milky Way and it has these two main arms and some smaller arms as well.
And a lot of these bright regions that you see here are open clusters.
They tend to form where there's a lot of gas and dust and that happens to be in the
arms of spiral galaxies, so you see lots of open clusters in the arms.
Those that are not in the arms are in the disk, the plane of the spiral galaxy.
Now contrasting to the open clusters are globular star clusters, which are much more massive
clusters, much more spherical and dense and they contain hundreds of thousands to in some
cases a few million stars.
Here's a great example of a globular star cluster and you can see where the name comes
from.
It's like a glob of stars and just really densely packed in the middle and having a much more
spherically symmetric distribution than the open clusters do.
There are fewer globular clusters in our Milky Way galaxy.
There's only about 150, 170 known and they tend to occur not in the plane of our spiral
galaxy but in what's called the halo.
If you look at our galaxy at certain wavelengths, you can see toward the central region, the
bulge here and you can see part of the plane, the disk.
Here we're looking toward the central part of our galaxy from the outskirts.
We kind of live near the outskirts of our galaxy and it turns out that the globular clusters
unlike the open clusters live out here in the halo of our galaxy, not in the disk or
plane of our galaxy.
So they clearly have a different origin.
Some galaxies, some very massive so-called elliptical galaxies like this one, M87, host
thousands, in this case something like 20,000 globular clusters.
Almost every one of these little slightly fuzzy blobs you see here is a globular cluster
belonging to this exceptionally massive elliptical galaxy.
Well the important thing about a cluster, first important thing about a cluster is that
all of the stars in the cluster are at the same distance from us or roughly the same
distance.
Let's think about this.
The stars aren't exactly at the same distance from us, otherwise they'd be sort of right
on top of each other and they're not, they're not all colliding.
But it's kind of like you're looking at a football stadium filled with people from the
perspective of a blimp, you know you're up in the blimp or in an airplane and you're
looking down at the football stadium and to a good first approximation all of the people
are the same distance from you because the differences in their distance from you are
minor compared to the overall separation.
You know one of them might be a few feet farther away, another one might be a few yards
closer but compared to the couple of miles above which you view this football stadium
from an airplane say those distances, those differences in distances are minor.
So if you plot the temperature luminosity diagram of a cluster but you use the apparent
magnitude of the stars instead of their luminosity, suppose you don't know the distance of the
cluster, you don't know the distance so you don't know the luminosity of the stars but
instead you plot their apparent magnitude or their apparent brightness on the vertical
axis versus their spectral class OBAFGKML or equivalently their surface temperature
going from high surface temperatures for the O type stars down to low surface type temperatures
for the M and L stars, you will get a well-defined main sequence and that's because all of these
stars are at about the same distance and we know from the inverse square law of light
that the apparent brightness is the luminosity divided by 4 pi times the distance squared.
So if you play around with that equation, you know then that the luminosity of a given
star is 4 pi times the distance squared times the apparent brightness but the distances
of all the stars are the same.
So the distance becomes just a proportionality constant, L becomes proportional to B the apparent
brightness.
So stars having differing apparent brightness also have different luminosity by the same
factor.
A star that appears 4 times as bright as another star is intrinsically 4 times as luminous
because they're both at the same distance so you don't have to worry about the distance.
It becomes a constant of proportionality.
So if you look at the apparent magnitude of the main sequence say of G type stars on
the main sequence and you compare with the known absolute magnitude or luminosity of
main sequence G type stars as determined from the temperature luminosity diagram of nearby
stars whose distances can be measured using trigonometric parallax, well that difference
in apparent magnitude versus absolute magnitude or the factor by which the apparent brightness
is less than the luminosity tells you the distance of that star that G star and hence
of the whole cluster because all the stars are at the same distance and you've figured
out the distance of one or more of them by looking at how much the main sequences are
shifted in this cluster from that of nearby stars whose distances are known and in such
a way you get the distance of the cluster.
So that's great.
You can tell pretty easily how far away clusters are.
Now let's use this fact to study the clusters some more and to determine the ages of the
stars in the cluster.
Not only are all the stars at the same distance and you now know that distance so you now
know the luminosities of the main sequence stars within it but also all those stars formed
from the same cloud of gas, the same nebula that collapsed and fragmented into a whole
bunch of stars, a bunch of pockets that collapsed or contracted into stars.
So it's the same stuff that made all of the stars in the cluster.
So all of them had initially the same chemical composition.
What they differed in was mass.
A given cluster will form a bunch of low mass stars, some intermediate mass stars and
a smaller number of high mass stars.
The massive stars are harder to form than the lower mass stars.
But there's a range of masses, that's the important thing.
For a sufficiently massive cluster you have a range of masses and if you've got a lot
of stars in that cluster you can assume that initially the cluster was born with stars
spanning all the way from O type main sequence stars and down to K, M and L main sequence
stars.
So there's a range of masses.
Now that range of masses translates into a range of luminosities and the luminosity as
we found out in the previous lecture is proportional to mass to the fourth power.
So the more massive stars are the more luminous main sequence stars and the less massive stars
are the less luminous main sequence stars.
And those of low mass are a lot less luminous than those of high mass.
So we found out last time that the massive stars use up their fuel very quickly and burn
out.
They turn into something else.
We'll discuss what they turn into in future lectures.
For now it's suffice us to say that they leave the main sequence.
Once they've used up their mass as fuel for nuclear reactions they leave the main sequence.
Now if you know the luminosity with which a star is shining, the number of ergs per second
that it's emitting, the number of ants doing push-ups okay, the number of flies doing push-ups
I should say, then you know the rate at which fuel is being used up.
In the sense you know the rate at which a candle is burning.
If you walk into a room and see a candle that's halfway down from its initial height and you
know the rate at which it's using up wax, simply walking in the room you can estimate
how long the candle has been burning, right?
If you know the candle's initial height and you know the rate at which it's using up
the wax, the measurement of how tall the candle is when you walk into the room tells you
its age.
So in a similar way if we know the rate at which stars use up their fuel, that is we
know the rate at which the candles burn, and we look at which stars have burnt out and
which stars have not yet left the main sequence, we can figure out how long the cluster has
been around because it's like the wick of a candle burning down.
Let's look at the main sequence in a temperature luminosity diagram.
Initially the main sequence was populated by stars going from O type massive stars down
through B, A, F, G, K, M, L from high mass to low mass, okay?
Now the massive stars burn out and turn into something else.
Turns out they become red super giants, but I'll talk about that later.
The point is they leave the main sequence, they turn off of the main sequence sooner
than the less massive stars.
Next, the less massive stars turn off of the main sequence.
Then the progressively less massive stars turn off the main sequence.
All of the stars formed at the same time from the same stuff, they only differ in mass,
so the only thing that is different among these stars is how long they can live on the
main sequence, and the massive luminous stars have short lives, whereas the low luminosity,
low mass stars have long lives.
So you go and you look at a cluster, plot its temperature luminosity diagram, and see
that all the O and B and A type stars might be missing, for example, and the F, G, K,
M, and L stars are still there.
That means the cluster is old enough to have allowed sufficient time for the O, B, and
A type stars to burn out, to turn into some other kinds of stars, whereas the F, G, K,
and L's, which live longer, are still around.
Well that means the cluster is that age at which the O, B, and A's have burnt out, but
the others have not yet burnt out.
If another cluster doesn't have main sequence stars of type F or G even, and only has K
and M stars, you know that it's even older, because more time had to have passed for that
main sequence to burn down, like the wick of the candle burning down.
It's a nearly perfect analogy, not perfect, because as I've said several times, I think
no analogy can be perfect, otherwise it's describing the very phenomenon that you're
trying to explain.
So O type stars live for just a few million years.
If you see a cluster that still has O type main sequence stars in it, it can't be more
than a few million years old, because otherwise they would have burnt out.
The sun lives for about 10 billion years on the main sequence, so if you see a cluster
that doesn't have G type stars like the sun on the main sequence, it's got to be at least
10 billion years old, because that's how long it takes for those stars to burn out.
M type stars can live more than 100 billion years, even a trillion years, so indeed the
universe isn't old enough to have burnt out the original M type main sequence stars that
formed.
So this is the key point.
The turn off point of the main sequence on a temperature luminosity diagram gives the
age of the cluster and hence of the individual stars in that cluster, and that's fantastic.
It turns out to be difficult to determine the ages of stars that are not in clusters,
and you can do it in a crude sort of way, but the ones in clusters you can measure much
more accurately.
Let me show you some examples.
Here are temperature luminosity diagrams of a bunch of clusters.
In all of the ones shown here, the O type main sequence stars are missing, so in fact
all of these clusters here are at least a few million years old, old enough to have burnt
out the O type main sequence stars.
This one here, NGC 2362 and H and Chi Perciai, they have B type stars, so they're somewhat
older but still pretty young because if they were older, then those B type stars would
have burnt out and you would have only had A type stars in below.
Still older clusters don't have A type stars, their main sequence turns off at F type, and
even older clusters have a main sequence turn off point which is at G type stars.
Here's a very old cluster where the turn off point is at around G8 or so, and that suggests
that this cluster here is maybe 5 billion years old or so.
Let's consider H and Chi Perciai, a young cluster.
It actually consists of two clusters as shown here through binoculars.
These are pretty young clusters and you can tell because there aren't O type stars, so
they're at least a few million years old, but there are some B type stars, so these
are clusters that are not more than a few tens of millions of years old.
These are young open star clusters.
An old open star cluster such as M67 whose temperature luminosity diagram is shown here
has a main sequence turn off point that's roughly between F0 and K0, it's somewhere in
the F star range.
The F0s are the hot F stars, F1s, 2s, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 are progressively cooler F
stars, and then you get to G0, the hottest G stars.
The main sequence turn off point of M67 is somewhere around F7 or something, and knowing
the luminosity of F7 stars, you can tell how long this cluster has been around, because
all the more luminous stars whose luminosities you also know have already burnt out, and so
you can tell how long the wick of the candle has been burning down.
Now, the stars that are no longer on the main sequence have turned into other kinds of stars,
giant stars and white dwarfs and stuff, I'll talk about them later.
The point here really is that you can determine the age of the cluster from the main sequence
turn off point.
We find that most open clusters are young, some are quite old like that one I showed
you that's about 5 billion years old, but the oldest clusters we know of are the globular
clusters.
Here's this beautiful one that I showed you earlier.
The globular clusters have main sequence turn off points that are very low.
For example, here's M3, it's a globular cluster, and its main sequence turn off point is at
around G2 or so.
Since main sequence G2 stars live about 10 billion years, this cluster is roughly 10
billion years old.
Now this is where when you're doing the tailed calculations, you do have to take into account
the initial chemical composition, because that does alter the stars' lives a little bit.
The main effect is the mass, but when you do these calculations in detail, a majority
of the globular clusters, these guys here, are found to be at least 10 billion years
old, and some are 12 to 13 billion years old.
Indeed, the globular clusters are the oldest discrete objects whose ages we've reliably
measured, and they set a lower limit to the age of the universe, because obviously the
universe can't be any younger than its contents.
So if you have some stars that are 12 or 13 billion years old, the universe had better
be at least that old.
So that's a great thing.
We know how to determine the ages of stars by looking at least at the stars in globular
clusters.
Now let's use the temperature luminosity diagram to help us determine the distances of stars
that are too far away for the trigonometric parallax method to work.
This new method is called spectroscopic parallax.
Parallax simply means you're measuring a distance, and in this case, you're going to
measure a distance from the spectrum.
Assume that you know the temperature luminosity diagram of nearby stars whose distances have
been determined through trigonometric parallax.
Here it is.
Now let's say you look at a distant star where the trigonometric parallax technique failed.
It's just too far away to yield a reliable distance.
Well you can get a spectrum of that star, and from the spectrum you can tell the spectral
type, O, B, A, F, G, K, M, or L.
You can also, from the details of the spectrum, tell whether the star is a main sequence star,
a red giant, a white dwarf, a super giant.
I won't go into the details, but the exact analysis of the spectrum, the strengths of
the lines and their widths, how much they're broadened by motions of atoms in the atmosphere
of the star, those are all affected by the size and the gravity of the star.
And so you can tell the star's so-called luminosity class, whether it's a super giant, a giant,
a main sequence star, a white dwarf.
Knowing the spectral type and the luminosity class, you can see where it falls on the temperature
luminosity diagram.
For example, you might find a star that's just like the sun, it's a G2 main sequence
star, but it appears really faint.
Comparing it with the known luminosity of the sun and using the inverse square law of
light, you get its distance, presto.
Or suppose you find another star that's a K-type star, but it's a super giant.
Well you know the absolute luminosity of nearby K-type super giants.
You compare that known luminosity with the observed apparent brightness of the star whose
distance you're trying to figure out, and you use the inverse square law of light to
get the distance.
It's great.
That's how you get the distances of more distant stars from their spectrum.
It's called spectroscopic parallax.
Now there is a minor complication that is actually quite important.
You might think it's minor, but it's important if you want to get accurate distances of stars.
And that complication is that there's gas and dust in between the stars, the so-called
interstellar medium.
You can see it in this photograph of the Milky Way.
There are these dark blotches, which I've mentioned several times, are clouds of gas
and dust that partially at least block the light of the stars behind them.
They dim that light because some of the photons get eaten by the dust particles or scattered
away from the line of sight.
This is called interstellar extinction.
You're extinguishing part of the light on its way from the star to us.
And so the star appears dimmer than it should have appeared.
Given its distance, it should have appeared a certain brightness, but some of the light
was taken away by this dust and gas, so it appears dimmer than it should have.
If you don't take this into account and you use the inverse square law, you will deduce
that the star is farther away than it really is because you will attribute its entire dimness
to distance, whereas part of its dimness is actually attributed to this interstellar
extinction.
Fortunately, there's a way of measuring the extinction.
A star that is dimmed by the absorption and scattering of light by dust and gas along
the line of sight is also reddened.
It's made redder.
The overall spectrum becomes deficient in blue photons relative to red photons.
This is not a red shifting effect.
Rather, it's a reddening effect analogous to that of the setting sun.
When you look at the setting sun as it gets lower and lower in the sky, we've already
discussed how molecules of air scatter preferentially the blue light, and dust also scatters and
absorbs preferentially the blue light, leaving the star progressively redder.
In this case, the sun progressively redder as its light goes through more and more of
the atmosphere.
The setting sun looks not only dim but red.
From the amount of this reddening and from the known spectrum of the sun, you can figure
out how much it has been dimmed, and similarly, you can do the same exercise for stars.
You can see how red they look.
You know they're true color because you know they're spectral class, and you can then
account for this dimming effect and get, therefore, a more accurate distance.
Finally, let me ask how typical the sun is.
Well, we've already mentioned that the sun is a single star, and most stars are in binary
or multiple systems.
So in that sense, the sun we already know is not all that typical.
However, let's move on and focus more on its intrinsic properties of the sun itself,
not whether it's in a binary system.
So let's plot the temperature luminosity diagrams of two sets of stars.
Let's start with the apparently brightest stars in the sky.
If you plot their luminosity or absolute visual magnitude on the vertical axis and their spectral
type on the horizontal axis, here's the sun down here, a G2 main sequence star.
And the brightest stars in the sky, at least most of them, are more luminous than the sun.
So it looks like the sun is a real pipsqueak weakling of a star because most of the bright
stars are intrinsically more luminous.
You see them because they're luminous.
They might even be quite far away, but because they're so luminous, they're still easy to
see.
So the very brightest stars are typically far away, but luminous, and they still appear
bright because they're so incredibly powerful.
But if you now go and say, all right, let me plot the temperature luminosity diagram
of the stars that are, say, within 30 light years of the sun, that is the nearby stars,
you find that most of them are dimmer than the sun.
Most of them are K and M dwarfs that are intrinsically less powerful than the sun.
A few are more powerful, Sirius, Altair, Procyon are more luminous than the sun, but most stars
are less luminous than the sun if you take a complete census of stars within, say, 30
or 50 light years from the sun.
So the sun is a G star, it's in the middle of the main sequence, but it's actually more
massive and more luminous than most stars, because most are K and M stars, but it's not
as massive and luminous as the most massive and luminous stars, they're stars that completely
dwarf the sun.
Nevertheless, the sun is more luminous and massive than the majority of the little pipsqueak
stars.
So overall, the sun is pretty much of a garden variety star, it sits in about the middle
of the main sequence, it has sort of the average mass and the average luminosity, most stars
are less massive and less luminous, but some are more massive and more luminous.
In the next lecture, we will understand how it is that stars like the sun shine, and why
the different masses correspond to different luminosities.
