In the previous lecture, I discussed stars of such low mass that the temperatures in
the cores are not high enough to allow normal hydrogen fusion to occur.
These are the so-called brown dwarfs, failed stars, but they're not completely failed
because deuterium fusion does occur for a short time.
Well now let's get back to the sun and consider its evolution.
What will happen to it in the future as it ages?
For about 9 or 10 billion years, the sun sits on the main sequence.
That is, it fuses hydrogen into helium through the proton-proton chain, releasing energy along
the way, and it's about halfway through its normal main sequence lifetime.
It's about 4.6 billion years old, so it's a middle-aged star.
The hydrogen that fuses into helium releases energy because the helium product is slightly
less massive than the original four protons or hydrogen nuclei that went into making it,
and that mass deficit gets converted into energy, it's just E equals mc squared.
And it's a huge amount of energy despite the fact that only seven tenths of a percent
of the mass of the original hydrogen got lost or used up in binding energy to form the helium
nucleus.
Well, what will happen when the sun starts running out of hydrogen fuel in its center?
What the sun will do in its future will be typical of what other low mass stars do in
their future.
So by studying the sun as a representative star, we can understand other stars as well.
Conversely, if we look at other stars at various stages of their lives, we can come to an
understanding of what our sun will do.
It's sort of like if you want to study how a typical person evolves during their lives.
You can study one person and assume they're typical, and from studies of that one person,
you deduce how the rest of them work, but it takes less time and you get a more representative
sample if you study a bunch of people at different stages of their lives, babies, adolescents,
adults, older people, and you say, OK, the babies of today will transform themselves
into adolescents and then adults and then older people, and this will be representative
of how humans as a class, as a species, evolve during their lives.
You can make that kind of a study in a short amount of time by looking at groups of people
and you get a much more representative group than if you just choose one person and study
his or her life for 70 or 100 years.
So we can learn about our sun as a representative star by looking at other stars in different
stages of their evolution.
We can also use the laws of physics and try to understand how the stars will evolve and
how the sun will evolve based on the nuclear reactions that occur in gases and the pressures
and temperatures associated with them and so on.
The study of the physics of gases is a pretty advanced state.
We know how gases behave pretty well, so we're pretty confident about the broad overview
that I'm going to give you in this lecture.
The details might still be a bit shaky, but the overall concepts were pretty certain of.
So here's a temperature luminosity diagram where you see the main sequence and the sun
is sitting on the main sequence.
Stars having different initial masses are at different places on the main sequence.
The initial mass with which the star is born dictates where it lands on the main sequence.
Here are the low mass stars, intermediate mass stars, and then the massive stars, the
most luminous ones of all.
As the sun evolves, it'll gradually brighten ever so slowly, and the reason for that is
that it'll be gradually using up the hydrogen in its core, turning it into helium.
So for every four initial protons, there will end up only one helium nucleus, so the number
of particles per unit volume in the middle of the sun, that is the number density, will
gradually decrease.
Well, pressure is proportional to the product of number density, number of particles per
unit volume, and temperature.
If the number density is decreasing because hydrogen is forming into helium, to compensate
and maintain the same pressure, the temperature has to rise, so the temperature in the core
of the sun will gradually rise.
And that'll mean that the protons will come closer together as they're all zooming around.
There will be more chances for the strong nuclear force to grab hold of them and fuse
them, and so the fusion rate will increase and the luminosity of the sun will slightly
rise.
Let me show you how that works, or at least how much it will rise if I look at this animation
here.
The sun right now has a central temperature of about 15 million degrees, and it has a
luminosity of one solar luminosity.
If the temperature rises by a few million degrees, the luminosity will rise as well.
Not a lot.
I've exaggerated the effect a little bit right here.
So in a few hundred million years, the earth will be substantially warmer because the sun's
luminosity or power will have increased a little bit, and the oceans will start boiling
away.
Indeed, in about a billion years, the oceans will be gone, and the earth will be bone dry.
Worldwide it will be like a scorching desert.
We'll have to do something about life on earth if we want to survive.
We'll have to somehow find ways to make water and store it deep underground, or I don't
know, I don't have the imagination right now to know what we should do, or maybe we
should move off the planet entirely.
In any case, these are all very long timescales, and if we don't do something about the threat
of a devastating comet or asteroid collision with earth, that'll actually kill us first.
So there's a number of cosmic catastrophes we need to worry about, and the oceans boiling
away, I think, is on a longer timescale than the comet and asteroid threat.
Maybe there will be a compensating effect that'll keep the temperatures lower than anticipated.
We know that a compensating effect of an inverse type must have occurred when the earth was
a lot younger.
Because when the earth was a lot younger, billions of years ago, the sun's luminosity
was about 30% lower than it is now.
Remember the luminosity is gradually increasing ever so slightly.
So billions of years ago it was 30% lower.
That means that the earth's temperatures would have been significantly lower than they are
right now, and in fact the earth should have been in a deep freeze, because with significantly
lower temperatures, the oceans basically freeze over after a while.
So if the earth were in a deep freeze, we wouldn't have the sorts of life that we see
back then, 3 billion, 2 billion, 1 billion years ago.
There are certain forms of life that we can tell existed in relatively warm conditions.
So something was keeping the earth significantly warmer billions of years ago when the sun's
luminosity was lower, and we think that may have been a more pronounced greenhouse effect
on the earth.
That's what kept it warmer.
That's the speculation.
So maybe in the future when the sun will be too hot and the luminosity will be too high,
then maybe there will be some other compensating effect that will keep the earth's temperature
low, but without that compensating effect, the earth will become hot, the oceans will
boil away, and it will be a rather inhospitable place.
What will happen in about 5 billion years when the sun reaches the end of its main sequence
life?
Well, it will have built up a helium core of about 10 to 15% of its total mass.
That's the part of the star where the temperatures are high enough for nuclear fusion to be sustained.
You have such high temperatures only in the central 10 to 15% of the star's mass, not
in the whole thing.
So in that core where a helium core will have been built up, nuclear reactions will stop
because the helium nuclei repel each other much more than protons do.
Where helium nuclei have two protons each, so the electric repulsion of helium nuclei
is a lot greater than the electric repulsion of protons, and you need higher temperatures
to get the helium nuclei sufficiently close together to fuse through action of the strong
nuclear force.
So for a while at least, there will be no nuclear reactions in the core, and yet light
will be coming out from the helium core.
It goes from hot regions to cold regions, heat diffuses out, so the helium core will
have no choice but to slowly, gravitationally contract to replenish the supply of energy
lost to its surroundings.
That contracting helium core will also heat up because gravity is doing work on the gas
during the contraction.
It's pulling on it, compressing it.
A good analogy is a pump and a bicycle tire or a basketball.
If you compress the air in the basketball or the bicycle tire, that air heats up.
You can feel it if you just put your hand on the rubber, the heat from the air is slowly
diffusing through the rubber, and you can actually feel it.
You've been compressing the air and doing work on it to heat it.
In a similar way, gravity compressing the core heats that core, and you end up with
a structure that looks like this, a contracting helium core that's getting ever hotter due
to the gravitational contraction, and a hydrogen burning shell around it.
This is a region where the temperatures are sufficiently high to fuse hydrogen into helium,
so that's adding to the mass of this contracting helium core, but meanwhile the core itself
is getting hotter and heating the region surrounding it, so what happens is that the hydrogen burning
shell feels the heat of the core and starts fusing hydrogen more quickly than it would
otherwise have done.
It's being in a sense propelled by extra energy from this contracting helium core.
So the hydrogen burning shell kind of goes wild.
It starts producing energy at a much greater rate than it normally would have, and that
energy gets soaked up by the surrounding layers which respond by expanding.
So the contracting helium core leads to an expansion of much of the rest of the star.
The expanding atmosphere of the star cools, and expanding gas cools for the same reason
that a gas that's contracting heats up.
So as the star expands and cools, its color shifts from sort of whitish, in the case of
the sun, to more yellowish, to orange, to red, because the peak of the spectrum shifts
to shorter, shifts to longer and longer wavelengths.
So as the sun bloats out like this, its color will change, it'll become a giant star, and
it'll become more orange or red.
So we will then call it a red giant.
It'll be much more luminous than it is right now because of this very actively fusing hydrogen
burning shell.
It's just kind of going wild.
So the sun might become a hundred times more powerful than it is right now, and earth will
be fried.
I mean, we will be completely devastated by then, because with a hundred times more powerful
sun, boy, there's not going to be any moisture left on earth.
Indeed, the sun will become so big in its red giant stage that it might come out even
out to the orbit of Mercury.
So it won't quite reach the earth, but it'll be a very big star at that point.
The structure of the sun will then be like this.
A small helium core with a hydrogen burning shell around it, vigorously burning, and an
expanding, bloated envelope of hydrogen.
Plotting it on the temperature luminosity diagram, we see that here's the main sequence.
Stars sit on the main sequence relatively unchanging for a long time.
They change, as I said before, they change perhaps by a few tens of percent in luminosity.
But then when the hydrogen runs out in the core, and the core turns into helium, and
we have this hydrogen burning shell, that's when the star's structure really starts changing
fast, and it evolves into a red giant.
Its surface temperature goes down, so it becomes more like a K star, and its luminosity rises,
because its radius is rising, so the thing will be a big, huge star more orange or red
than it is right now.
That's what we call a red giant.
Well, eventually this slowly contracting helium core will reach temperatures of around 100
million degrees, and at those temperatures, three helium nuclei can come together and
form a carbon nucleus through this process of nuclear fusion.
Once you've done that, it's relatively easy for the carbon nucleus to pick up another
helium nucleus and turn into oxygen.
Both of those reactions, the formation of carbon and the formation of oxygen, liberate
still more energy.
So at that point, the star, the sun, will have two sources of energy, the helium-fusing
core and a hydrogen-burning shell around it.
This fusion of helium into carbon and oxygen doesn't last very long, it lasts only about
a million years or so, and that's because each fusion reaction doesn't give all that
much energy compared to the original proton fusion reactions.
Per reaction, they give a lot more energy than when you fuse helium together, and yet
the star is a very luminous star at this point.
It's a red giant star, so it's producing energy at a prodigious amount and a prodigious rate,
and so it has to do a very large number of reactions per second in order to produce that
luminosity, and so the helium gets used up rather quickly in only about a million years,
and a carbon-oxygen core forms.
So then you have this carbon-oxygen core, its temperatures aren't high enough for fusion,
so it begins to contract just as the helium core, its predecessor, had done.
That contraction heats the carbon-oxygen core, liberating energy to a helium-burning shell
around it, causing the helium-burning shell to burn even faster, that is to fuse even
faster than before.
That causes the hydrogen-burning shell to fuse even faster than before, and this means
that the star produces really a large amount of energy per unit time.
That means its luminosity rises really a lot, and that energy pushes out the outer envelope
of the star even more, causing it to become an even bigger red giant.
So at this point, the star becomes a really huge red giant and might even encompass Earth's
orbit.
That's how big the sun might become.
The calculations are still a little bit uncertain as to just how big the sun will become in
about half a billion years when it becomes this red giant and an even bigger red giant.
So different stars spend different amounts of time reaching and staying in the red giant
phase.
It goes from something like a hundred million years to a few billion years, and for the sun,
that stage, the red giant stage, will last about half a billion years or so.
Okay, well at this point, with the star being so big, its outer atmosphere is barely back
to the star.
That is, gravity is weak way out there because the outer atmosphere is so far from the star,
and the star becomes unstable.
It can start losing that outer atmosphere through a steady wind.
The radiation is pushing out on the gases and making them move away from the star.
So we call this a stellar wind, kind of like the solar wind.
But also, the star can become unstable sort of pulsationally.
It starts oscillating, and some of these pulsations actually eject the outer parts of the star
in a relatively nonviolent way that I call a cosmic burp.
Okay, so the outer 10 or 20 percent of the star's mass can be ejected, and there can
be many such ejection episodes, which together with the steadier winds, gradually erode away
at the star's atmosphere, exposing more and more of the inner core.
Well, what you get after one of these burps, one of these ejections, is an expanding shell
of ionized gas, of gas that's being ionized by the photons from the hot central core, which
is a very small object at this point.
And those expanding shells of gas can glow and form a disk or a ring as pictured here.
And this is an example of what's known as a planetary nebula.
There is the dying central star.
It's ejecting these shells of gas, and they're glowing.
Here's another one.
Look at the beautiful structure in this one.
There's the dying star, and here are these shells of ejected gas.
And the gas can clump up, as was the case in this particular planetary nebula.
Now, the term planetary nebula came from the 19th century when astronomers using small
telescopes looked at these little disks of gas, didn't know physically what they are,
but they said, oh, they kind of look like planets, but they're clearly nebulae.
You can tell from the spectrum that there's ionized gases there, so these are not planets.
So astronomers called them planetary nebulae.
Even in cases where the nebulae look like rings, such as in this one, the famous ring
nebula in the constellation Lyra, some of the early telescopes astronomers used didn't
distinguish the ring very well.
And so even the ring-like objects were called planetary nebulae.
Here's another example.
This one actually is about as big as the full moon is in the sky.
Well these things have nothing to do with planets.
This is not the disk from which planets form.
Again, this is just the term that early astronomers used.
Why do these objects glow so much?
Well, if you look at this diagram, you see the hot central star.
It's hot because this is the inner regions of the star, and that's where there's a lot
of hydrogen and helium fusing in these shells surrounding the core.
And a lot of ultraviolet photons get emitted.
Those ultraviolet photons can ionize the cloud that's being ejected away from the star.
So I'm going to illustrate that here by saying that I'm an electron bound to the nucleus
of an atom.
There's the nucleus there, that ball, and I'm bound, but then I absorb an ultraviolet
photon from the central star, the central core.
I absorb that energy, and I become ionized.
I'm no longer bound to that nucleus.
I'm just sort of freely wandering around.
Now eventually, I'll find a nucleus that has a positive charge, and I'll be attracted
to it, and I can jump into a bound state releasing a photon in that process, because
I went from a free state to a bound state, one of lower energy, so I had to get rid of
a photon.
I emitted a photon.
And then I can cascade down to progressively lower levels by emitting more and more photons.
In this case, I emitted first a red photon, and then a green photon, because the levels
that I jumped between corresponded to energies, in this hypothetical case, of a red photon
and a green photon.
So the energy of the ultraviolet photon that ionized me got transformed into a bunch of
photons that come out from this nebula, causing the nebula to glow.
The other way in which the nebula can glow is if an electron flying around in this nebula
hits me, it can, through that collision, knock me into a higher level.
So someone in the audience can kick me up to a higher level like this, up to a higher
electronic energy level, and then I come back down and emit a photon in the process.
So the kinetic energy of electrons flying around and hitting other electrons bound in
atoms can transform that energy to emitted light.
And that's why the nebula glows.
You can illustrate this process here through this diagram.
The photon comes in, ionizes the atom.
The electron is just wandering around on its own now.
And then it meets up with another proton, say, releases some energy, and then cascades down
to the lower energy levels emitting photons along the way.
Or as I said, a collision can knock an electron from one bound state to another bound state,
and then in coming back down, that electron can emit some light.
So the spectrum of the gas might look like this.
Here are spectra of many different gases, hydrogen, helium, sodium, mercury.
But in this case, the important point is that these are emission lines, not absorption lines,
because the gas is emitting the light.
It's not absorbing light from within.
It's not like a normal star.
It's a glowing nebula now, not the photosphere of a normal star.
Well, by taking advantage of the fact that the nebula is emitting mostly in a few strong
emission lines, amateur astronomers have taken some stunningly beautiful photographs of planetary
nebulae.
There are a few of them, in this case by Richard Crisp.
Now you can take some very nice photographs if you don't take into account these emission
lines that I'm talking about.
But Richard Crisp and some of his colleagues have taken beautiful photographs by knowing
that the nebula emits in certain emission lines and using that fact to their advantage.
What they've done is they've taken photographs by using filters that pass only the light of
a particular emission line.
So the light from that line goes through the filter, everything else gets blocked.
All other forms of light get blocked.
And by taking several different photographs through filters that allow light from different
emission lines through.
They get the structure of the nebula as seen in these different emission lines.
And if you then combine all the photographs, you can get a truly stunning picture like
the ones that I just showed.
Here's a photograph not of a planetary nebula, but of the remnant of an exploding star, the
crab nebula.
And it was made by a similar process.
And to illustrate that, here is a spectrum of the crab nebula where we plot brightness
versus wavelength.
And you can see these emission lines.
By isolating the light in the emission lines, here's one of doubly ionized oxygen.
Here's an image in hydrogen light.
Here's an image in singly ionized nitrogen.
And here's an image in sulfur that's singly ionized.
You combine all those images, then you get these stunning photographs.
And I think they're truly marvelous.
Well as the nebula spreads out, it fades.
Over a few tens of thousands of years, maybe 50,000 years, it spreads so much that it fades
out and you can't see it very easily.
But there can be many such ejection episodes over the course of a million years or so spent
in the planetary nebula or in this stage where the star is able to emit a planetary nebula.
And indeed, you can see in photographs evidence for multiple ejections.
Here's one ejection near the central star and here's an earlier ejection which has spread
out more.
Here's another star where you can see a very complicated ejection.
But if you take a deeper picture, the central part of this picture corresponded to the picture
I just showed you, but you can see that farther out there's this complex structure indicating
previous ejections earlier in time.
And again, amateur astronomers can take really stunning photographs of these planetary nebulae,
in some cases even better than photographs that I've seen taken with space telescopes.
Here's the Ring Nebula in Lyra, photographed by Jeff Collins.
This is a normal photograph through broad filters, allowing lots of different light to
pass.
But if you then supplemented this with a photograph taken through a filter that only allows hydrogen
emission lines to pass, you get this amazing outer structure which can be further enhanced
through photographic processing, digital processing, to show this beautiful flower-like
arrangement of gases corresponding to previous sets of ejections or planetary nebula formation
stages in the slow death of this single aging star down here.
Here's the corresponding Spitzer infrared photograph, and I actually think that the
amateur astronomer has a more stunning photograph than that of Spitzer.
Now, of course, Hubble does provide really great resolution or clarity.
So if we look at some of the Hubble photographs, we can see really amazing structure in some
of these planetary nebulae.
All sorts of little knots and things were clumps of gas apparently collected and were
rammed into by other gases moving more quickly.
So here, in fact, is an animation of a planetary nebula forming, and it's ejecting gases.
But then later on, a more rapid wind, a more rapid ejection occurs, and it compresses the
gases of the previous ejection, forming the overall shape and structure of this nebula,
and giving rise to these comet-like clumps or streaks that look really cool.
They look like little teardrops or little comets.
So you get with Hubble this kind of resolution that allows you to see those kinds of things.
The other thing that's fun to see is evidence for bipolar ejection in the deaths of stars.
Some planetary nebulae have not a spherically symmetric appearance, but more an appearance
that suggests an axis of symmetry like this one or that one.
Look at that.
There's an axis of symmetry and the ejection occurs along that axis, not in a spherically
symmetric way.
So what we think is going on is that there's a disc of gas here which is preventing the
gas from expanding very much along the direction of the disc, but perpendicular to it, it can
expand more easily.
And here in this photograph, you can almost convince yourself that you see the disc that's
blocking expansion in this direction and allowing it in the perpendicular direction.
And that's one of my favorite of these planetary nebulae that show this bipolar ejection.
We think that the disc and the bipolar ejection are formed when you have a binary system and
one star gets older and expands into a red giant, starts transferring material to its
companion, actually envelops the companion, so now both stars are inside a common envelope
as that common envelope contracts, a disc forms, and then when that star decides to become
a planetary nebulae, the ejection occurs predominantly along the axis of the disc.
So that's how you get these bipolar ejections.
Our own sun probably will not form a bipolar planetary nebulae, rather it'll probably
form a more or less spherically symmetrical one.
We don't know exactly what it'll look like, but I'm hoping that it'll be a really pretty
one so that future aliens looking at our dying sun will say, wow, that's a real beauty.
