In
the previous lecture I described how some types of white dwarfs may undergo a thermonuclear
runaway at the end of their lives, literally blowing themselves to smithereens.
Now these type 1a supernovae are extremely powerful luminous objects, amazing to watch,
and they generate some of the heaviest elements we know of in the universe.
How they get to this explosive state is, if you'll pardon the pun, a burning question.
We don't really know how the white dwarf gets to this unstable Chandrasekhar limit,
but once it gets there, it explodes.
You need these special circumstances, and most white dwarfs never reach those special
circumstances, but occasionally some do, and they explode.
But there's another very different type of physical mechanism for stellar explosions,
and it's thought to be relevant for type 2 supernovae.
Now I mentioned last time that type 2 supernovae like this one here appear in spiral galaxies,
usually in or near spiral arms like this one, where lots of massive stars are forming or
have recently formed.
And so we think that these stars that become type 2 supernovae are massive stars at the
end of their lives.
This is also suggested by the light curve of a type 2 supernova.
You can see brightness versus days here, and it stays at about the same brightness for
several months, and this suggests that the star that's exploding has a very thick envelope
that's able to retain the energy for long periods of time and gradually allow that energy
to leak out if there weren't a thick envelope that energy would leak out very quickly.
So all this points to red supergiants as the most likely progenitor star, or the star that
becomes the supernova.
Here these red supergiants that are very, very luminous, they come from massive evolved
stars.
That is stars that have left the main sequence.
And these are stars that are at least 10 times the mass of our sun initially.
Now some astronomers think that maybe a star at least 8 times the mass of the sun could
explode in this way.
It's safer to say that there are at least 10 times the mass of the sun initially.
If you make a cross-section cut of such a star, here's what it looks like.
You have an outer envelope of hydrogen within which there's a helium shell, and inside that
there's a shell consisting predominantly of carbon and oxygen.
Then there's shells of even heavier elements like neon, magnesium, and then silicon and
sulfur.
And finally, at the very center there's an iron core.
You have all these shells of gas, and here's sort of a fancier plot of the cross-sectional
view of a red supergiant.
It kind of looks like an onion with all these different layers, the iron core, a layer of
silicon and sulfur surrounding it.
These are by the way just the main elements in each of these layers.
Then oxygen, neon, and magnesium.
Then a layer of carbon and oxygen, then helium, and finally hydrogen.
And this whole thing is way down in the middle of an extremely large star, most of whose
volume is just hydrogen.
Now it has this onion layer structure because the ashes of one set of nuclear reactions
became the fuel for the next set.
Hydrogen burned in a nuclear sense to helium.
Helium went to carbon and oxygen.
Carbon and oxygen went to neon, magnesium, things like that.
And this happens because each of these heavier elements is progressively more and more tightly
bound than its predecessors.
If we look at a plot of the binding energy per nucleon, that is per proton or neutron
in the nucleus of an atom, versus the atomic weight, which is just the number of protons
and neutrons, hydrogen has an atomic weight of one, deuterium has an atomic weight of
two, then there's helium, beryllium, carbon, oxygen, and so on.
The binding energy per nucleon increases along this curve, meaning that the nuclei are progressively
more tightly bound.
And so if you take light initial particles and bring them together and fuse them together,
the mass of the end product is less than the mass of the initial reactants, and it's that
mass difference that gets converted into energy according to Einstein's famous E equals mc
squared.
And I discussed this process in some detail when I considered the fusion of hydrogen into
helium during the main sequence stages of a star's life.
So if we look at the red supergiant, we have this hydrogen envelope with the helium shell
inside, then carbon and oxygen, and then shells of progressively heavier elements ending all
the way with iron in the core.
Now iron doesn't liberate energy.
All the preceding stages liberated energy, keeping the star hot inside and keeping the
pressure high.
But iron, if it were to fuse to a heavier element, would absorb energy.
And that's because iron and the elements surrounding iron are at the top of the binding energy
curve.
This is an expanded view of the plot I showed you before, where you have the binding energy
per nucleon versus the atomic weight.
All the light elements can fuse to heavier elements liberating energy along the way,
because the products are more and more tightly bound compared to the reactants.
Similarly, heavy elements can fission or break up into lighter elements, releasing energy,
because the binding energy of the lighter elements per nucleon is higher than the binding
energy of the very heavy elements, like uranium.
So uranium can split into lighter things, and carbon and hydrogen can fuse into heavier
things.
Both of those processes liberate energy.
But right around iron, you have the highest binding energy per nucleon.
So iron and its similar elements, cobalt, nickel, things like that, are the most tightly
bound nuclei.
So fusion of those elements does not produce energy.
It actually would require energy.
So what you get is a halt or a stop to the nuclear fusion process in the core of a star
when you reach an iron core.
And you get this iron core then in the middle, surrounded by layers that are still fusing
up to heavier elements, liberating energy as they fuse.
So hydrogen fused to helium, it liberated energy.
That was the main sequence stage.
Then helium fused to carbon and oxygen.
Then as you can see, carbon and oxygen fused to heavier elements.
All those fusion reactions liberate energy, keeping the star hot inside and preventing
it from collapsing due to the inexorable force of gravity trying to pull it in.
But once you reach iron, you don't get any extra energy.
So the iron core then builds up, and there are these fusion reactions surrounding it.
And eventually, when the iron core reaches roughly 1.4 solar masses, roughly the Chandrasekhar
limit, it gets to this unstable stage similar to a white dwarf.
But instead of undergoing a thermonuclear runaway like a white dwarf in a Type 1A supernova,
the iron core in a massive star decides to collapse.
Gravity is ultimately victorious in this case.
And you have this iron core collapsing down to a tiny little volume, roughly the size
of a city, 10 kilometers in radius, a neutron star.
And it liberates a tremendous amount of energy in this process.
Now microscopically, what happens is that the electrons and protons combine to form
neutrons and these funny little particles, neutrinos, which I discussed when I considered
fusion in the sun.
And the pressure support that had been provided by the electrons mostly, and to a lesser extent
the protons, disappears.
You just get a ball of neutrons.
And this core collapses to this tiny ball of neutrons, a neutron star, essentially,
where you have a sphere whose diameter is roughly 20 kilometers, a mass 1.4 times that
of the sun, and an incredible density.
I'll talk about neutron stars more later.
Now during this collapse, a tremendous amount of energy is liberated.
So this neutron star is collapsing down, or this core is collapsing down to form a neutron
star.
But just like when you jump on a trampoline and you don't reach an equilibrium configuration
right away, rather you bounce back up, so too, this neutron star collapsing in on itself
reaches super nuclear densities, even greater densities than nuclei.
And at that point, the material starts to repel and it bounces, it rebounds like you
are rebounding off of a trampoline.
Now when you rebound off of a trampoline, you've got a lot of energy coming up.
If you have stuff coming down on top of you, you can hit that stuff and propel it upwards.
Let me show you a demo.
Suppose this little basketball is like the core, the iron core of a red supergiant collapsing
in on itself.
So it's going to collapse and it's going to rebound.
Now here it rebounds off of the floor, but you can think of it as rebounding off of itself.
So here it is, it rebounds, bounces back up like me jumping off of a trampoline.
Meanwhile, the stuff surrounding it has no more pressure support because the core has
collapsed and it too falls and left on its own, it would just sort of rebound a little
bit.
But if the stuff surrounding the collapsing iron core hits this outwardly moving rebounding
core, it can get an extra amount of energy and get propelled upwards with a huge speed.
So let me show you when I put now this tennis ball, which are the surrounding layers around
the core, and put it on top of the imploding and then rebounding core.
Let's see what we get.
Whoa, look at that.
The thing just takes off and in fact in lecture if students aren't paying attention, I can
cleverly put the ball on one side here and propel the ball towards them and wake them
up.
So anyway, that illustrates to you how the imploding core of a red supergiant can rebound
and propel the surrounding layers outwards.
That's kind of really cool.
Now that's called the prompt mechanism and it turns out that it's really not quite
enough.
I mean, just like the tennis ball eventually came back down because of the Earth's gravity,
so too the gravity of the neutron star that just got formed is pretty large and it tends
to want to bring this rebounding material back down.
So you need a bit of an extra push and that extra push is provided by the flood of neutrinos
that got emitted by this process.
First of all, I said that when the core is collapsing, protons and electrons are combining
to form neutrons and neutrinos and those neutrinos come out and some of them can hit the surrounding
layers and push them out.
Moreover, the young neutron star that has formed has a temperature of about 100 billion
degrees.
That's because a huge amount of gravitational energy got released as this earth-sized iron
core collapses down to form a neutron star that's only about 10 kilometers in radius.
And that energy, the gravitational binding energy of a neutron star is about a tenth
of a solar mass and using E equals mc squared, if you convert that into energy, it's a huge
amount of energy and at these temperatures of 100 billion degrees that are generated
when so much energy is released in such a small volume, it turns out that neutrinos are
produced in huge quantities at such temperatures.
So you just get a veritable flood of neutrinos and even though neutrinos hardly interact
at all, some of them will interact with the material surrounding them and help propel
that material out.
And that is what actually allows the star to achieve a successful explosion.
The neutrinos actually do most of the work.
Now the person who figured this out first was Fritz Zwicky at Caltech along with his
colleague Walter Bada.
And they did this in 1933, just a year after James Chadwick had discovered the neutron.
And they were both brilliant men, Zwicky in particular is one of my heroes, he just was
decades ahead of other astronomers in so many ways.
But though brilliant and very creative, he was also rather arrogant and abrasive.
And he actually referred to his Caltech colleagues as spherical bastards, because you know, they're
bastards any way you look at them.
Now this is not a good way to make friends and retain friends, you know, especially since
people at Caltech are generally pretty smart and here's Zwicky perhaps indicating what
he thought of their brain size or something.
I'm not sure what he's doing there, but he just didn't get along very well.
And so he was ignored in part because he was just sort of viewed as a crazy guy.
But now it turns out he was right on a lot of things.
I mean, he was wrong on certain things too, but he was right as well.
And he and Walter Vada had figured out this explosion mechanism.
Now here's David Arnett at the University of Arizona, formerly in Chicago, showing
what the Chicago Sears Tower would look like if compressed to the density of a neutron
star.
It would be this little gumball here, so it would be an incredibly dense material, nothing
like what we've created in a laboratory, only atomic nuclei are of that sort.
And we didn't really create them, they already sort of exist.
So this would be like a ball of neutrons, like a gigantic atomic nucleus, the mass of
a building in a gumball, it's just an incredible stuff.
Now this ejected material takes on complex shapes and there are various instabilities
that occur, but the point is that there's so much energy released in this process that
a lot of elements heavier than iron can form due to nuclear fusion.
The star has given up, it has exploded, there's plenty of energy floating around, now that
energy can go into colliding neutrons with heavy nuclei, producing even heavier nuclei.
Now that process absorbs energy because you're producing really heavy nuclei like iron, like
gold and silver and things like that, but there's plenty of energy to go around.
The star is no longer trying to hold itself up, it's no longer trying to generate energy
to keep itself hot inside, rather it's already exploded, so there's plenty of energy to go
around.
Atomic nuclei hit each other, fuse into heavier ones, in particular neutrons tend to hit things
and fuse into even heavier nuclei.
And in this process then, you get the rich periodic table of the elements.
You get all the elements heavier than iron, one way or another, through type 2 supernovae
and also through type 1A's, but in particular in type 2's you get all sorts of nuclei that
are otherwise quite rare to produce in any other way.
And one way or another then, all of the heavy elements of which we consist and of which earth-like
planets, rocky planets consist, were produced by these supernovae.
Now it turns out that in some cases you can get an iron nucleus inside the envelope of
a red giant and it can absorb a neutron and produce some heavier elements.
So some nucleosynthesis or the synthesis or creation of elements occurs not in supernovae
but rather in red giants, but the seed elements, the iron that was necessary for the nucleosynthesis
in those red giants came from some previous supernovae explosions.
So one way or another, all of the heavy elements came from supernovae.
All right, well, given that red supergiants are supposed to explode, you might look in
the sky and say, well, when is Betelgeuse, the shoulder of Orion, going to explode?
And it turns out we don't really know.
We don't know because if you look at the stages of nuclear burning that go on in a red supergiant
and you look at the time scales associated with them, the last few stages, the fusion
of silicon to iron, that takes just one day and it occurs at a temperature of four billion
degrees and the preceding stage, oxygen to silicon and sulfur, takes just six months.
And even the stage where you're fusing carbon to oxygen, neon and magnesium takes 600 years.
These are all very small quantities compared to the stage during which a red supergiant,
such as Betelgeuse, did or is fusing helium into carbon and oxygen.
That stage is about 500,000 years and these time scales depend a little bit on the mass
of the star that you started with.
But here's a representative set of time scales for a 25 solar mass star.
And all these stages are short compared to the main sequence stage, which in this case
is about 7 million years.
Now since Betelgeuse is a red supergiant, we know that it's at least in the helium burning
stage, so it's at least in the stage that lasts 500,000 years.
It might be in the carbon burning stage, which lasts only 600 years, or it might even be
in the silicon burning stage, which lasts only one day.
If the latter, then it's going to explode tomorrow.
More likely, however, it'll explode sometime in the next half a million years and we just
don't know when.
All these stages are very short.
So in any case, you look at Betelgeuse and you say, well, we don't really know what its
core is doing.
Maybe it's in the silicon burning stage or maybe it's in the hydrogen or the helium burning
stages.
It can't be in the hydrogen burning stage because it's a red supergiant at this point.
So how can we tell at what stage it's at?
Well, it turns out that in these last couple of stages, in particular, oxygen going to
silicon and sulfur and silicon going to iron, the temperatures are so high, billions of
degrees, that a lot of neutrinos are being formed and they escape from the star essentially
immediately.
They travel at the speed of light or close to the speed of light and they just escape
from the star, unlike the photons which bounce around a lot and can't escape.
So if we had a really sensitive neutrino detector and we pointed it at Betelgeuse and we see
nothing, nothing, nothing and then suddenly we see a large increase in the number of neutrinos,
we could say, aha, Betelgeuse is about to blow up and we could point to Betelgeuse and
actually watch its explosion in the next day or two.
So that would be kind of fun.
Now it turns out that it's not just red supergiants that can explode in this way.
It's been recently discovered a new set of species of the so-called core collapse supernovae.
In the diagram here, you can see essentially what I'm talking about.
True, most core collapse supernovae have a hydrogen shell, but suppose the star has
gotten rid of its hydrogen shell prior to exploding, in which case it only has a helium
envelope and the normal carbon oxygen and so on core.
This could lead to a core collapse supernova that doesn't have hydrogen in its spectrum,
yet is not the explosion of a white dwarf.
That we call a Type 1B because it doesn't have hydrogen in its spectrum, so it's a
Type 1, but it does have helium in its spectrum unlike a normal Type 1A, so we call it a Type
1B.
If the star has somehow lost not only its hydrogen layer, but also its helium layer prior
to exploding.
Then it has a carbon and oxygen outermost layer and then successively heavier elements
inside, oxygen, neon, magnesium, silicon, sulfur all the way up to iron.
So in those cases, the exploding star would have a spectrum devoid of hydrogen, so it
would be a Type 1, but it wouldn't look like the spectrum of a Type 1A in detail because
it's not an exploding white dwarf, rather it's a core collapse object with a whole bunch
of these intermediate mass elements, carbon and oxygen and calcium and magnesium and silicon
surrounding the core and pummeling outwards.
So that would look spectroscopically different from a Type 1A.
And these things were suspected in the 1960s that some Type 1 supernovae are different
from the others, but they were first recognized as a clear new subclass of supernovae in the
mid-1980s.
And you might expect this subclass to be pretty important because if some Type 1s don't completely
obliterate themselves and produce a whole bunch of iron and nickel and cobalt, but rather
are the core collapse of a massive star that leads to a bunch of oxygen and sulfur and stuff
being ejected, that would affect the chemical evolution of galaxies because not all Type
1As and Type 1Bs and 1Cs produce the same chemical elements.
Here's in fact a spectrum of a Type 1A long after it has exploded and you see a bunch
of iron in the spectrum, whereas a Type 1C has so-called intermediate mass elements,
oxygen and calcium and magnesium and things like that.
It kind of looks like the spectrum of a Type 2, but without the hydrogen.
Well, it turns out that I got interested in supernovae in 1985 because my former thesis
advisor and I, Wallace Sargent, were observing at Palomar Observatory and we were looking
at a whole bunch of galaxies and we stumbled across a supernova of unprecedented observational
properties.
It turned out to be one of the defining examples of this new subclass.
Indeed, it showed that not all Type 1s are these Type 1A supernovae.
We had a great five-night observing run in February where all the nights were clear and
we got a lot of great data and we should have been happy.
I was actually kind of depressed at that time because my girlfriend had just dumped me so
I was all kind of feeling bumped out, but I was happy that we had gotten good data.
In the last hour of the fifth and final night, we were looking at a bunch of charts in front
of us saying, well, which galaxy should we observe?
We had time only to observe two more galaxies.
I said, well, let's observe NGC 4618 because that galaxy had been classified as a peculiar
galaxy in some catalog of galaxies.
We pointed the telescope to NGC 4618 and we saw a bright star-like object in the middle
of this peculiar galaxy where we had expected to see no such bright star and previous astronomers
hadn't seen such a star.
We took a spectrum of this star and the spectrum was truly bizarre.
Here's brightness versus wavelength and it had these strong emission lines of oxygen and
calcium and magnesium and things like that, sodium, intermediate mass elements and essentially
no hydrogen, yet it didn't look like a Type 1A because it didn't have the spectrum of
a Type 1A.
So we just got really excited.
It was so fantastic.
We said this is a new type of supernova.
This is one whose progenitor star, the star that exploded, somehow had lost or got stripped
of its hydrogen envelope prior to the explosion and we wrote a paper about this and it got
reported in the newspapers and the headline that came out, at least in the San Francisco
Chronicle, was Astronomers Peak at a Strip Teasing Star because we had told that the
reporter that the envelope had somehow gotten stripped from the star prior to the explosion.
We didn't tell him to call it a strip teasing star, but anyway, this just changed my career.
I got really interested in supernovae and the physics of how they explode and how they
can be used to understand the chemical evolution of galaxies and the production of neutron
stars and pulsars and ultimately, as I'll tell you later in this course, supernovae
turned out to be enormously important for cosmology, the study of the structure and
evolution of the universe as a whole.
So this happened in 1985 and it just changed my career.
But it just shows how important it is to be observant and to take advantage of opportunities
that are thrown your way because sometimes you get a great new opportunity and if you
don't capitalize on it, it's lost forever.
But if you do capitalize on it, all sorts of wonderful things can happen.
And I've just been having so much fun the past 20 years studying supernovae.
So then the question is, how did the envelope of hydrogen, and in some cases even helium,
get stripped?
Well, massive stars go through winds and gentle ejections, as is shown here, where just the
pressure of the photons and these gentle burps that I talked about before expel the envelope
and in some cases, the envelope just expels outwards in two bulbous bipolar directions
like this one for aida carina, I've mentioned this star before.
In other cases, it's a more or less spherical ejection.
So that's how a star can lose part of its atmosphere of gas or it can transfer part
of its atmosphere of gas onto a companion star.
If it's in a binary system, as most stars are, the companion star can steal some of
that material when the primary star expands and starts becoming a red supergiant.
So you can get this transfer of material.
And you might even expect that in some cases, partial stripping would occur.
So not all of the hydrogen envelope, but just some of it got stripped away or stolen by
a companion star.
And in that case, you'd have a helium core with all the oxygen and iron and all the other
stuff surrounded by just a low mass thin shell of hydrogen.
And this would look sort of like a type 2B, you might call it.
Initially when it explodes, you'd see the hydrogen, so that would be type 2.
But as you start peering down into the expanding ejecta, there wouldn't be any more hydrogen
to see and it would start looking like a type 1B.
So this is sort of a hybrid, a type 2B.
And I actually observed one of these things, supernova 1987K, shown here, before the prediction
that these things might exist became well-known.
And I said, well, here's a star that started out as a type 2.
And then later, the spectrum turned into a type 1B.
And so I called it a type 2B.
And in fact, there was a theoretical model suggesting that that might even be the case.
Now, some astronomers thought that I was crazy that maybe I had observed two different supernovae
at different times and got confused by their spectra, a type 2 on one occasion.
And then a few months later, I accidentally observed a different star because they thought
that this just can't occur.
But it does occur.
And my results were vindicated in 1993 when there was a bright supernova called 1993J that
went off.
And it was actually discovered by a Spanish amateur astronomer, Francisco Garcia.
And it went off in a bright galaxy just 11 million light years away.
Here it is going off.
And there's the star that exploded right there.
So that's a before picture, and there's an after picture in this bright nearby galaxy.
It had the same characteristics as supernova 1987K.
That is, it went from type 2 to type 1B in terms of its observational properties.
Now we think that this star actually lost part of its material through transfer to a
companion and part of its material through a wind.
And other astronomers, in particular in Cambridge, England, have found evidence for the surviving
companion.
They can see it in the spectrum.
In the spectrum of supernova 1993J now, a decade or two later, you can see evidence for the
surviving companion.
So it's there.
On the other hand, a wind must have been ejected as well from the star that later became a
supernova because we can see the interaction of the ejected material with the supernova.
The spectrum now is showing a lot of evidence for the supernova ejecta interacting with
gases that had been gently blown off in a wind prior to the explosion.
And here, in fact, is a bunch of pictures taken at radio wavelengths where you can see
the expanding ejecta, and they continue to glow so brightly because they're slamming
into the surrounding material that had been gently blown off in a wind prior to the explosion.
So we think that these core collapse supernovae come in a number of species or varieties.
Type 2, the more normal kind, type 2B, type 1B, type 1B, 1C, where the helium envelope
is sort of thin, all the way down to type 1C, where the hydrogen and helium envelopes
are gone, but the rest of the core of the star looks about the same.
So it looks like gravity is ultimately victorious in all these stars, all these massive stars,
regardless of how much of an envelope they still retain.
The iron core ultimately collapses, forming a neutron star and blowing off the rest of
the material.
