We have seen that neutron stars are formed through the gravitational collapse of the
iron core of a very massive star, a star at least 8 to 10 times the mass of the sun that
either still has a massive hydrogen envelope or in some cases the hydrogen envelope or
even the helium layer have been stripped off through winds or transferred to a companion
star or whatever, but in any case the iron core collapses, gravity wins, the thing collapses
to a neutron star, releasing a lot of energy and blowing away the outer material.
Being so dense, the neutron star that's formed has a very strong gravitational field and
Einstein's general theory of relativity is necessary for an accurate description of a neutron
star's physical properties. We'll also need Einstein's general theory of relativity for
the next topic of the course, black holes, which is one of my favorite topics, you know,
black holes are a fantastic concept and to really understand them you need Einstein's
general theory of relativity. So let me in these next two lectures discuss this magnificent
theory. Newton developed Newtonian mechanics, his famous laws of motion and the law of universal
gravitation, and these were a huge breakthrough in science. Newton's laws work extremely
well for many, many applications, baseballs and airplanes and things like that. The modern
world wouldn't work if Newtonian mechanics were basically wrong. However, we've already
seen that Newtonian mechanics breaks down at very high speeds. In lecture 42, when discussing
the possibility of interstellar travel, we said that you have to take into account the
fact that clocks slow down if they're moving relative to you and lengths become contracted
and all sorts of other weird things happen, okay, lack of simultaneity and all that. So
Newtonian mechanics doesn't work so well at high speeds and you need this refinement,
this special theory of relativity. It turns out you need to refine Newton's gravity as
well if you have a strong gravitational field. And we will see examples of that in the next
two lectures. The basic point is that Newton didn't know how gravity works and Einstein
found inconsistencies in his theory of gravity, of Newton's theory of gravity with Einstein's
special theory of relativity, and this necessitated a whole new perspective, a whole new view on
gravity. Newton said in the Principia, it is inconceivable that inanimate brute matter
should affect other matter without mutual contact. Gravity must be caused by an agent
acting constantly according to certain laws. But whether this agent be material or immaterial,
I have left to the consideration of my readers. So Newton didn't know, he admitted that he
didn't know how gravity works. But he knew that it describes the orbit of the moon and
other things pretty well and so, you know, use it as long as it works and, well, if it
doesn't work and you find a situation where it's not applicable, then you've got to figure
out what's wrong, okay, and this is exactly what happened to Einstein. It became clear
to Einstein that standard Newtonian gravity is inconsistent with his special theory of
relativity. Standard Newtonian gravity was essentially broken. And the thought experiment
that Einstein had, the most famous such thought experiment in this particular case, was one
involving the sun and the earth and Newton's so-called instantaneous action at a distance.
So to illustrate that, let's look at this diagram where we have the earth orbiting the
sun and let's suppose that the sun's mass for some reason were to suddenly vanish. It
just vanishes from the universe. It's no longer there. It's not that the sun blows up or anything,
not that it's going to do that, but you have to make the mass vanish completely. Just a
thought experiment. According to Newtonian gravity, if the sun's mass vanishes, poof,
then the earth should go flying along the tangent to its trajectory, to its elliptical orbit
here, at the moment that the sun's mass vanishes because you have this instantaneous action
at a distance. Newton thought that masses tell other masses to move in an instantaneous
way. And so if there's no mass for the sun, then the earth has no reason to follow this
curved path and it'll continue in a straight line going in the same direction it was going
at the moment the sun's mass disappeared. That's essentially Newton's first law, that
objects continue in their state of motion unless affected by a force. But clearly to
Einstein this was a violation of the special theory of relativity because special relativity
claims that no information can travel faster than the speed of light. So how can the earth
instantaneously have known that the sun's mass vanished? That's the essence of Einstein's
thought experiment. Special relativity and Newtonian gravity were fundamentally inconsistent.
Newtonian gravity was broken. Now, if something is working well, like a computer, you don't
need to know intrinsically how it operates, how it works. But if something is broken,
if a computer is broken, you need an expert to go in and fix it and that expert has to
know how the computer works in order to fix it or an automobile or whatever. You don't
just kick it despite the fact that that sometimes works, it's just coincidental, okay? Usually
you have to know how the object works. And Einstein in fiddling around with Newtonian
gravity couldn't really figure out a way to make it work unless he took a completely
fresh perspective. He needed to really just take it from a completely different point
of view. And he worked on this for about a decade before coming up with something that
he really liked. And that he published in 1916. It was called his General Theory of
Relativity because it's sort of more general than the special theory that deals with constant
speeds and no gravitational field. The general theory deals with accelerations and gravitational
fields. So it's sort of more general than the special theory of relativity. And it's
based on the idea that there is no fundamental difference between a uniform acceleration
and a uniform gravitational field. Now special relativity was based on the idea that there's
no difference in a laboratory at rest and one in uniform motion. That was special relativity's
principle of relativity. In general relativity, Einstein said, well, there's no real difference
between an accelerated frame and a frame in a uniform gravitational field. And this idea
that there's no such difference between the two frames was what Einstein called his happiest
thought ever. There's this profound relationship between uniform acceleration and a uniform
gravitational field. And the idea or the thought experiment he came up with for this is, suppose
you're in a windowless elevator, all right, and you're just stationary, you're just sitting
there. Now suppose the elevator accelerates upward. You know that you feel heavier for
a moment while it's accelerating and before it reaches a constant speed, you feel heavier.
Once it reaches a constant speed, you feel the same as you always do again. But as it's
accelerating, you feel heavier and when it's decelerating, you feel lighter. Well, how
do you know in this windowless elevator that what really happened was that the elevator
accelerated? What if instead some massive object were suddenly placed underneath the elevator
making you feel temporarily heavier and then it was moved out and then you felt lighter?
You know, maybe that's what happened really, you know, you don't know. And that's what
Einstein thought about this, this elevator thought experiment. So he considered what
you would see in an accelerated elevator and then deduced that you would see the same thing
in a uniform gravitational field since you don't know whether the elevator is accelerating
or whether it's actually, you know, has a bigger gravitational field or a smaller gravitational
field under it or in it. So he gained these key insights, okay? So suppose we look at
this elevator and we first have it going along at a constant speed. So here's a constant
speed elevator with a guy sitting in there watching a beam of light from a flashlight.
Since the principle of relativity, that is, Einstein's special relativity says that there's
no difference between a frame at rest and one moving with constant velocity, clearly
this fellow would see the light beam go in a straight line across the elevator regardless
of whether he's moving with a constant velocity or is at rest. We already know that those
two frames of reference are identical. Alright, so the beam goes straight across. Now suppose
the elevator is not only moving but also accelerating upward. In that case, this fellow's eyes will
be catching up with the light as he accelerates up because once the light is in motion, once
the photons have been emitted, they're just cruising along here. They don't know that
the elevator, that is, the walls around the light are being accelerated up and so the
light just keeps going in a straight line relative to absolute space in a sense, but
this guy is accelerating upward and so relative to him, he gets closer and closer to the light
beam and it makes the light look bent. So Einstein deduced that in an accelerating frame,
the light gets bent. But since an accelerating frame is equivalent to a frame placed in a
uniform gravitational field, the deduction was that light must be bent in a gravitational
field as well. What a fantastic idea. What a great thought experiment. He didn't really
do this. Light moves so quickly you actually can't measure its bending over the distance
of an elevator, at least you couldn't do it a century ago, maybe you can do it now, I
know, but he thought about this and came up with this idea. So general relativity postulates
that gravity is a manifestation of the warping of space and time, that effectively things
move along their natural paths in an intrinsically warped space. And this was the geometrical
idea that Einstein came up with, which was essentially equivalent to this idea of an
accelerated frame. If light is bent in an accelerated frame, he said well it's bent in a gravitational
field as well, and the geometrical model that he came up with was that space itself and
time it turns out are themselves warped or distorted by the presence of mass or energy
and other objects then move through this distorted space and time following their natural trajectories
in an intrinsically curved space time continuum. So the idea is that you have a rubber sheet
placed across a table and an ant goes in a straight line across that rubber sheet if
it's flat, if it's not distorted or curved. So that's what we call a Euclidean straight
line, one that sort of follows the rules of Euclidean geometry. But if you were to place
a paper weight on this rubber sheet, in this case Earth's gravitational field pulls on
the paper weight, that's not really what Einstein is saying. Einstein is saying that the paper
weight itself causes this warping of the rubber sheet, this is where the analogy breaks down
a little bit. Here it's the Earth's gravity pulling down on the paper weight, but really
in relativity the paper weight itself causes this warping of the rubber. Regardless, you've
got this warped rubber sheet and now the ant follows a very different path from our
perspective. It's still one of many natural paths that the ant could have followed, I
mean it could have gone around this warping like that or it could have gone inside and
part way down or something, but here it tried to go along this straight line directly from
this position to that position and in so doing it actually had to go bend down way down almost
to this paper weight, actually to the paper weight and then up again and so it follows
a curved path. So we illustrate this usually with what's called an embedding diagram,
a diagram that shows just two of the spatial dimensions, here's what would have been flat
space way out here near the edges of this rectangle, but then matter or energy, either
one, cause a warping of this coordinate grid and the matter or energy causing the warping
is represented by this blue ball here, but the point is the ball is not being pulled
down by Earth's gravity, the ball itself is causing this warping and the warping is in
a different dimension. So here you have a two dimensional space and the warping is in
a third dimension. So in our space we have three spatial dimensions X, Y and Z, so the
warping caused by mass and energy would be in some fourth spatial dimension. This is
getting kind of crazy, but this was Einstein's genius, it works. So the two dimensional analogy
is just going to show you how this warping happens into a dimension that we can see on
this sheet of paper, but in real life the warping is into some fourth spatial dimension
which we cannot see and we have no physical access to it, but that's the dimension, call
it W if you will, into which space warps. That's the geometrical picture that Einstein
had, alright? And then objects follow their natural path through that curved space. So
let me give you an example of this. Here's a cloth sheet stretched across this circular
drum and if I hold it like this you can see it's flat and marbles going along it go in
a straight line, okay? So here's some marbles just going along a straight line because it's
a flat space. Now if I were to place a golf ball inside this thing, the gravity of the
earth makes the cloth bend downward, but in Einstein's view it's the golf ball itself
not the earth's gravity pulling on it that's causing this warping of the cloth, okay? So
you've got this warped cloth, you can see it bulging down below and now if I take this
little marble and just flick it along the surface you can see that it covers or you can
see that it goes along a curved path. In fact it goes around this golf ball and it eventually
spirals in because it loses energy due to friction against the cloth but basically it's going
around in circles and it's orbiting the golf ball. So if the sun were to produce a warp
in three-dimensional space like this then the trajectories of the planets could be thought
of as being like this marble going along its natural path in an intrinsically curved space.
It was just a marvelous idea, you know? So okay that was his idea that you essentially
have a warped space and the denser and more massive the object the more it bends the space
around it and so if you have a whole bunch of these things each of them causes a warping
around it and here are the dense big ones and they cause a deeper steeper warping and
here are the little guys, you know? But they all produce a little warping and so for example
the sun produces a warping that causes the earth to go around it but earth has a little
warp around it as well and so the moon follows its natural path around the earth, okay? So
that's the idea. Now time also gets distorted or warped in Einstein's relativity and this
became well known and influenced a number of people. There's this famous painting by
Dolly, The Persistence of Memory and it's often associated with relativity among the
general public because people think of relativity and warped time and all that. It's not at
all clear that Dolly was in any way influenced directly by relativity. To my knowledge there's
no documented evidence of that though he may have well been aware, in fact I think he was
aware of relativistic ideas. I mean this was a very big thing that Einstein had come up
with and he was a very famous person at this point but it appears as though Dolly was actually
thinking of overripe Camembert cheese when he painted this famous, famous painting. He
actually even said that he had dreamed about cheese though there's all sorts of symbolism in
this painting of various sorts that I'm not qualified to talk about but there are ants
crawling around devouring a gold watch and there's various sensual looking eyelashes and
things so who knows? People who know much more about art than I do interpret this painting
but I like to think of it as being associated with relativity and among the general public it
is often associated with relativity because of this warping of space and time. Well you might
say this is kind of a weird theory you know is it right? Can we find some experimental tests for
it? And even if it's basically right that you know it gives some modified view of Newtonian
mechanics is it truly the correct theory? I mean there are many versions of Newtonian gravity
now that have been developed over the past century not all of which are identical to general
relativity and they give quantitatively different predictions from that of from those of general
relativity so you want to have some tests and the first test historically that was made was the
explanation of an interesting effect the precession or rotation of the orbit of Mercury around the
Sun. So Mercury does not follow a closed ellipse around the Sun it doesn't just go around an ellipse
like that always coming back to the same position rather the ellipse rotates or precesses and this
was a well-known effect in fact the the precession is is fairly large it's over 500 arc seconds per
century so if you draw a line between the Sun and Mercury that line rotates by an angle of 500 arc
seconds or about 8 arc minutes per century that sounds like a small amount but it was in fact
easily measurable. Now most of that can be explained through perturbations by Jupiter and other
Newtonian effects but there were 43 seconds of arc per century of this more than 500 that were
unexplained by any known effect and Einstein knew this okay and he immediately applied his general
relativity to this problem of the precession of the perihelion of Mercury and what he found was
that the extra precession is in fact easily explained by general relativistic effects and
quantitatively it was exactly what was observed 43 extra arc seconds per century of this rotation or
precession of the orbit of Mercury. So this was considered a triumph for general relativity because
he explained quantitatively and qualitatively but most importantly quantitatively unknown effect
but some people could say well that's great but maybe he cooked up relativity in such a way as to
explain this one phenomenon and it doesn't really explain anything else because it's wrong so it's
much better to have predictions which can then be verified and the first prediction that he made
that was that was well well verified was that was that light should be bent by a gravitational field
and indeed I already discussed this in the lecture on solar eclipses where I said that this
bending of starlight when it is near the the Sun and and due to the the warping of space as predicted
by general relativity this was actually observed by Sir Arthur Eddington during a total solar
eclipse in 1919 specifically he noted that the apparent positions of stars during an eclipse in
the general vicinity of the eclipse Sun were a little bit displaced from their true positions or
the positions that had been measured at night some other month when the Sun was nowhere near that
part of the sky and this deflection that he measured was consistent with general relativity
though not to a high degree of precision or accuracy indeed Eddington kind of ignored some of
the data that weren't so much in agreement with the prediction it turns out and he selectively
believed the data that seemed to agree with relativity nevertheless this was the first sort
of observational confirmation of relativity and this is the thing that made Einstein an overnight
celebrity among the general public not just physicists so indeed the the effect is very
small here here's a little diagram the eclipse Sun is down here somewhere the star was observed to
be over here and its true position if there were no displacement would have been here and you see
this offset is very small it's smaller than the blur circle of a star this particular diagram has
been magnified several hundred times compared to the original photographic emulsion so it was a
hard thing to measure and it's I'm not discrediting Eddington in any way for having made a bad
measurement he made as good a measurement as he could have and personal biases influenced many
of us even scientists tend to want to believe data that agrees with some preconceived notion of the
universe and discard data that doesn't agree and so maybe that's what was going on a little bit
we're all human and so is Eddington we now measure this effect much more precisely by looking at the
positions of objects called quasars now we'll look at quasars much more extensively in a few
lectures but they are the central regions of distant galaxies where we think there's a giant black
hole swallowing material and it emits radio waves and other forms of light before it actually gets
swallowed by the black hole so there's all this material there's all this gas and it's emitting
radio waves and other forms of radiation and you can see these things at a very great distance
here are four of them and they're billions of light years away these are optical photographs
but the point is we know they're precise positions and they're visible during the day with radio
telescopes because the sun isn't very bright at radio wavelengths and you can measure their
positions when the sun is in the general vicinity of these quasars and in fact their positions shift
when the sun is in their general direction compared with where they appear when the sun
isn't in their general direction so this has been really really well measured with that the other
thing that's been measured is that if you look at starlight going past the sun not only is the path
bent but the path has a different length than it would have had had it gone in what we call a
Euclidean straight line and when you look at for example the signals from the spacecraft like
Voyager when they were on the other side of the sun opposite side of to where we are the
signals took longer to get to us than they would have had there not been the sun causing this
warping of space and we know exactly when the spacecraft emitted the signals and we know exactly
when they arrived and from the speed of light you can determine the path length and the path
length agrees with an intrinsically warped space and not with the Euclidean straight line so that's
been measured very very well now another prediction that that Einstein made the third or the third
effect there were one effect was an explanation of something that was known the procession of
mercury and then there were two predictions the bending of light and this second one the second
one was that light is redshifted as it comes out of a gravitational field so here you have a mass
and if you emit blue light if you're near the gravitational field it's losing energy as it
climbs out of that gravitational field and becomes gradually redshifted and the amount of redshifting
is bigger the bigger the gravitational field out of which the light is trying to climb so you have
here a flashlight beam where the light starts out yellow becomes redder you also have the light
curved if it's not going away radially from the center of the star initially so the the curvature
effect had already been measured through the bending of star light near the sun and these
quasar positions and all that but this redshifting effect was was yet another specific test and
this was proposed in 1919 but not measured until about four decades later by two physicists
pound and repka who used a newly discovered effect called the mosbauer effect with which you can
measure very precisely the wavelength of a photon and in particular you measure wavelengths of
gamma rays that are emitted through the radioactive decay of certain radioactive nuclei or from a
nucleus going from an excited state down to a lower energy level a gamma ray with a very fixed
energy is is emitted and the mosbauer effect can be used to measure that that energy so for example
excited iron nuclei iron 57 that come from the radioactive decay of cobalt well they emit a
certain type of gamma ray photon having a very specific energy and pound and repka had a little
emitter of this line down at the bottom of the jefferson physical lab at harvard university
so here's these iron 57 nuclei emitting this particular wavelength of gamma rays
and it was climbed it climbed out of the gravitational field of the earth going to the
top of the of the jefferson physical lab 74 feet higher and it should have become
gravitationally redshifted by a very small amount now that would mean that an iron absorber at the
top end here wouldn't absorb the photon if it got redshifted because the wavelength would now be
wrong it would be the wrong wavelength because it's different from the wavelength at which it was
emitted and so the absorber which only absorbs photons having a wavelength equal to the wavelength
that which they they are emitted that absorber wouldn't absorb the photons because they've been
redshifted but now if you move the source relative to the absorber you can you can blue shift those
redshifted photons and the amount of blue shift that is needed to get their wavelength
back to the wavelength that is needed for the absorber to absorb them is a measure of the
gravitational redshift okay so you move this source increase its speed until the absorber
finally starts absorbing these photons again and you can do it the opposite way as well you can
have the source here and the detector there in that case the photons get blue shifted anyway the
the measurement was made and the gravitational redshift is only five parts in 10 to the 15 so
it's a very small effect but the experimental result was 5.13 plus or minus 0.51 times 10 to the
minus 15 for the gravitational redshift and theory was 4.92 which is in agreement with with the
experiment so pound and replica measured this in 1960 and then confirmed it with one percent
precision in 1963 so it's a fantastic measurement of the gravitational redshift even here on earth
now when you measure it for something like light escaping from a white dwarf it's a much bigger
effect and and you can measure that and that has been measured and from a neutron starts even bigger
so that's really cool now there's one other thing that is related to this and that is that time gets
warped by gravitational fields and here I've exaggerated the effect but if time were not warped
then near a neutron star a clock that initially reads noon near the neutron star and noon far from
the neutron star would continue to show the same time you know a few hours later but if there's a
gravitational time dilation effect then in fact near the neutron star maybe two hours will have
passed or as far from the neutron star four hours will have passed and I've exaggerated the effect
here um but but the principle is correct now you can actually measure this on earth by using the
gps system the global positioning system that is used on airplanes or in automobiles to figure
out where you are I mean you might say relativity is some bizarre thing it has no practical
applications to everyday life but but that's not true there is one very well known practical
application and that is that gps devices wouldn't work if if general relativity weren't correct
so the point is is that you have the this network of 24 satellites going with speeds of 14 000
kilometers per hour and at least four of them are visible from any point on earth at any given time
and they are sending signals to your little unit in your car and if you know the speed of light
which you do and if you have atomic clocks that measure time very carefully you can figure out
how far away each of the satellites is from you and if you have enough satellites you can figure
out uniquely where you are and so for example if you were if you were told that you're 1858 miles
from san francisco then you know that you're somewhere on the circle having a radius of 1858
miles if you're also told that you're 1161 miles from miami then you know that you're somewhere on
this circle so you could be in mexico or you could be here in chicago if you're also told that you're
713 miles from new york then it turns out there's only one intersection point you have to be in
chicago now in three-dimensional spacing you'd a fourth measurement but you always see at least
four of these satellites and so you can determine uniquely where you are but this depends on
relativity because at a speed of 14 000 kilometers per hour the clocks on the satellites are running
a little bit slower than clocks on earth by seven microseconds per day they're running slower
and because of general relativity they're in a weaker gravitational field and they're running 45
microseconds per day faster so the net effect is that the clocks in the satellites are running
fast at 38 microseconds per day and that's a huge effect it would it would make huge errors in in our
position which would accumulate with time and so what the engineers did is they took relativity
into account when designing the satellites and they made the atomic clocks up there run more
slowly than on earth by 38 microseconds per day and then it all works out if they hadn't done this
GPS systems wouldn't work your planes would end up in the wrong places you wouldn't know where to
drive and all that so there's a great practical application of relativity it works and if it
were not to work this system wouldn't get you to the right place at the right time
