I
now move on to the fifth and final unit of the second major part of the course,
the contents of the universe. In the first four units, I discussed the solar system,
other planetary systems, the many types of stars in their lives, and black holes. And now, in this
fifth unit, I'll go on and discuss galaxies, the larger structures in which all of these other
components exist. We'll start with our own home, the Milky Way Galaxy, a grand structure,
a spiral galaxy, about 100,000 light-years in diameter and only a couple of thousand light-years
thick, containing several hundred billions of stars, all gravitationally bound together,
going around in circles or ellipses around this central part of the galaxy.
Seen from the outside, our galaxy might look something like this, a spiral, with the sun,
just one of these hundreds of billions of stars, perhaps one-half to two-thirds of the way out
from the center. We can't see our Milky Way's structure very clearly because we live inside
it. It's sort of like a mouse inside a maze. It's hard to see the overall structure of the maze if
you're snooping around inside. If you're looking at it from a low angle, you begin to see the
structure of the maze, but if you look at it from a high angle, then you can see it much more clearly.
So we shouldn't fault the mouse for having a hard time making its way to the cheese. We say,
oh, go that way, but for the mouse, it's hard to tell which way to go. And in a similar way, we
don't really know in detail the structure of our own Milky Way galaxy because we live within it like
this. We know the structure of other galaxies much better. Now the sun orbits in a nearly circular
orbit, slightly elliptical, around the center of the galaxy, with a speed of around 200 kilometers
per second. And at its distance from the center of our galaxy, about 24,000 light years, it takes it
250 million years to complete one full orbit around the center of the galaxy. Now, given that
the sun is about four and a half billion years old, this means that it has completed, since its birth,
about 18 orbits around the center. So it could consider itself a young adult in terms of galactic
years. Of course, the sun is about halfway through its main sequence lifetime. And that's a much more
fundamental measure of the ages of stars, you know, how old they are, intrinsic to themselves,
not how many times they've gone around the galaxy. But anyway, the sun is a young adult basically
in galactic years. If we look at what we think our galaxy looks like, it's something like this. Now
this is just sort of an artist's representation of what our galaxy is like as seen face on from the
outside. It has a nucleus and a central bulge of stars, and then a bar like structure like this,
from the ends of which emerge two major arms that then break up into two or more other arms.
Our sun is about one half to two thirds of the way out from the center to the ill defined edge
of the galaxy. And it's on the inside edge of what's called the Orion arm, a spur from a bigger
arm known as the Sagittarius arm. And the Sagittarius arm is toward the center of our galaxy.
In the opposite direction, there's the Perseus arm, and we can see some clusters of stars there as
well. But we see many more nebulae and clusters in the Sagittarius arm toward the center of our
galaxy. The clusters and nebulae tend to congregate in the arms. There's another major arm known as
the Norma arm. But this is still kind of a vague picture because we don't really have a detailed
view of our galaxy. If we look at what's in those arms closely, we see nebulae and clusters.
Here's a star cluster in or near a spiral arm, and here's another one. These clusters, as I've
discussed before, and we'll do even more in today's lecture, come out of the formation process intrinsic
to a giant cloud of gas and dust like the Orion nebula. These clouds are gravitationally unstable,
and they start contracting, and then those contracting clouds fragment into smaller subunits,
which then turn into stars. But the clusters form from these nebulae, and they form rather
quickly. And since the nebulae are in the spiral arms, new stars are formed in the spiral arms as
well. An edge on view of our Milky Way looks something like this. This is an actual photograph or a
collection of photographs taken at infrared wavelengths, and from our position near the
outskirts of our galaxy, we look toward the center and see this bulge, and if we look off to the
sides, we see a disk of stars getting fainter and fainter as you go further and further away
from the bulge. But this is sort of an all-sky view of our galaxy. A schematic representation
is shown here with the thin disk of our galaxy, maybe one or two thousand light years thick,
and perhaps a hundred thousand light years across. In the very center, there's the nucleus,
and then a bulge of rather old stars. There's also a halo containing old stars and globular clusters.
The disk contains both old stars and younger stars, and in particular the young stars are
formed in the spiral arms. The globular clusters are a beautiful site. Here's a fantastic
photograph of one of them. Giant clusters of hundreds of thousands or even millions of stars
gravitationally bound together, orbiting as units the center of our galaxy. And you can take quite
good photographs of these things even through relatively small, amateur-sized telescopes.
Here's a beautiful photograph taken through an amateur telescope, and here's another one.
They're just really great objects, although if you look through a telescope, you rarely can see the
individual stars. They kind of blur together because they're faint and there are many of them,
but in a photograph, you can discern them. You get great views with the Hubble Space Telescope,
where you can go all the way down into the central regions of globular clusters and see
individual stars. Here in this photograph, they're a little bit burnt out, but in other
stretches of this photograph, you can see stars all the way down to the center because you don't
have the turbulent effects of the Earth's atmosphere. Now the band of light stretching
across the sky, which we call the Milky Way, I've already described in lecture five. It's got this
splotchy distribution, dark regions like this, and bright regions, concentrations of stars,
clouds of illuminated gas, clouds of dark gas and dust, very splotchy thing. And basically,
as I've said before, the Milky Way is what you get when you look along the plane of our galaxy,
where you see a multitude of stars along the plane, whereas perpendicular to the plane or at
other odd angles, you're just not looking through regions that have as many stars. So that's what
the plane of the Milky Way is caused by. We're looking through the disc of our galaxy. Now our
own solar system, the ecliptic plane, is tilted by about 60 degrees relative to the galactic plane.
And during the summer months, as viewed from the Northern Hemisphere, we are actually crossing
the galactic plane, and the center of our Milky Way is in this direction. During the Northern
Hemisphere's winter months, at night, we're actually looking toward the direction opposite
to the direction of the center of our galaxy. And recall that our own axis of rotation is tilted
relative to the vertical. So here's the axis of rotation of our whole solar system, and Earth's
axis is tilted by 23.5 degrees. Now in the summer, in our Northern Hemisphere summer,
the Milky Way galaxy center is off to the right here, to my right, and the sun is there. So here's
the night sky looking out this way, and you can see that the center of our galaxy is quite low
above the horizon, as seen from the Northern Hemisphere. But from the Southern Hemisphere,
the center of our galaxy is high above the horizon. In fact, it passes nearly overhead.
So you get a better view of the Milky Way from the Southern Hemisphere of the Earth during the
Northern Hemisphere summer, or hence the Southern Hemisphere winter. You don't get such a great
view from the Northern Hemisphere, although you still can get quite a nice view if you have dark
skies. And if you really look up at the sky when it's really dark and away from city lights and
the moon is down, you get a totally glorious view of the Milky Way. And the central part of our
galaxy is over here in this direction. And I described how when I observed in Chile, far from
any city lights, I just felt like I was immersed in the Milky Way with the whole thing forming this
giant structure above me, like an inverted bowl. The celestial sphere is this inverted bowl with
this giant structure hovering above me. It was just a marvelous feeling. It made me feel like I'm
part of the Milky Way galaxy in a way that I never felt before. Now if you take a pair of
binoculars and you sweep across the Milky Way, you'll see lots of these nebulae, dark nebulae,
bright nebulae, clusters and things like that. And in the Southern Hemisphere you can see Alpha
and Beta Centauri, which are pretty much right smack in the Milky Way galaxy, near the Southern
Cross, which within it has a region called the Colesack, because it looks so dark relative to
the surrounding regions that have lots of bright stars. There there's a bunch of dust blocking
our view of the more distant stars. And looking over toward the constellations Sagittarius and
Scorpius, you can see many such dark clouds and also some brighter regions and then some glowing
clouds of gas where you have hot stars ionizing the gas. And in nice deep photographs of the Milky
Way, you can see all these magnificent structures. I urge you to just take a good pair of binoculars,
go to a dark site and explore the Milky Way. It'll just be a fantastic experience.
Now I should mention that not all the nebulae are clouds of gas within our galaxy.
Some nebulae, in particular nebulae called spiral nebulae, like the ones shown here,
turn out to be galaxies of their own, far, far from our own galaxy. And the nature of these spiral
nebulae was controversial about a century ago, but now we know that they are other galaxies.
Now these other galaxies cannot be seen in the plane of our own Milky Way galaxy very easily
because of all the dust and gas blocking the view through the plane. So you tend to see the
spiral nebulae, the other galaxies, perpendicular to the plane of the Milky Way or at pretty steep
angles to the plane of the Milky Way. These nebulae can be stunningly beautiful. The Orion
Nebula is just a great object 1,500 light years away in the sword of the constellation Orion.
So there's the belt, there are the feet, the shoulders, the head, and then the sword. Let's
zoom in on it. It's this region of star formation where stars have been formed for the past few
million years and we can see these young stars. And moreover, peering down into the depths of the
Orion Nebula, we can witness the process of star formation as it's going on right now. And with
many different telescopes, we've achieved great views of the central regions of nebulae like this,
showing in detail the process of star formation. If we look at a spiral galaxy in general and
talk about these spiral arms, which have the nebulae within them, the arms glow largely because of the
massive young stars that form within them and that emit a lot of light and which then ionize
and cause to glow the surrounding clouds of gas. So these are the emission nebulae. The gas is
ionized by ultraviolet radiation from these hot massive stars that form in these giant nebulae.
So here with the Orion Nebulae, you see in particular four central, very massive,
very hot stars that are emitting a flood of ultraviolet radiation. And that ultraviolet
radiation can ionize atoms in particular, I show hydrogen here, kicking the electron away.
And when that electron finds another free proton, it can recombine emitting a photon,
emitting a quantum of light, and then cascade down to lower and lower energy levels, emitting
yet more light. So that's the process by which these nebulae glow. So here we have the electron
recombining with the proton, emitting a photon, and then it cascades down in one or more jumps
to lower energy levels, again emitting photons. So that's one of the process by which these things
glow. The other process, as I've already described, is when an electron kicks another electron already
bound in an atom up to a higher energy level. So it gives some of its kinetic energy, its energy
of motion to the electron that's bound in an atom, kicks it up to a higher energy level,
and then from that higher energy level, the electron cascades down and emits light. So
I discussed this when I discussed planetary nebulae, like the one we're zooming in on here,
the Katzai nebula. And it's a wonderful structure glowing because of the ultraviolet radiation
emitted in this case by the dying star in the middle of this nebula. Now the process
by which the nebula glows is the same as in the emission nebulae I've just described,
but in the case of the emission nebulae I just described, it's young new massive stars
forming the flood of ultraviolet photons that ionize the gas rather than an old dying star
producing the ultraviolet photons. Here's another planetary nebula where you've got this old dying
star whose core is becoming exposed and the hot core emits ultraviolet photons and ionizes the
cloud of gas. And I had discussed that in lecture 51, but the important thing to keep in mind is that
though the glowing process is the same in a nebula where new stars are forming,
in this case the new stars, the new massive hot stars are the things that produce the ultraviolet
photons in contrast to the planetary nebulae where it was an old dying star whose exposed core is
really hot and produces the ultraviolet photons. So there's a slight distinction there.
If you look at then a schematic of the gas around a hot massive star that emits a lot of
ultraviolet photons, you see that those photons ionize the atoms in its vicinity out to sort of
a spherical region like this and beyond some distance there's not enough photons to ionize
the atoms and so they remain neutral. So here's a region of neutral atoms. Surrounding the star
there's a region of ionized atoms. In particular when hydrogen is ionized it's referred to as H
with a Roman numeral 2. Neutral hydrogen is referred to as H Roman numeral 1. So here's an H2 region
surrounding a hot massive young star. Here's another region that has a concentration of
hydrogen atoms, it's a cloud, it's a nebula, but it hasn't yet formed a star that's emitting
ultraviolet photons. So in this nebula the gas is still neutral, it is an H1 region.
Okay, now in some cases there's enough ultraviolet photons that they can even
eject one of the electrons from a helium atom producing ionized helium as well, although
it takes a lot of energy to ionize helium and most stars don't produce
ultraviolet photons having so much energy. Instead they just produce ultraviolet photons with enough
energy to ionize the hydrogen. Now within this H2 region then these different processes that I just
described can occur, recombination of an electron with a proton or collisional excitation and then
cascading downwards. In either case you get a spectrum of emission lines. So plotting apparent
brightness versus wavelength or color, you see a continuum produced by the hot stars in the nebula
and then you see these spikes, these emission lines produced by the ionized gases, in this case
doubly ionized oxygen or by neutral hydrogen, here's the hydrogen beta line, there's the hydrogen
alpha line due to electrons cascading down the different levels that are allowed in the hydrogen
atom and so you get this spiky structure and from analysis of the spikes you can determine things
like the chemical composition of the nebula, the temperature of the star producing the ionizing
photons and things like that. Now these nebulae then glow at these various colors, these various
emission lines and if you isolate the light from the various emission lines and produce several
different photographs through filters passing light from one emission line versus another and then
combine them you can get these incredible photographs through this tricolor process where for example
you combine three different pictures isolating light from three emission lines at say blue,
green and red wavelengths and then you combine them and you get these fantastic pictures like the
ones produced by Richard Crisp and other amateur astronomers who do this process. It's a fantastic
process because they get these great pictures and earlier I in fact illustrated how you get
these pictures for an object like the crab nebula where again you have an emission line spectrum
and if you isolate or filter through the light from each of these strong emission lines you get
a different picture depending on which emission line you are imaging and when you combine the
pictures you get this fantastic structure I just love those photographs and here's a picture of
the Orion nebula taken using this tricolor process with several different filters. All right well
those are the emission nebulae they glow because the ultraviolet photons of hot massive stars ionize
the gas and essentially cause it to fluoresce. There's another type of nebula a reflection
nebula where you have visible photons being reflected off of small particles of matter we call them
dust just fine particulate matter and this is dust tends to be mixed in with gas wherever you
have nebulae where you have gas you also have dust some places have more dust than others
but in any case if you have the dust it can reflect the light and the reflection process works best
for blue light so the reflection nebulae as they're called tend to be blue like the nebula
surrounding the stars of the Pleiades the seven sisters that nebulae is a reflection nebula it's
not glowing because these stars have ionized the gas no these stars aren't hot enough to ionize gas
they don't emit enough ultraviolet photons but they do emit visible light photons which then
reflect off of the dust causing the surrounding nebulosity to glow and the light that is reflected
is predominantly blue for the same reason that our sky is blue i had already discussed with you
how sunlight going through the atmosphere gets reflected by molecules and also by dust particles
in our atmosphere and the blues greens and violets get reflected more easily than the red
and orange colors so the red and orange photons go streaming through whereas the blues tend to get
reflected and they reach our eyes so away from the sun the sky looks blue now of course the sun set
looks red because the sunlight is filtering through so much of the atmosphere that most of the violet
and blue and green photons have either been reflected away or absorbed by gas and smog in our atmosphere
leaving the orange and red colors to filter through to your eyes so we had discussed we had discussed
that before and here we see a celestial example where the blue reflection nebulae are blue for
essentially the same reason as the daytime blue sky so here you have a bright star that's not
emitting much ultraviolet light but it is emitting optical light which reflects off of the dust
particles causing this blue glow in this nebula here the trifid or trifid there are some hot stars
that are ionizing the clouds of gas and those ionized clouds of gas then recombine and you get
hydrogen alpha photons which tend to be red and that's what causes this reddish glow here
you also see some very dark regions those are dense dusty nebulae called dark nebulae or absorption
nebulae where there's so much material that it blocks the light that's behind that object as seen
by us and doesn't let that light come through so those look dark in in relation to the very
bright surroundings now here's a good example of a reflection nebula surrounded by a dark nebula
and this reflection nebulae glows blue and it looks kind of like the north american continents so
here's a big version of florida and there's the caribbean and mexico and then here's the california
origan and washington coast and up here is is canada so that's called the north american nebula
kind of a cool thing so there are usually all three types of nebulae where you find you know when
where you find one you you tend to find others as well and in particular here you have the horse head
nebula where there's a reflection nebula around a bright star emitting visible photons down here
over here there's some hot stars that are ionizing the clouds of gas and causing them to glow through
the various processes that i described but then here in the shape of a horse's head is a particularly
dark and dense cloud of gas that blocks the background light and there are not that many
stars visible within it as well because it's just too dense for light to pass through here's another
example of a reflection nebula next to this bright star some emission nebulae there and some dark
nebulae here in some cases you can't even see the star that's ionizing the emission nebula
because it might be behind this dark nebula here's another example of a reflection nebula
surrounding a dark nebula and then there's some emission nebulae over here and then the eagle
nebula is a fantastic object where the dark nebulae are so dense that we know that stars
are forming down in there because we've seen them with infrared and radio wavelengths if we zoom
down into the eagle nebula we can we can see the grandeur the majesty of our galaxy and of all these
stars and the glowing clouds of gas and dust from which the stars formed and we go down down into
this nebula peering ever closer into the heart of what's going on in there and although it might be
hidden at visible wavelengths if you look at the same region in the infrared or at radio wavelengths
you can see new stars forming here's another example the trifid or trifid nebula zooming in
on this thing from far away as we come closer and closer we can see the glowing clouds of gas
and the reflection nebula produced by a bright star shining photons off of dust particles and
down in the core of the dark cloud of the trifid nebula there are some new stars that recently
formed as well as stars that are still forming so here's a schematic of what's happening in these
nebulae in the densest parts new stars form they emit ultraviolet light that ionizes at least
a certain region around that cluster of hot stars that's then the h2 region that emits the
emission lines surrounding that is a region of neutral gas that doesn't produce such emission
lines if you have a very dark dense nebula the ultraviolet photons don't penetrate it very much
and neither do other photons of optical or ultraviolet wavelengths but radio and infrared
photons might penetrate it and allow you to see what's going on inside and then out here there
might be a reflection nebula where optical photons made it through this ionized cloud and got to the
reflection nebula and then dust in the reflection nebula reflected those visible light photons
and in this photograph you can see once again the horse head nebula a dark nebula surrounded by
the emission nebula with various other reflection nebulae in its vicinity this whole structure
is just below the belt of Orion so these diffuse clouds of gas and dust between the stars are
part of what we call the interstellar medium much of the interstellar medium has a very low density
is and is very diffuse but in some regions you have these denser clouds of gas which can become
gravitationally unstable and collapse to form new stars the densest of the clouds form molecules
and here you can see the central part of what's called a giant molecular cloud the densities
of the particles are so high up to a million particles per cubic centimeter that molecules
can begin to form and in those densest regions new stars are forming as well so here we're seeing
just the central few light years half a parsec or so of this vast thing the Orion nebula which
we've looked at before but here's the core of it where you have these densities of a million
particles per cubic centimeter still trillions of times less dense than the atmosphere of the earth
at sea level this is better than any vacuum we've ever produced on earth but for interstellar space
this is dense the typical density is one particle per cubic centimeter loose clouds might be a hundred
or a thousand particles or atoms per cubic centimeter but these dense molecular clouds
contain a hundred thousand up to a million particles per cubic centimeter and they span
regions up to a few hundred light years across these are the regions that form giant clusters
of thousands of stars and if we zoom in now on one of these regions the cone nebula we can see
deep inside stars forming right before our very eyes now by that i mean that we can't see
the process overnight or anything but but by looking at these objects with different telescopes
and looking at nebulae having different ages like this cone nebula and and other nebulae like the
eagle nebula that we can zoom in on we can see the process of star formation at different stages
of development so it's kind of like looking at the evolution of stars you look at different stars
and you can see them at different stages of their development in a similar way zooming into the eagle
nebula we can see stars in different stages of their development and we see this whole process
of star formation in that sense going on right before our very eyes not to say that one particular
star formed before our very eyes but but but the whole collection of them in different stages of
development formed and we can see those different stages of formation and the realization then
that our sun and planets formed from this interstellar medium whose composition is gradually
changing as a result of the heavy elements ejected into the cosmos by supernovae the realization that
we formed from structures like this chemically enriched by previous generations of massive stars
was a monumental step in our understanding of our place in the cosmos and and our origins in this
vast universe
