I have discussed how the space between the stars is filled with gas and dust.
Gas is just little atoms and molecules and dust is fine particulate matter.
And in general this interstellar medium is splotchy.
There are denser regions and there are less dense regions.
And stars form out of the densest clumps, okay?
Well the gas and dust though the site of star formation does present a problem for us because
it blocks our view of various parts of our galaxy.
It's like smog and you can't see through it very easily and so you can't see stars
that are behind dense clumps or even if you can see the stars they appear fainter than
they would have otherwise appeared.
So if you look at the sky with the naked eye and start counting stars and plot their positions
around you, you will see that there's about the same number of bright stars in all directions
of the band of light we call the Milky Way.
That is you can't see a huge concentration toward the center of our galaxy because in
fact the center of our galaxy is blocked or obscured by clouds of gas and dust between
us and the center of our galaxy.
This is a process called extinction or obscuration of light.
So the astronomers at the late 19th century who looked at the sky and counted stars in
different parts of the sky and saw about the same number of stars in all directions
of the band of the Milky Way and concluded that our sun is in the center of the Milky
Way and moreover concluded that the Milky Way galaxy isn't very big because you couldn't
see stars that were more than a few thousand light years away.
So that's the size of the Milky Way and we're at the center.
This extinction or obscuration of the starlight is similar to smog.
Now I did my graduate studies at Caltech in Pasadena and in the late 70s and early 80s
LA was a much smogger place than it is now because now there are better emission controls
on cars and things like that.
But from Caltech the San Gabriel Mountains are just a few miles away and on some days
you could see them clearly.
On other days they were barely visible and on some days I'm sad to say you couldn't
see them at all because of the smog not just fog or clouds.
You can see this effect when you look through fog as well.
Through thick fog you can't see anything.
Through thin fog parts of the road here for example are visible but they're clearly obscured.
You can't see them as easily and the parts that you can see are dimmer than they would
otherwise have been.
Will Harlow Shapley in 1917 realize that we're not in the center of our galaxy?
He saw that the distribution of globular star clusters had a higher concentration in one
part of the celestial sphere than in the opposite part.
Because the globular clusters were these grand structures containing hundreds of thousands
of stars bound to each other he assumed that the globular cluster system is centered on
the center of our galaxy.
This was a bold assumption and not particularly well motivated by other data but he just thought
that the system of globular clusters probably in a sense is a backbone for our galaxy and
he was right in his gut feeling.
So from the distribution of the globular clusters from their distances and their positions in
the sky he realized that our sun is out near the edge of our galaxy and that our galaxy
is much bigger than had been thought before.
So here is the schematic that he drew.
Our galaxy has this concentration of globular clusters surrounding the center and because
there were more globular clusters in these general directions of the sky than in the
opposite directions he concluded that our sun is offset by a considerable distance from
the center of our galaxy.
And from the distances of the globular clusters he concluded that the center of our galaxy
is very far away.
I think he concluded that it's something like 100,000 light years away or more.
So in fact it turns out he overestimated the size of our galaxy.
We now know that our sun is only 24 or 25,000 light years from the center and that overestimate
resulted from the fact that he didn't properly take into account the dimming or obscuration
of even the globular clusters by this interstellar gas and dust.
Its effects were not known yet.
They became known about a dozen years later from the work of Trumpler.
But he shapely didn't know about the dimming effect and so looking at the brightnesses of
the globular clusters and figuring out their distances from their apparent brightnesses
and comparing with the known luminosity of nearby ones he overestimated their distance
and hence the distance to the center of our galaxy.
Nevertheless he was clearly right that our galaxy is much bigger than previous astronomers
had thought and that our sun is not in the center.
Now let's look at our Milky Way galaxy taking a deeper view.
If you take a long exposure photograph like this one then you begin to see the faint stars
and then you can see that indeed there is a concentration of stars toward the center
of our galaxy compared with other regions of the Milky Way.
But this isn't so readily visible when you're looking only at naked eye stars alright because
you only see out a couple of thousand light years or so and you can't see to the center
of our galaxy.
But in a deep photograph like this you can see much more distant fainter stars and their
concentration toward the center starts becoming apparent.
It becomes even more apparent if you look at our galaxy with infrared wavelengths or
radio wavelengths where you can penetrate the clouds of gas and dust and see most of
the stars and in that case you can readily tell that we are offset toward the edge of
our galaxy.
Well the interstellar extinction or obscuration that you can see when you look at these clouds
of gas in the Milky Way galaxy prevent us from seeing in detail the spiral arms and
I discussed this in the previous lecture that we can't really tell the structure of the
maze in which we're located.
Other galaxies have spiral arms that are readily visible because we see them from the outside
and especially for a face on galaxy like this there's very little gas and dust blocking
our view of the spiral arms.
If that galaxy were edge on then the gas and dust within that galaxy would block our view
of its spiral arms.
But here for a face on galaxy they're easy to see and here's a beautiful galaxy the whirlpool
galaxy where the spiral arms are once again easy to see.
So how do you map the spiral arms in our own galaxy?
Well as I said massive stars form in the arms because there are nebulae clouds of gas and
dust in the arms.
So you can look for type O and B main sequence stars, young massive stars that have not had
much of a chance to wander away from their birth places because they simply don't live
a long time and you look at how bright they appear to be, figure out their distance, taking
into account interstellar extinction and all that and you can kind of tell where the arms
are based on the distribution of type O and B main sequence stars.
But they're rare so you can't really tell the detailed structure of our arms.
You can also find the distances of star clusters.
Since clusters form in the arms and don't have that much time to move away in general
especially if they're young clusters you can map out the spiral arms by looking at the
distribution of clusters in our galaxy.
But an even better way to map the distribution of the arms is to use radio astronomy techniques
and look at the light emitted by cold clouds of atomic hydrogen.
Those clouds of atomic hydrogen emit radio waves which find themselves in essentially
a transparent galaxy.
They don't care about the clouds of gas and dust that obscure optical and ultraviolet
light.
Radio waves just bend around those particles.
Just as on a smoggy or a foggy day you can hear your radio stations in your car even
though you might not be able to see more than 100 yards in front of you.
So radio waves pass through space even if it has clouds of gas and dust.
And the line of neutral hydrogen is produced by the following process.
You have hydrogen in its ground state where the electron is in its lowest energy level
compared to the higher energy levels out here.
But it turns out that that lowest energy level actually is split by what's called a hyperfine
transition into two very closely spaced energy levels.
They are defined by the energy of an electron and a proton when both are spinning in the
same direction as shown here as compared with when the electron and proton are spinning
in opposite directions.
Now protons and electrons are fundamental particles or nearly fundamental particles
that have this property called spin and the spin makes them behave kind of like a magnet.
So they have this orientation effect where two magnets that are aligned parallel to each
other like this.
There is no tendency for the two magnets to attract each other.
In fact they repel one another.
But if I now flip one of them over they attract each other like this.
And this is a lower energy state than when they are both pointing in the same direction.
So it's natural for the electron and proton to want to flip over in such a way that their
spins are opposite.
And during this flip a photon of radio radiation having a wavelength of just 21 centimeters
well into the radio part of the spectrum gets emitted.
So cold clouds of hydrogen can emit this radiation but you might ask how do the atoms get in
such a state where both the electron and the proton are oriented with their spins in
the same direction in the first place.
That is how do they get into the higher energy state?
Well if you have cold hydrogen atoms sitting around and occasionally they collide with
other particles those collisions can flip the electron to be in the higher energy state
relative to the proton.
That is you flip them in such a way that the magnets are aligned.
And after something like typically 10 or 11 million years the electron decides to flip
over.
In other words it's not too unhappy in this higher energy state because it's not a very
much higher energy state.
It's only higher by the energy equivalent of one 21 centimeter radio photon and that's
not a very much higher energy.
So the electron doesn't mind being there but after 10 or 11 million years it decides okay
on average that's about how much time I wait before I flip over to the lower energy state
and emit this photon.
Now they do it only very rarely but if you have clouds that are hundreds of light years
across there's enough hydrogen atoms that enough of them are producing this radiation
at any given time that you can see that radiation coming from a clump of gas, a cloud.
And there are special techniques for determining how far away that cloud is and I simply don't
have time to go into them.
But in this way you can map the distribution of clouds of gas in our galaxy and see whether
it has nice orderly spiral structure like some of the other spiral galaxies I showed.
And the result is that you don't see a very orderly spiral structure.
You see kind of some hints of some spiral arms but also blobby distribution with lots
of spurs and things sticking out.
And it could be that our galaxy doesn't have a grand design spiral structure, it might
have more short stubby arms or this could partly be due to uncertainties in the distances
that are determined to these clouds because it turns out to be quite tricky to determine
these distances after all.
In any case our galaxy definitely does have at least some stubby arms and maybe a few
bigger ones off of which these stubby ones emerge.
So how do the clouds and stars in our galaxy move?
What are their trajectories?
What are their orbits?
We can study their relative motions that is their motions relative to the sun and if
we know that the sun is orbiting the center of our galaxy in roughly a circle or a little
bit of an ellipse with a speed of 200 kilometers per second and if we know those relative motions
then we can determine the absolute motions of the stars and clouds of gas in our galaxy.
Well, okay, how do we get the motions of stars relative to the sun?
The radial motion toward us or away from us is easy to obtain from the Doppler shift.
It's this business where you take the spectrum of the star, see how much the pattern of lines
is shifted to the red or to the blue wavelengths and from the amount of that shift you get
the speed of the star.
So the radial velocity is easy to get.
The transverse velocity, that is the speed in the plane of the sky, is harder to get.
We see that stars are moving over the years ever so slightly relative to one another in
the sky.
Those are called proper motions.
If you look at the proper motion of the fastest moving known star, Barnard's star, you can
see that from 1997 to 2004 it moved a considerable distance relative to the more stable distance
stationary, more distant, less rapidly moving stars in its vicinity.
If you look at the Big Dipper and you ask yourself, what did its shape look like a hundred
thousand years ago and what will it look like a hundred thousand years from now and in the
meantime?
Well, we can look at the proper motions of all the stars in that part of the sky and
see how the Big Dipper changes in appearance from one hundred thousand BC to one hundred
thousand AD.
Let's run through that again.
It starts at one hundred thousand BC, here it is about now and then a hundred thousand
years from now it will have a very different shape indeed.
And you can see that the other stars are moving as well.
They're moving every which way because all stars have some amount of proper motion and
some stars have more than others.
Why might a star have a bigger angular motion across the sky than another star?
Well, maybe it's physically moving faster.
Okay, if a star is at the same distance as another star but physically moving faster,
it'll have a greater angular motion across the sky.
Or maybe they're at the same, or maybe they're moving with the same speed but one of them
is much closer to you than the other, than the one that's closer will appear to move
in angular motion across the sky more quickly.
And you've seen this when you're near an airport, right?
You see the airplanes taking off and they go zooming across the sky from sort of horizon
to horizon.
And at takeoff they're not moving as quickly as they are once they're nicely high up in
the sky.
Yet high up in the sky you see an airplane and it's sort of crawling across the sky.
The angular motion is small, okay?
So clearly distance is an important effect.
And finally, it's important whether most of the star's motion is across your line of
sight, like this, or toward you, radial.
For a given physical speed, clearly the angular motion will be greater if more of it is perpendicular
to your line of sight than if it's along your line of sight.
So all these factors come into play when getting the proper motion or angular speed
of a star across the sky.
If you measure the angular motion and you also determine the distance using triangulation
or trigonometric parallax or spectroscopic parallax or other techniques, then you can
get the physical motion in kilometers per second.
That is, if you know the angular motion and you know the distance, then you can figure
out the physical speed.
Similarly for an airplane, if you know its angular motion and you know its distance,
you can figure out its physical speed.
So that physical speed in the plane of the sky called transverse motion as opposed to
the radial velocity, well those two velocities together give you the space motion or the
space velocity.
And here it's illustrated.
Here's a star which moves in a certain amount of time over to here radially along the direction
to the sun and also moves transverse to the direction to the sun, that is in the plane
of the sky by a certain amount.
And its total space motion is this distance divided by a certain amount of time which
gives you a space velocity.
That space velocity is the combination of the radial velocity and the transverse velocity.
When you measure the space velocity of a bunch of stars in the vicinity of the sun, you find
that there's a fair amount of random motion, sort of chaotic, okay?
Some stars are moving toward us and in the same direction of the sky, others are moving
away.
But when you do this for a bunch of stars, you find that there's a sort of an average
motion, a mean motion.
And what you find is that if here's the sun, then stars that are the same distance from
the center of the galaxy, which is down here somewhere, are not moving at all toward us
or away from us.
That means they must be moving with us at about 200 kilometers per second.
On the other hand, stars that are closer toward the center of our galaxy than our sun are
seen to be overtaking us.
They're moving at about the same speed, but they have a smaller circumference to go.
And so they're passing us up, it turns out.
And conversely, stars that are not too far away, but farther from the center than our
sun is, they turn out to be moving at about the same speed as our sun.
But because they have a bigger circumference to go through, they are lagging behind the
sun as seen by us.
So everything is rotating in this direction, from left to right.
But the stars closer in are passing us up, and the stars farther out are lagging behind.
This is known as differential rotation.
You can also get the relative motion by looking at the radio radiation emitted by clouds of
hydrogen gas throughout our galaxy.
And they're doing the same sorts of thing.
There's a differential rotation.
If you look at, then, the picture of our galaxy and how the stars and clouds of gas are moving,
here we are out here at 24,000 light years.
We're moving at about 200 kilometers per second.
But most parts of our galaxy are also moving at about 200 kilometers per second.
There's a little dip here at 180 and a slightly higher velocity at 230 closer to the center.
And then even closer to the center, the stars and clouds of gas are moving more slowly.
But over much of the galaxy, everything is orbiting at about 200 kilometers per second.
So if you plot the speed of rotation of our galaxy versus the distance from the center,
close into the center, the stars are moving more slowly than 200 kilometers per second.
But out at about 1,000 parsecs and beyond, the speed is roughly constant at about 200
kilometers per second.
The rotation curve of our galaxy is said to be flat.
All right?
Now this is true for many other spiral galaxies, it turns out.
You measure how quickly they're rotating as a function of distance from the center,
and they seem to have this flat rotation curve.
It's a generic property of spiral galaxies.
And it has strong implications for the formation of spiral arms in the first place.
If you ask yourself, why don't the arms wrap up quickly, like the cream in a coffee cup,
which you put into the coffee cup, and then you swirl it around, and the cream makes a
spiral pattern that wraps up quickly, well so too should the arms of our galaxy.
Because look, if all the stars and clouds of gas are moving at about 200 kilometers per
second, but the ones closer into the center of the galaxy have a smaller orbital distance,
a smaller circumference for the circle, they will get in front of the ones that are farther
away.
And similarly, the ones that are really far away will lag behind the ones that are in
the middle.
So very quickly what you have is this stretching out of an initially radial spoke, let's say
you started out that way, and that radial spoke quickly winds up and forms spiral arms
that are too tightly wound compared with the typical ones that we think are in our galaxy
and the ones we definitely see in other galaxies.
So if the whole thing is rotating at 200 kilometers per second, why don't the arms get very tightly
wound up?
Well, the solution is that the arms are actually what's called a density wave.
The arms don't consist of a bunch of stars which forever remain in those arms, rather
the arms are a compression of gas where new stars form and then gradually move out of that
region.
The compression of gas rotates around the center of our galaxy at a different speed
than the speed of the typical stars that are wandering around the center of our galaxy.
So you have this pattern, the spiral density waves, which are moving through the disk at
a different speed than the orbital speed of the stars.
And so at any given time, the spiral arms consist of different material at one time
than at some earlier or future time.
Let me give you an example.
Suppose there's a roadblock because people are fixing potholes in a four-lane highway
and you're up in a helicopter looking at the traffic flow and cars are zooming past but
they have to clump up a little bit in order to fit into two lanes here, whereas before
they fit comfortably into four.
But if there's not many cars, they don't actually have to slow down.
Let's say there's no rubber-neckers and they just keep on going at the same speed.
They're not slowing down to look at the action.
All right, well, so all these cars are zipping through, but meanwhile, the people fixing
the potholes are making slow progress and they gradually move along the road, fixing
the potholes along the way.
Meanwhile, all these cars are zipping past at a much higher speed.
And what you would see from a helicopter is a clump of cars that gradually moves along
the highway at a slow speed and a much slower speed than the speed of individual cars that
went zipping through that bottleneck.
So in a similar way, then, in our galaxy, what we think is happening is that the orbits
of stars are elliptical because of a perturbation from other galaxies like the Magellanic Clouds,
little dwarf galaxies that orbit our own.
They cause the stellar orbits to be not quite circular, rather elliptical, and the ellipses
precess or rotate at different rates, causing an apparent clumping up, and the clump has
a spiral structure.
And those clumps are where there are massive clouds of gas and dust from which new stars
form, and then those new massive stars light up the surrounding nebulae, producing the beautiful
arms that we see.
So we see the arms defined by young massive stars and the ionized clouds of gas from which
they form, and dark clouds of gas next to those ionized gas clouds.
But that clumping of clouds, forming a spiral pattern, moves through the disk at a different
rate than the stars do, just as the cars moved past the bottleneck at a different rate than
the bottleneck itself was moving along.
So it's kind of a neat thing, all right?
And we see that our own galaxy has these companions which may be hassling it, which may be perturbing
it to form spiral arms in this way, and indeed, the best so-called grand design spiral galaxies
like this one here, the whirlpool, almost always have a companion which might be gravitationally
perturbing gas in the disk, causing the spiral structure to form in the first place, okay?
Well you might think that looking at this velocity curve, that the speed of stars in
the very center is zero, looks like it's zero, right?
But that's because we haven't taken a very close look at the very central region.
If you take a magnifying glass or better yet a telescope and zoom in on the central region
of our galaxy, you find actually that the speeds are enormously high.
And that's because there's a supermassive black hole in the center of our galaxy, having
about 3.6 million times the mass of our sun.
So let's look at the center of our galaxy.
There it is toward the region of Sagittarius and Scorpius.
It's in this green box.
And with the technique of adaptive optics on big telescopes like the Keck telescope,
or the very large telescope that the Europeans own in Chile, you can get very clear views
of those stars.
And Andrea Ghez at UCLA and Reinhard Genzel in Germany have been for years mapping the
motions of those stars in the central part of our galaxy.
And here's a picture taken with adaptive optics or a related technique in 1994, then in 1996,
and then in 2000.
And you can see that the stars have moved.
In fact, if you plot their positions, you can see that zoom, zoom, zoom, they're orbiting
around something.
Let's look at it again.
Zoom, zoom, zoom.
These stars are moving very quickly around some object marked with a red cross here.
Look at that thing.
That one went so close to whatever is there pulling on it.
It's fantastic.
Now, if you plot these motions of the stars and you look at where they are, so here this
star started here, and then over the years it moved to there.
This one started here, and over the years it moved to there, and so on.
When you look at a few of these in particular, star 2 and star 16, you find that star 2,
for example, passes 124 astronomical units from some sort of a central object that's
pulling on it, and star 16 passed only 45 astronomical units from that same object.
And at the time of closest approach, star 2 was moving at 5,000 kilometers per second,
and star 16 was moving at 12,000 kilometers per second.
From those numbers, you can figure out that there's a common single object right smack
in the middle there marked by this black cross causing these stars to have such incredible
trajectories, and the mass at that central position is 3.6 million solar masses, and
it's confined within a region smaller than 45 astronomical units because we see one of
these stars coming that close to that spot in the sky.
There is nothing that that could be other than a black hole.
Whatever other ideas people have at this point, they are far more exotic than even black holes.
So the center of our galaxy provides, at this time, by far the most compelling evidence
for the existence of not just any old black holes, but the supermassive variety which
we will see are a common characteristic of spiral and other galaxies.
