Having explored how astronomers find distant galaxies and how they study the properties
of various types of nearby galaxies to compare with those distant galaxies, let's now learn
what we've found out about the evolution of galaxies, clusters, and the universe.
First, let's consider what our basic expectations might be.
For the formation of the disk of a spiral galaxy, we actually think that what happens
is that there's initially a collapsing, slowly spinning cloud of gas, a vast cloud of primordial
material. And as it collapses, it spins faster, just like a ballet dancer spins faster as she
brings her arms in, because of the conservation of angular momentum. For a given amount of mass,
if that mass is concentrated into a smaller volume, it must spin faster. So the spin rate
increases. Now collisions between the various atoms in this cloud of gas will radiate energy.
They collide with one another, so some of their kinetic energy goes into exciting electrons up
into higher energy levels, and those electrons then come cascading down, emitting that radiation,
and hence causing the cloud of gas to lose energy. And as it loses energy, it flattens out,
just like the disk of our solar system flattened out due to collisions among all the little
particles in the beginning. Along the equator, you don't flatten out as much, you don't come down in
as much, because the centrifugal force, the outward force that you feel in a rotating frame of reference,
keeps you out a little bit. But along the axis, you can flatten down. So after the disk forms,
stars then coalesce out of clouds of gas in that disk, and you get essentially the disk of the
galaxy, a bunch of young stars and maybe some older stars, but a mixture of stars. And indeed,
if you look at the disk of a spiral galaxy, it has a mixture of some young stars, some old stars.
The youngest stars are the ones that are forming now in spiral arms from clouds of gas that have
not yet formed stars, and the older stars are from the clouds of gas that collapsed to form the disk
billions of years ago. But basically, you get this disk-like structure. In the case of an
elliptical galaxy, we think that once again, we start with a vast cloud of gas, but it's not
spinning as quickly. And for some reason, maybe that lack of spin is somehow related to the efficiency
with which stars can form, because it appears as though stars form much earlier in an elliptical
galaxy than in a spiral galaxy. And once stars form, if they form very early when the thing is
still roughly spherical and big, then energy can't be dissipated because the stars hardly ever
collide with one another. There's very huge amounts of space between the stars, and they almost
never collide. So if the stars formed when they were still in a large spherical volume, then that
volume cannot flatten down because there's no way to dissipate the energy. So you get then a large
distribution of stars in a roughly spherical or elliptical shape, depending on just how much
rotation there was for this vast cloud of gas. But we see that indeed elliptical galaxies consist of
old stars as though they formed long, long ago when the cloud of gas was still spherical or
roughly spherical, maybe flattened a little bit. Now, if you combine those two things and you ask
what happens when you form a spiral galaxy that has both a halo and a bulge, which are roughly
spherical in shape, and a disc, which is flattened, well, we think that again it starts as a collapsing
spinning cloud of gas. There's some initial star formation that made the halo of the spiral galaxy,
and later there's some star formation that formed the bulge. But most of the star formation
occurred much later when the gas had had a chance to settle into a disc through
collisions among the gas particles that dissipated the energy. Okay, so the gas that remains gaseous
is able to collide and dissipate energy. The gas that turned into stars becomes collisionless and
isn't able to dissipate energy. So halos are roughly spherical, discs are flat. And in this
picture then you have this collapsing cloud of gas that's somewhat rotating. Some globular clusters
and lone stars form out here early in the halo. The rest of the gas keeps on collapsing because
it's still in gaseous form and is able to dissipate energy. After collapsing to a disc, it then starts
forming stars. So you get a combination of both a halo and a disc with also a bulge. That's the
basic idea of galaxy formation. And when we observe spiral galaxies, as I said before, we do indeed
find a halo and a bulge, both of which are roughly spherical or somewhat flattened, and then a highly
flattened disc. So those are the basic expectations. Now what about reality? What have we learned
through comparisons of distant galaxies with nearby galaxies and looking at different types
of nearby galaxies and doing massive computations and simulations with supercomputers and a bunch
of smaller computers parallel processing? What have we actually found? What's reality? Well,
we found that some of this picture that I just described, some of the expectations have indeed
been borne out through the observations and simulations. But there are complexities that
we had not yet anticipated when this simple model had been established. One of the complexities
that we found is that though most elliptical galaxies did indeed form a long time ago,
especially those ellipticals that are in clusters of galaxies, for whatever reason,
the dense regions of clusters tend to form ellipticals early on, nevertheless ellipticals that
are somewhat solitary and not in dense clusters, in many cases do seem to have formed somewhat
later in time. In other words, relatively recently. Now here's an elliptical galaxy, M87, all of whose
stars are old in which we think formed long ago. It's in the middle of the Virgo cluster.
But there are other elliptical galaxies that formed clearly more recently and we think that
they formed as a result of the interaction and gradual merging of spiral galaxies, disc galaxies.
So here's a galaxy that is basically spiral in shape, but has this long tail. It interacted
in the relatively recent past, say a billion years or so, with another galaxy. And here's a pair of
galaxies where you can still see them interacting and in fact they're quite close to one another.
And these are so close to one another that the numerical simulations show that they will
gradually merge and form an elliptical galaxy. You see the simulation quite well reproduces the
observed shape of that pair of galaxies known as the mice. If we now project forward by a few
billion years, you can see that the mice merge together, throw out some stars, but the central
regions become something that looks a lot like an elliptical galaxy. Well, the Andromeda galaxy,
our nearest neighbor, 2.4 million light years away, is coming toward us, toward the Milky Way,
at about 100 kilometers per second. We can calculate that the Milky Way and the Andromeda
galaxy will begin to merge in five or six billion years and presumably in seven or eight billion
years they will have merged to form an elliptical. So here's a complex numerical simulation with
millions of particles within these galaxies and now they're beginning to gravitationally
interact and merge and you can see tidal tails being formed. That is, the tidal forces or differential
forces of one galaxy on on different parts of the other galaxy stretches out the stars and ejects
some of them in these tidal tails. The others don't get ejected and begin to just sort of
conglomerate together, forming a single galaxy, which for a while looks quite structured and
complex, but with time begins to settle down and relax and look more and more like an elliptical.
Look at these stars escaping off of the frame. Anyway, wait for a few billion years. Well,
which on the computer simulations hopefully take overnight or at most a week and you can
and you can simulate what happens over billions of years and see the formation of elliptical
galaxies from from pairs of spirals. Now let's take a look at another one of these simulations.
When you look at the two galaxies coming together and they begin to merge, you might think that the
stars actually collide quite often and that's not true. This is a gravitational interaction.
It looks like there's a lot of stars there and there are, but the spaces between the stars
are so vast that the stars almost never collide. Rather, they just gravitationally interact and
the two disc or spiral galaxies gradually form this elliptical galaxy. You'll recall indeed from
lecture 18 that the typical spacing in our part of our galaxy between stars, say four light years
or so from the Sun to the nearest star divided by the radius of a typical star like that of the Sun,
that ratio is of order 10 million or 100 million. So the spaces between the stars are much, much
bigger than the stars themselves and that means that the stars themselves almost never collide.
Anyway, when you have a newly formed elliptical like the one in that previous simulation,
it may have a lot of gas and dust still remaining in it because that's the remnant
of the two spiral galaxies that formed the elliptical in the first place. So here is
an example of one of these relatively young ellipticals. This one almost certainly formed
from the merging of two spiral galaxies and you can still see the gas and dust remaining from those
spiral galaxies and in this elliptical star formation is still occurring, not like the old
ellipticals where the star formation ceased a long time ago. Let's look at some of the Hubble
pictures of very distant galaxies like these. These are puny little scrawny bits and pieces of galaxies.
There may be a few thousand light years in diameter. We think these are galaxy building blocks.
So another thing we've learned then besides the fact that the ellipticals form from spirals
is that apparently spirals form from these smaller bits and pieces that gradually coalesce because
we see lots and lots of little tiny galaxies like this, physically small bits of galaxies
at high red shifts and today we see very few such things. So we think a lot of these guys merge
together to form spirals and some perhaps didn't merge and they just faded with time as the star
formation rate declined and indeed when you look at relatively distant spiral galaxies they look
like train wrecks. Look at these things. These are a few billion light years away and they look
like they resulted from the coalescence of a bunch of these smaller subunits or building blocks.
So instead of big spiral galaxies forming from the collapse of one giant cloud it appears that at
least in some cases, if not many cases, spiral galaxies formed instead as a result of the coalescence
of a bunch of smaller subunits like these. So here's a bright beautifully formed nearby spiral
galaxy. It may have formed according to the picture I told you about at the beginning of the lecture
but it also may have formed, it now seems, from the coalescence of these smaller building blocks.
When these various bits and pieces of galaxies that are going to form bigger galaxies come together
and the clouds of gas mesh into one another, collide. Gas, you know, can collide because the
space between the atoms is actually pretty small. So these things can collide and send pressure waves
into each other and this can lead to the formation of new stars and you can get bursts of star
formation in some of these interacting galaxies. So let me show you some examples. Here are two
interacting galaxies where the clouds of gas are indeed colliding, sending pressure waves or shock
waves through the clouds of gas and inducing the formation of new stars. And if you look at some
of these interacting galaxies where the stars themselves almost never collide but where the
nebulae, the clouds of gas do collide, you in fact do see many, many clusters of stars
presumably induced by this gravitational interaction which also led to the collisions
among the clouds. So here's a close-up of two of these interacting galaxies where you see massive
star clusters that consist of very young massive stars that could only have formed as a result of
this interaction. And a close-up of one of these clusters shows the gas and debris from which
this cluster formed. Here's this great nebula from which a cluster in the very middle formed.
And here's another cluster in a bit of a galaxy that interacted with another galaxy. So in fact,
if you have a supernova near a cloud, that supernova can send shock waves through the cloud
and that can induce the formation of new massive stars like those shown in this
simulation. And then those stars can blow up and they can further compress clouds of gas that are
nearby inducing new star formation. And some of those stars will blow up after a while compressing
other adjacent clouds of gas and dust leading to an additional chain of star formation. So these
gravitational interactions and collisions can induce chains of star formation. And
in galaxies like this one, you see many, many clusters of young massive stars and many filamentary
structures reminiscent of supernova remnants. So here's a galaxy that has had a lot of star
formation going on in the past few tens of millions of years. Here are two galaxies that
didn't collide but are nevertheless gravitationally interacting. And one galaxy
can perturb the gas in another galaxy in such a way as to induce star formation as well,
without actually directly colliding. And in the center of this galaxy, M82,
you see at visible wavelengths a chaotic structure of clouds of gas and dust.
But if you peer down into the infrared, you can actually see more of the stars because the
infrared radiation passes through the gas and dust pretty easily. And there's a lot of stars here
that are just a few million years old and other stars that are still forming. And it's almost
certainly the case that this episode of star formation in this galaxy, M82, was induced by
the gravitational interaction of the binary companion galaxy, Mesier 81. M82 has so much
star formation going on that it's blowing out bubbles, a wind, indeed a superwind. So here's a
view at normal visible wavelengths. And you can see it looks kind of peculiar. This is one of the
peculiar galaxies I defined a few lectures ago. And then if you look at special wavelengths like
hydrogen, alpha, you see all this gas coming out and glowing. This is due to electrons going
from the third to the second energy level in hydrogen atoms. So they glow with a red color.
If you then look in the infrared, you can see that there's dust that's being blown out of this
galaxy as well. Because the dust is warm and it glows at infrared wavelengths. And it has,
if anything, an even broader distribution than this optically glowing hot gas shown in the previous
picture. So the dust sort of surrounds the hottest parts of this outflowing wind. And you can see
the dust glowing at infrared wavelengths. If you go to even higher energy radiation x-rays,
you can actually see the hot gas being blown out of the central regions of M82. And when you put
all of those pictures together, you get this truly glorious view of this galaxy in which a superwind
is blowing out gas, polluting the intergalactic medium, the space between the galaxies with
elements, heavy elements that have been enriched by the process of star formation and star death.
So the intergalactic medium gets some of the remains of the supernovae and other gases remain
gravitationally trapped, chemically enriching these galaxies. But you thought the solar wind
was pretty strong. Man, this is like billions of times stronger than the solar wind, pushing
gas away from this galaxy. It's just a fantastic thing, this galactic superwind. Now I mentioned
how with the infrared, you can peer down into these galaxies and see the stars forming.
In some galaxies, there's so much dust that in fact you don't even see most of the radiation
that's emitted. Here's a galaxy which is visible at optical wavelengths. But if you look at it in
the infrared, it's even more luminous because there's a whole bunch of dust there which is
absorbing the ultraviolet light produced by hot young stars. And then that dust warms up and glows
at infrared wavelengths. So this is a galaxy, ARP 220, that glows much more brightly in the
infrared than in the optical. And an extreme example of this is shown here where, optically,
this cloud of gas hardly shines at all. But if you look at it in the infrared, you can see a
tremendous amount of radiation coming out because that infrared radiation can travel through dense
clouds of gas and dust, whereas optical radiation cannot. Gravitational interactions cause star
formation not just in the central regions of galaxies, but also sometimes in rings surrounding
the bulk of the galaxy. And here's a great example of a galaxy with two companions that
are gravitationally interacting with it. And that gravitational interaction has led to rampant
star formation, not in the nucleus of this galaxy where there's not much gas and dust from which
to form new stars, but rather in the outskirts where apparently there was a lot of gas and dust.
And it got compressed and perturbed as a result of this gravitational interaction
and has formed a whole chain, a whole elliptical ring of stars surrounding the nucleus of this
galaxy. So remember a few lectures ago, I said that these peculiar ring galaxies are thought to be
induced by gravitational interactions with companions. Here we see a very good example of that.
Now galaxy groups merge as well, not just, you know, binary galaxies interacting with each other
and merging to form other galaxies, but groups, whole collections of galaxies can merge. And
it's important to take into account the dark matter when doing computer simulations of these
mergers. So you've got all these galaxies flying around. And by the way, this is a numerical
simulation consisting of tens of millions of particles, stars, gravitationally interacting.
And you can see that initially six or so galaxies were interacting. And now already
several of them have merged together. And the rest will merge together soon. So what we're
seeing here is billions of years of time reproduced in something like 30 seconds or a minute long
animation using supercomputers and clusters of computers hooked together, doing complex,
tedious, long calculations together over the course of just a night or a week. You can see
all these stars coming together, some being blown out during this interaction. You could never watch
this through an optical or a radio telescope. But computers, supercomputers and linked smaller
computers are the theorists telescope. They tell the theoretical astrophysicist what is going on
over the course of billions of years. And this beautifully complements the information that we
get through visual and radio and infrared and x-ray studies. Our own galaxy has been eating
or merging with smaller galaxies for several billions of years. And our two big remaining
satellite galaxies, the Large Magellanic Cloud and the Small Magellanic Cloud, will almost certainly
get consumed by the Milky Way in the next five or six billion years. We already have evidence
that our galaxy has consumed other smaller dwarf galaxies that originally orbited it. You can tell
from certain groups of stars that have a certain distance and a set of motions and other properties.
You can tell that these are torn up small galaxies. Right now, we're not yet eating the Large and
Small Magellanic Clouds, but we are gravitationally interacting with them. And indeed, the Large and
Small Magellanic Clouds appear to have produced a warp in the plane of the distribution of neutral
hydrogen in our galaxy. Here are the central parts of the galaxy where most of the stars are,
and here's where the sun is. But extending far beyond the sun, there's a plane of neutral hydrogen,
and one half of that plane is warped upward, and another half is warped downward. We've known
about that for 50 years, and people thought, well, maybe it's produced by a gravitational
interaction with the Large and Small Magellanic Clouds. But after all, there are such puny galaxies,
how can they possibly cause such a massive warp? Well, my colleagues at Berkeley, together with
another astronomer at the University of Massachusetts, computed the gravitational interaction of the
Large Magellanic Cloud with our galaxy and saw that it can indeed produce a warp which changes
over time. This whole simulation runs one and a half billion years. But the only way that that warp
can be produced is if the Large Magellanic Cloud is interacting with a vast halo of dark matter
in our Milky Way galaxy. That interaction leaves a wake behind the Large Magellanic Cloud, and that
wake in the distribution of dark matter interacting with the neutral hydrogen in the disc of our
galaxy causes it to flop around and warp and all that. That suggests that the dark matter
that we thought is in the halo of our galaxy really is there, because this is independent
evidence for that. Now we can look at the formation of a large cluster of galaxies, and here we see
the expansion of the universe with the redshift going down at the upper left there, so time is
increasing from the Big Bang to the present, and we can see all these galaxies coming together.
Now the universe was expanding in this simulation, you could see that it was getting bigger, but the
galaxies themselves are coming together as a result of their gravitational interaction,
and here you see thousands of galaxies plummeting toward the central region, getting disrupted
and forming a large galaxy called a CD galaxy. Now here's another simulation where we're seeing
a set of galaxies also coming together to form a cluster. In this simulation we're zooming out
with the expansion of the universe, so it looks like the box remains the same size, but really the
universe is expanding, it's just that we're zooming out with the expansion keeping the box
apparently the same size, and again you see all these galaxies coming together merging, and there's
one central galaxy, this CD galaxy that's devouring its neighbors, it's unbelievable how they do this,
but galaxies cannibalize each other, and what started out as thousands of galaxies might end
up as only one or two. The Virgo collaboration, a European collaboration, has done the most extensive
calculations of this type, and here one of its members, Volker Springle, has done a beautiful
visualization of what the computer models churn out. This is a simulation done with literally
billions of particles, and over time you can see them coming together forming galaxies.
See the redshift is up there at the upper left, it's going down meaning that time is moving
forward, and so you're seeing these galaxies coalescing and forming bigger galaxies, these
CD galaxies, these cannibal galaxies, but with time, just a few billion years ago let's say,
even some of the major groupings of galaxies coalesce to form one big monster galaxy, look
at that thing forming in the middle there, with the swarm of smaller galaxies like bees going
around it, and they too are being gravitationally tugged by this giant galaxy, so that galaxy is
getting bigger and bigger and bigger, and indeed observed giant clusters of galaxies do show one
or two such dominant galaxies in their centers. Well we can also study with numerical simulations
the formation of clusters and superclusters and voids, the largest scales in the universe,
and what we see is that these areas where stars form are at the peaks of a more vast
underlying distribution of dark matter, so here we see all these galaxies and clusters and super
clusters surrounding voids, apparently there's dark matter everywhere, but the stars form where
there are peaks in the density of the dark matter, just like snow forms or snow persists
at the peaks of mountains, but there's a vast underlying backbone of lower elevations where
you don't see the snow, so here's the result of the so-called millennium simulation done by the
Virgo collaboration, it consists of 10 billion particles, and they simulated the formation
of large-scale structure, and here we are flying through the results of their simulation, through
clusters and superclusters and then through voids, and this simulation gives a very realistic picture
of what our universe actually looks like. Other similar simulations give similar results,
but different in detail, here you can see a rotating cube to give us different perspective
of large-scale structure forming due to the gravitational collapse of gas over the course
of the history of the universe, and if you do yet additional simulations like this one,
and change the properties with which the clouds of gas initially start, for example,
you fill them with different kinds of dark matter, neutrinos or wimps or black holes or whatever,
you find that the details of the formation of the large-scale structure end up depending on
what you assume for not just the visible type of gas that forms stars, but for the dominant
gravitationally attractive material of the universe, the dark matter, you will get different kinds of
filamentary structures and clusters and voids, depending on whether you fill your universe
with wimps or neutrinos or other types of stuff, and in particular we know that most of the dark
matter can't be neutrinos, because neutrinos would wipe out the formation of the large-scale
structure that you see in simulations like these, here's yet another simulation done by another
theoretical astrophysicist. So it's amazing to me that through observations and theoretical
calculations like this, we can come to an understanding not just of the way in which the
structure formed, but we can learn that the details of how our universe looks on large scales actually
depend on the properties of fundamental particles, wimps and neutrinos and other type of particles
on the very smallest scales. That to me is a magnificent unification of the two different
extremes of the cosmos, the very large and the very small.
