Astronomers now have a much better understanding, though far from complete, of how the large
scale properties of galaxies, clusters of galaxies, and superclusters form and evolve
with time.
We will next explore the central regions of galaxies, many of which go through a very
active, luminous, powerful phase early in their development.
And we will see that at any given time, only a small percentage of galaxies go through this
active phase, but over the course of time, perhaps a majority of galaxies go through
it.
Now astronomers think that the incredible power of such active galaxies comes from a
giant black hole devouring material in the central regions.
There's a giant black hole sitting there, and there's gas swirling in.
And as that gas goes into the stronger and stronger gravitational field surrounding the
black hole, it emits a tremendous amount of light and particles before actually crossing
the event horizon.
So that's what we think an active galaxy is.
Now there's a related creature, the quasar, which is thought to be an especially massive
supermassive black hole accreting or swallowing or devouring an especially large amount of
gas in its vicinity.
And so by devouring a large amount of material, that material can shine profusely at optical
and other wavelengths, causing the central region of the galaxy, the quasar, to far outshine
the rest of the stars, and it makes the rest of the galaxy actually quite hard to see.
So this is an extreme form of activity known as a quasar.
Here are two photographs of galaxies that are at about the same distance from us.
The normal galaxy has a fairly fuzzy nucleus.
The active galaxy has a point-like or we call a star-like nucleus.
That doesn't mean that physically it's a star, but what we mean is that it looks like a point
of light, like a star far away.
It doesn't look fuzzy, like a collection of stars.
So it looks as though a really large amount of energy is coming from a very small volume.
So that's an active galaxy.
A quasar would look like this.
The point-like source of energy is very bright, so bright that the rest of the galaxy of stars
is not visible or very hard to detect.
So let's begin with active galaxies, the more mild form of this extreme activity, in part
because historically they were the first ones discovered, discovered well before quasars.
If you use the redshifts of galaxies and Hubble's law to get the distances of these galaxies,
you can combine their apparent brightness with the distance to get their power, or luminosity.
And in some cases, the luminosity of the central part is really enormous.
So if you go to the equation for the inverse square law of light, the apparent brightness
B is the luminosity L over 4 pi D squared, where D is the distance of the object.
What I'm saying is that the brightness B was so large in the nuclei of some of these galaxies
that when multiplied by 4 pi D squared, the resulting luminosity L was incredibly high,
much higher than that of normal galaxies consisting of, say, a cluster of stars in the very central
region.
Often this incredible luminosity would be seen not just at optical or visible wavelengths,
but also in the x-rays or ultraviolet or radio or infrared.
Sometimes all forms of electromagnetic radiation come out of a single active nucleus.
Other times, one or more forms may dominate over other forms.
So for example, this giant elliptical galaxy, Mesia 87, in the center of the Virgo cluster
is a strong source of radio emission.
It just has an amazing amount of radio radiation coming from its central region.
And optically that central region, though interesting, I'll show you in a few minutes,
it's not quite as distinctive as the profuse amounts of radio radiation coming from the
center of M87.
The radio radiation can be detected with conventional radio telescopes such as this
one.
Now, besides the central region being bright at radio wavelengths, we sometimes find that
these active galaxies have two lobes or regions of radio emission far from the center, the
nucleus.
But these lobes contain a vast quantity of energetic particles which are emitting radio
waves.
And the lobes are shown here for Cygnus A, a radio galaxy.
You can see these vast regions where there are charged particles swirling around in magnetic
fields emitting radio waves.
And apparently these charged particles get to these lobes through funneling through a
jet, a narrow jet like water squirting out of a hose.
And that jet emerges from the optical center of the galaxy, which in this case also glows
at radio wavelengths.
So here's the core or center.
There's a jet of finely collimated charged particles ending up in a lobe where they become
more dispersed.
And where the jet hits the backside of the lobe, you sometimes get a hot spot or a bright
spot on either side there.
That's where this jet is ramming into particularly dense gas at the far end of the lobe.
So this is a typical radio galaxy and sometimes these jets can extend over a million light
years and they're really highly collimated.
Here's the central region of one of these radio galaxies where you can see this jet
of charged particles and radiation squirting out along a very narrow beam.
It kind of reminds one of a pulsar, but a pulsar, a rapidly rotating spinning neutron
star is a very, very different beast than the center of an active galaxy where you have
a black hole in whose vicinity a jet of material is squirting out.
So active galaxies and quasars differ from pulsars in scale.
Active galaxies are galaxies, pulsars are neutron stars that are rapidly rotating.
But in both cases somehow you get a finely collimated beam of particles and radiation.
In this graphic you can see that in the very central region the collimation is really fine,
it's really highly collimated, and it extends over a few light years.
Here's a scale of one parsec.
Then over hundreds of thousands of light years you still see this jet being very highly
collimated.
And then over millions of light years you begin to see how the charged particles spread
out and become more diffuse in these lobes, but it's really incredible the vast range
of scales over which a jet-like structure like this forms and disperses particles.
And I've mentioned how the radiation actually comes not from the thermal motion, the random
statistical motion of particles of gas due to their temperature, but rather the radiation
comes from charged particles spiraling around in magnetic fields, kind of like shown here
where you have magnetic fields oriented in this direction and charged particles spiraling
around.
Those spiraling charged particles emit light, it's called synchrotron radiation, and it
is not thermal radiation, it's not associated with the random motions of particles, rather
it's associated with the spiraling motion of charged particles in magnetic fields.
You can get very good detailed images of radio galaxies with radio telescopes that are separated
from one another using this technique called interferometry.
You can get resolutions of an arc second, a tenth of an arc second, or even better.
I've mentioned interferometry before, but let me review it here with this diagram where
I show two radio telescopes separated by some distance, and in this particular case, the
waves coming in are in phase at both telescopes.
In other words, both telescopes right here are seeing the trough between two crests,
and a short time later they'll both see the crest of this wave.
From a slightly different direction, the waves might be out of phase, so this telescope
is seeing a wave crest, whereas that one is seeing a wave trough there, and there will
be destructive interference as opposed to constructive interference.
And by looking at the interference pattern in slightly different directions in the sky,
astronomers can reconstruct what the object looks like.
You effectively get an image from this interference pattern.
And one way to perhaps illustrate this more clearly is to simply think of a single giant
mirror collecting light and bringing it to one focus.
Well, you could cut holes in that mirror, and you'd get less light coming to the focus,
but you'd still see a complete image of the object.
You wouldn't get holes in it, because every part of the mirror forms a complete image.
I talked about that when we discussed telescopes.
And now imagine removing all parts of the mirror except for the two most distant parts.
Well, you still get the light coming to this focus, so you get the resolution or clarity
of a telescope of this diameter or baseline, but you get less light than a telescope of
that baseline.
Well, that's okay.
You know, I mean, you can't build a telescope that's hundreds of kilometers in size, right?
That's just not going to happen, so you might not get that much collecting area.
But if you have telescopes separated by hundreds of kilometers, at least you'll get the clarity
or resolution of a telescope that size.
And so the very large array in New Mexico is a series of 27 telescopes spread out over
a large area and combined, their signals give this high resolution.
And you can even put these radio telescopes over an entire continent, and perhaps in Hawaii
and in the Caribbean, and you get the resolution of a baseline having this large size.
Indeed, this is called the very long baseline array, the VLBA, and you can even have these
telescopes on different continents, and then you get a baseline spanning many thousands
of kilometers, giving you resolutions of better than one one thousandth of an arc second.
So radio astronomers could view with interferometers the details of radio galaxies and get intricate
pictures of these hot spots and lobes and jets.
It's fantastic.
The activity, as I mentioned, is often visible at other wavelengths as well, like X-ray wavelengths
and infrared.
Here's a galaxy called Centaurus A. It's a peculiar looking elliptical galaxy with all
sorts of gas and dust in the central region, unlike normal ellipticals.
And if you look at it at X-ray wavelengths, you can see a jet of X-ray emitting particles
coming from the very central part of that galaxy.
Wow.
And here's M87 again, and if you look at it at optical wavelengths with the Hubble Space
Telescope, you see this jet with all sorts of knots and little bumps and things in it.
The jet was known before the Hubble Space Telescope came around, but this is the most
detailed optical picture of the jet.
So it's emerging from this nucleus there, where something fantastic is going on.
Now if you look at M87 at other wavelengths, you can see that at radio wavelengths it glows.
Here's an image formed by a British array of radio telescopes known as Merlin.
At X-rays, it glows.
Here's the Chandra X-ray Observatory image.
And again, at optical wavelengths, it glows as well.
The Hubble image shows all sorts of little knots in this non-uniform jet.
Now there's a subclass of active galaxies known as Seifert galaxies, and they were in
fact among the first to ever be discovered of this active sort.
Carl Seifert, an astronomer in the mid-1940s, discovered that some galaxies at optical wavelengths
have very bright nuclei, and this is before the development of radio telescopes.
But he said, wow, look at these things.
They have very bright nuclei, and the spectra show very broad lines indicative of very rapid
motions.
So here's an example of one of these Seifert galaxies.
This is NGC 5548.
And compared with the normal galaxy, it has a bright star-like, that is, point-like nucleus.
And that's what Seifert noticed.
And he also noticed that the spectrum of NGC 5548 has these very broad lines, particularly
of hydrogen, broad Balmer lines.
Here's H-alpha.
There's H-beta.
Moreover, there are narrow lines spanning a wide range of ionization stages.
Here's singly-ionized helium.
Here's doubly-ionized neon.
Off in the UV, there's quadruply-ionized neon.
Here in the optical, there's six times ionized iron.
Those are not the kinds of lines you normally see from a nebula ionized by a hot O-type star.
You might see doubly-ionized oxygen, but you won't see any ionized helium.
You won't see quadruply-ionized neon.
You won't see iron that's being ionized six times.
So hot stars produce some ionization of the gases, but not as extreme a form of ionization
as apparently the spectra of Seifert Galaxy's show.
The Seiferts come in two flavors, those with broad lines, the Seifert ones, and those without
the broad lines, but still spanning a wide range of ionization stages for the gas.
And one person, one astronomer who studied Seifert Galaxy's a lot and came to a much
better understanding of their physical properties was Donald Osterbrock, who made many, many
studies of Seifert Galaxy's over a number of decades at Lick Observatory.
He actually gave me a summer job as a guide at Lick Observatory in the summers of 1977
and 78, so I lived there during those summers at Lick Observatory.
And my job was to sell postcards and photographs and stuff in the gift shop, but also to give
tours of the observatory, in particular the old 36-inch James Lick Refractor, the big
huge thing that was the biggest telescope in the world when it was completed in the mid-1880s.
And it is during those summers as an undergraduate that I first started explaining astronomy to
the general public.
Now the gas in active galaxies shows these broad emission lines, and from the breadth
or width of those lines, you can tell that the gases are moving around at very high speeds
over 10,000 kilometers per second.
Take a look at the spectrum down here.
If all of these photons are intrinsically coming out of the gas at a wavelength of 4861
angstroms, the wavelength of the hydrogen beta line at rest, then to have come out at
wavelengths of 4,900 angstroms or 4,800 angstroms, the speeds of the particles of gas of hydrogen
must be huge to get such big red shifts and blue shifts.
So the gas is moving around like there's no tomorrow inside the central regions of these
active galaxies.
Stars alone probably cannot produce the observed activity in these galaxies.
They can't produce all the radio waves and x-rays and optical radiation.
Stars alone don't generally have speeds for the gas that are that large, tens of thousands
of kilometers per second.
I mean, occasionally they do.
Stars that explode, supernovae show those speeds.
But in these galaxies, it doesn't look like there's just one supernova popping off after
another.
These things are persistently bright and persistently have these broad lines.
And model calculations and other observations show that it's not just a bunch of supernovae
going off.
So these are very odd galaxies indeed, the Seifert galaxies and more generally the active
galaxies.
But for some reason, they were largely ignored by astronomers since their discovery in the
1940s and 50s.
Astronomers didn't pay that much attention to them.
That is, until quasars, an even more active type of galaxy, were discovered.
So in the post-World War II use of radio telescopes that had been developed quite a lot during
World War II for military purposes, astronomers started scanning the skies looking to see what
might be visible at radio wavelengths.
And in some cases, these radio telescopes scanning the sky saw something obviously peculiar,
like a supernova remnant.
Here's the remnant of the great supernova of 1054 AD, where gases are rushing out and
there are strong magnetic fields and there's lots of charged particles zooming around.
And the radio astronomers said, oh yeah, it's not that surprising that the crab nebula is
emitting a lot of radio radiation.
Or they'd look and they'd see that optically there's a peculiar galaxy like Centaurus A
in about the position from which radio waves were coming.
So they'd say, oh yeah, that's the thing that's emitting the radio waves.
But in many regions of the sky, if you looked optically to where the radio telescopes were
saying there's a lot of radiation coming from, there wasn't anything unusual.
So you'd look in the sky, here I happen to have chosen the region toward the constellation
Leo, and there's nothing particularly obvious going on.
Now the radio astronomers couldn't pinpoint exactly where the radiation was coming from
because the resolution or clarity of single radio telescope dishes is pretty low.
You get a fuzzy view of the sky.
It's only with radio interferometry, with large baselines, that you start getting great
clarity.
So the astronomers, the radio astronomers said, well there's something there emitting
a lot of radio radiation, but we don't know what it is.
And in a few cases it kind of looked like there was a peculiar blue star, bluer than
normal stars, in the field of view of the radio telescopes.
Here's one of them, 3C48, named after the third Cambridge University catalog of radio
sources.
This was number 48 in that catalog.
So this turned out to be a blue star, and it's about in the place where the radio telescopes
were pointing, but people weren't sure that that's where the radio radiation was coming
from because, in fact, normal stars don't emit much radio radiation.
They emit a little bit, but not profuse amounts of it.
Well a key to the study of quasars occurred when the moon passed between us and one of
these strong radio sources, 3C273, in the third radio catalog of the Cambridge survey.
The moon is going along like this, and when it passed in front of 3C273, it cut off the
radio radiation that we could see from it.
In other words, the moon is occulting or blocking 3C273.
Since we know the moon's position in the sky very accurately at all times, it's moving
with some apparent speed V through the sky, we could tell that at the moment that the
radio waves blinked out, the source of radio waves must be somewhere along the edge of
the moon within this general region where the radio telescopes were telling us that
the source was located.
So we would say, okay, it's maybe that star, or maybe if there were some other star at
the edge of the moon at that point, that would be a candidate as well.
But when the moon uncovers the source, you get another bit of positional information.
So with these timing measurements, astronomers realize that 3C273 corresponds to an optically
rather bright looking star.
It's 13th magnitude.
Amateur astronomers can easily see it with their telescopes.
So here's this star definitively emitting a lot of radio radiation because we could
tell that it's coming from that star because when the moon blinked it out, that's the star
that was at the edge of the moon.
Moreover, this thing had a little jet-like structure of radiation coming out of it.
Kind of a weird thing.
So why would a star be emitting a large amount of radio radiation?
And why is there this little jet-like protrusion?
Other stars were found at the positions of radio waves emitting not only optical light,
but this profuse amount of radio radiation.
So these were called quasi-stellar radio sources.
They looked stellar, but people didn't want to call them stars because normal stars don't
emit a lot of radio radiation.
So they called them quasi-stellar, quasi-stellar radio sources or quasars for short.
And here are four of the first discovered quasars, 3C48, 3C147, 3C273, 3C196.
You can see that these things resemble stars in the same photographs.
I mean, you know, if there weren't this arrow pointing at 3C147, would you say optically
that it looks peculiar compared to the other stars?
No, you wouldn't.
You know, they look just like stars.
Well then astronomers said, all right, let's see what their spectra look like.
And their spectra were wild.
Okay, you take the spectrum of one of these quasars and you plot the brightness versus
wavelength.
And you see all these wild, broad undulations.
Brightness versus wavelength shows sort of a roller coaster-like spectrum with these
broad lines having peaks at wavelengths at which normal elements in the laboratory don't
produce emission lines.
Okay, you know, we just know all the common forms of elements and all their ionized stages.
And there are no strong lines emitted by laboratory gases at rest having these particular wavelengths
or these particular patterns of wavelengths.
And they're all broad and stuff.
What's going on, you know?
So people were puzzled by these spectra.
They truly looked bizarre.
And then in 1963, Martin Schmidt of Caltech realized that the spectrum of quasar 3C273
is basically the spectrum of hot hydrogen gas, that is around 10,000 degrees Kelvin,
redshifted by a whopping 16%.
That is Z, the redshift would be 0.16.
Here's Martin Schmidt, now very famous as a result of this discovery.
He's at the right.
At the left is Alan Sandage, about whom I'll have more to say later.
He's one of the great pioneers in cosmology, in particular, in trying to determine the
Hubble constant, the value of the Hubble constant.
He was a disciple of Hubble's.
Well Schmidt used the 200-inch telescope at Palomar Observatory, which we call affectionately
the big eye.
You know, it was the biggest eye on the sky for a long time, 200 inches, five meters in
diameter, at least until the Keck 10-meter telescopes came along.
It was built by George Ellery Hale, who in succession built the largest telescopes in
the world, the 60 and 100-inch telescopes at Mount Wilson, and then the 200-inch telescope
at Palomar.
I loved using that thing as a graduate student.
Anyway, Martin Schmidt took the spectrum of 3C273, and here is his original spectrum.
There's 3C273 showing some lines, and they're a bit hard to discern here.
But if you make a plot of the apparent brightness versus wavelength from this kind of a lousy
reproduction of the old photographic plate that Martin Schmidt had, here you see this
broad line, which in a plot of brightness versus wavelength, you can see it's structure
better.
There's another broad line, there's its structure in the plot, there's another one.
Well Martin Schmidt realized that this is the same pattern as emitted by hot hydrogen
gas glowing in emission.
The lines here look dark because this is a negative print, but they're actually glowing.
They are redshifted from their normal positions in a laboratory gas by fully 16%.
You can tell the wavelengths of these lines because there is a comparison spectrum of
gases in the laboratory that is in the telescope at rest, and these gases are neon and iron
and all that, and we know the wavelengths of these lines, and from a comparison you
can measure the wavelengths of the lines in the quasar spectrum, and those wavelengths
correspond to hydrogen emission redshifted by 16%.
That is amazing, 16%, delta lambda over lambda naught is 0.16.
This was a huge redshift.
A few galaxies were known at that time with a comparable redshift, but they were faint
little pathetic looking things, fuzzy and dim, and you could hardly get a good spectrum
of them.
Here's a 13th magnitude star.
I mean this star was easily visible even through small telescopes, yet it had the same redshift
of a galaxy that's fuzzy and faint and far away.
If the redshifts are due to the expansion of the universe, then quasars are incredibly
distant and incredibly luminous, and an amazing conclusion.
Now when Martin Schmidt mentioned to his colleagues that he had figured out the spectrum of 3C273,
it was redshifted by 0.16, his colleague Jesse Greenstein, another astronomer at Caltech,
said, oh well in that case the redshift of 3C48, the first identified quasar actually,
is 0.37.
Greenstein had considered the possibility that he was seeing the spectrum of hydrogen
redshifted by a large amount, but he had pretty much concluded that that can't be the right
interpretation because such a large redshift, 0.37, was unprecedented, and this was a relatively
bright object.
3C48 is 16th magnitude, and so Greenstein didn't take the possibility seriously, and
he had in fact just submitted a paper for publication in the Astrophysical Journal that
interpreted 3C48 as some weird kind of a magnetic white dwarf, but he had had the right interpretation
for a while.
He just dismissed that idea until Schmidt came up with pretty compelling evidence.
Now you might wonder why weren't the spectra recognized to resemble the spectra of seaford
galaxies, in particular Type 1 seafords whose spectra had been obtained all the way back
to 1944 by Carl Seaford.
Well people just didn't notice it.
They weren't thinking about redshifts that are this high, and moreover they had in their
mind some sort of weird stars because the quasars looked like stars, but just radio
emitting stars, so people weren't thinking about galaxies far away with high redshifts.
They were thinking about stars, and so they just didn't have the right frame of reference
until Schmidt came along, and Schmidt as a result of this interpretation became very famous,
and here he is on the cover of the March 11, 1966 issue of Time Magazine, astronomer Martin
Schmidt with his echo going way back billions of light years, and 3C273 is down here.
Why do we say billions of light years?
Well recall that if redshift is due to expansion, then quasars must be very distant because
their redshifts are large.
Z, which is delta lambda over lambda naught, is roughly equal to the speed of recession
divided by the speed of light.
At least this formula works pretty well for small recession speeds.
So for quasar 3C273, the recession speed with a redshift of 0.16 is 16% of the speed
of light, or 48,000 kilometers per second.
If we now plug that observed recession speed into Hubble's law, and we assume a value
for the Hubble constant, now thought to be 71 or 73 kilometers per second per megaparsec,
you solve for the distance and you get that the distance is nearly 700 megaparsecs, or
over 2 billion light years.
3C273 is over 2 billion light years away, yet it far outshines galaxies known at that
redshift at that time.
Indeed, it's 10 to 1000 times as brilliant, as powerful as a galaxy at a comparable redshift.
That is amazing.
And what must be inside is some sort of a monster creating a truly gargantuan amount
of energy from a very, very small volume.
