The discovery of quasars in the mid-1960s and the correct interpretation of their spectra
caused a firestorm of activity among astronomers.
How could objects of such high redshift appear star-like, not fuzzy, and appear rather bright
compared with fuzzy little faint galaxies of comparable redshifts?
It didn't seem possible.
3C273, at a redshift of 0.16, has a distance of 2.1 billion light-years, yet it is far,
far brighter than galaxies of comparable redshifts known at that time.
3C48 had a redshift of 0.37 corresponding to a distance of 4 billion light-years.
At that time in the mid-1960s, no galaxies having such high redshifts were known, let
alone such bright things.
3C48 is 16th magnitude.
You can see it in a moderate-sized telescope.
Well more of these strange radio-emitting sources were found, and all of them appeared
to be associated with very blue star-like objects.
So then astronomers started searching for quasars, not through radio surveys, but by
looking at scans of the sky, searching for bright blue star-like objects.
And some of those blue objects turned out to be simply blue stars.
O and B-type stars are not quasars, and they look blue.
But some others turned out to be quasars.
Their spectra were like those of quasars.
Interestingly, quite a few of the ones that were found in this way were later observed
with radio telescopes, and they didn't seem to emit much at radio wavelengths.
So they were called radio-quiet quasars.
Now that may seem like an odd term, since quasar means quasi-stellar radio source.
Well, these objects were radio-quiet versions, that is, they don't emit much radio radiation.
But in all other respects, they seemed similar to quasars.
So they were named QSOs, or quasi-stellar objects.
But they're essentially the same thing as quasars, they're just a different species,
one that doesn't emit much radio waves.
And so I will use the term QSO and quasar interchangeably in this course, as do many
astronomers.
Soon after the discovery of quasars, some were found with redshifts comparable to or
even exceeding 1, like redshift 2, Z of 2.
Now if you were to use the formula that Z equals V, the speed of recession over C, you
would find that the speed of recession exceeds the speed of light.
Now later we will find out that the universe can be, and indeed is, expanding faster than
the speed of light.
But you don't see those parts, they're so far away that the light doesn't get to you.
So in this case, it turns out that you get this incorrect interpretation that something's
moving away faster than the speed of light, because you're not using the correct relativistic
formula.
If you use the more correct formula, then the speed of recession is related to the redshift
by this equation.
Z equals the square root of the quantity 1 plus V over C divided by 1 minus V over C.
And then you subtract 1 from that whole thing under the square root.
You don't have to worry about this, but I just thought that if you want to plug in various
redshifts and find out the speed of recession, you can do so with this formula.
Even this isn't exactly right, because this is the relativistic Doppler formula, but the
observed redshifts of quasars and galaxies are not due to a motion of an object through
a pre-existing space, the way the Doppler effect occurs.
But rather, the redshift is due to an expansion of space itself.
And that is actually quantitatively different when you look into things in detail.
But this is a close enough approximation, okay, so we can use it.
So let's look back at our table of redshift versus lookback time.
When we see an object at a given redshift, Z, how far back in time are we looking?
Well for these objects that were discovered at redshift 1 or 2, these quasars, you can
see that we're looking back 8, 9, or even 10 billion years into the past.
And this was now late 60s, early 70s.
This is long before the discovery of comparably high redshift galaxies.
So you can imagine the excitement of astronomers.
They finally have a probe of great distances in the universe, whereas before we had probes
only of relatively nearby distances.
So there was a quest for ever higher redshift quasars.
People wanted to find them, to probe the universe as far back in time as possible.
That was the only way known for probing the universe at that time.
So setting a redshift record for a quasar became not only a scientifically useful thing
to do, but also kind of a friendly competition among astronomers.
You could gain some fame and glory, you know, maybe a headline in the newspaper if you found
the highest redshift quasar.
You could get your name in the Guinness Book of World Records for a while.
And it turns out that successive records were broken, but then along came a quasar called
Parks or PKS 2000-330, and it had a redshift of 3.78.
So you're seeing it about 12 billion light years away, okay?
Here's a photograph of it, a negative image.
These aren't all black holes, okay?
These are stars, and there's the quasar marked between the tick marks.
And it's got a redshift of 3.78, and that was the redshift record for a long time.
Well my former PhD thesis advisor, Wal Sgt. at Caltech, had a colleague who had developed
a technique for finding high redshift quasar candidates.
He looked for objects that appeared to have broad emission lines in a certain type of photographic
plate that would reveal crude spectra of a whole bunch of stars at the same time.
And he looked at these crude spectra, and he could kind of tell which ones looked like
they might have broad emission lines.
So he, Cyril Hazard, would feed these quasar candidates to my advisor, who would then tell
me to go and observe them with the Palomar 200-inch telescope.
Sometimes we would do it together.
In one of these objects, Q1208 plus 1011 turned out to have a spectrum, brightness versus
wavelength, whose redshift was 3.803.
That is .02 bigger than the previous record holder.
And here you can see these various emission lines of hydrogen, nitrogen, carbon, silicon,
and other elements.
And this is a typical high redshift quasar spectrum, but it was the highest redshift
found at that point.
So I presented a poster on this work in China, at a meeting in China, at about the same time
that we published the work in Nature magazine.
And I put up this poster showing our results, redshift record by only a little bit, but nevertheless
a redshift record.
And then someone told me that at that same meeting, another group was reporting a quasar
with a redshift exceeding 4.
All right, 4.02, I seem to recall, in fact.
And that group had developed a new clever technique for finding high redshift quasar
candidates.
They realized that at such high redshifts, the colors of quasars are no longer blue.
Remember, the earliest quasars had blue colors.
But when you redshift that out to high redshifts, the blue light turns into red light.
So what you should look for actually are red objects.
And they had a scheme for finding objects with peculiar red colors that differed in
detail from the colors of stars.
So they had this one object with a redshift greater than 4, and at least a dozen candidates
for a redshift greater than 4.
So I thought, well, I'd better not, you know, trumpet our work too much because people would
kind of laugh at us if we're making too big a deal out of it, and this other group has
found a bunch of them at redshift 4.
But at least we had the record for a little while.
That was kind of fun.
Well, there are some modern surveys of the sky, such as the Sloan Digital Sky Survey,
where they're getting digitized versions of the whole sky, or much of the sky, and they
can measure the colors of objects, and they can also get redshifts of galaxies and other
objects.
And in the Southern Hemisphere, there's a similar survey called the Two Degree Field
Galaxy Redshift Survey.
It's conducted in Australia.
Anyway, many surveys have been done of the sky, and now there are literally millions
of quasars known.
The redshifts that have been found have been progressively higher and higher and higher.
Here's a Sloan quasar that was found some time ago.
It has a redshift of 4.75 because the Lime and Alpha Line of Hydrogen, which is at a laboratory
or rest wavelength of 1,216 angstroms, appears at 69.92 angstroms.
And it turns out that the observed wavelength of a line is related to the laboratory wavelength
by the quantity 1 plus redshift times that wavelength.
So in fact, 5.75 times 1,216 is 6,992.
So this is a quasar with a redshift of 475%.
So the lines appear at a wavelength 5.75 times bigger than the nominal rest wavelength.
So that was a good one for a while.
And then others were found, and in mid-2006, the highest redshift known is 6.4 for a quasar.
So by now, galaxies have actually passed them up because I mentioned that there's a galaxy
known at redshift 6.6 and several redshift 7 galaxies suspected.
And at the time that these quasars were found, they were the highest redshift objects known.
And it's only recently that we've started finding high redshift galaxies of comparable
redshift.
Anyway, this one at redshift 6.4 is this little red dot there marked with an arrow.
And it's moving away from us at 96% of the speed of light.
More importantly, we're seeing it as it was when the universe was only 7% of its present
age.
So we're seeing this object as its light was coming from a very young universe.
Quasars appear star-like, smaller than galaxies.
So physically, they're very small, yet a lot of energy comes out of them.
What produces this amount of energy, especially back when the universe was really young?
How come the quasars are so small?
Well, there really, it turns out, very, very small, smaller than even was thought by astronomers
in the first few years of studies of quasars.
Because it was found that, in fact, quasars vary in brightness.
Here's brightness plotted versus year.
And here's a quasar, 3C279, varying in brightness quite dramatically by factors of up to 100
over years and by smaller factors over months and weeks.
So quasars vary in their light output.
This was a great surprise because it indicated that quasars are physically even smaller than
people had suspected.
Here's the argument.
Suppose you have an opaque object that's one light month in radius.
And suppose it brightens suddenly, instantaneously, all over its surface by some factor.
Well light emitted by the near side will reach you, the observer over here, one full month
before light from the edge reaches you.
Because this light here, on the near side, has a one light month head start.
So an instantaneous variation will be observed by the observer as spanning one whole month.
Because you see the near side brightening a whole month earlier than the side.
Or if this object were transparent, you see the near side brightening a whole month earlier
than the middle.
And the middle brightens a whole month earlier than the far side.
Doesn't really matter if you have an opaque object or a transparent object.
Let's take an object that's one light year in radius.
Well, the near side light has a one light year, hence a one year head start, since light
travels at the speed of light.
And so it'll reach you one year before light from the side reaches you.
So again, an instantaneous variation takes, in this case, at least one year.
The point is, is that the observed variability timescale gives you a minimum possible size
for the emitting object.
Even if it emits all the light instantaneously, if it has a certain size, the observed variation
will take longer.
Now if it doesn't emit all the light instantaneously, some parts are after others and all that,
well then the observed variation will take even longer.
So the observed variation sets a minimum physical size to the object that's emitting the light.
Now you could imagine that a light bulb goes off here and that induces one to go off here
and then there and there and there, and you're watching from over here and then you would
see all these light bulbs at the same time.
But that would be a rather contrived situation.
If they're all going off randomly, you will see the near ones before you see the far ones
because of the extra light travel time it takes to traverse that extra distance.
So the fact that quasars vary over weeks, months, or years means that physically they
are no larger than light weeks, light months, or light years in size.
Yet remember, galaxies are typically over 10,000 light years in diameter, not just one
or a couple of light years, not just a couple of light months, but 10,000 light years.
And quasars emit more energy than an entire galaxy.
So quasars are far smaller than galaxies yet emit 10 to 100 times as much energy per second.
That means that they've got incredibly powerful engines of some sort producing that energy.
Well, that energy problem was so severe that some astronomers said maybe we are misinterpreting
the redshifts of quasars.
Maybe they're really not as distant as their redshifts make them out to be.
For example, suppose the redshift is a gravitationally induced redshift, not due to the expansion
of the universe.
Well, there are solid arguments against this.
To get a redshift of one or two, you would need huge gravitational fields and that would
lead to the problems in the formation of emission lines of the kind observed and stuff like that.
And later, the hypothesis was completely ruled out because we found the galaxy of starlight
surrounding the quasar and it has the same redshift.
So if galaxies are at the distance that the redshifts indicate, then the quasars in the
middle of the galaxies are as well.
So that argument is now gone.
Well, maybe quasars are not actually far away.
They're really nearby and the redshift is due to a motion.
But rather than an expansion of the universe, maybe it's a motion like a ballistic thing.
Maybe these things are ejected from the center of our galaxy.
So here's our galaxy and it's ejecting these cannonballs, okay, and they're zooming away
from us and we see these large radial velocities and that's what causes the redshift.
But if that were the case, we would see these things moving across the sky as well.
That is, there would be a proper motion, an angular motion across the sky.
Only if all the quasars were emitted from the sun or our solar system would the motions
appear to be entirely radial.
But it's hard to see how our earth or our sun could emit these blobs.
More realistically, they might be emitted from the center of a galaxy by some unknown
mechanism.
And then there would be proper motions, angular motions across the sky and no such motions
were observed.
So that idea was thrown out.
So then people thought, well, maybe quasars are shot out of other galaxies.
Maybe other galaxies are more special than ours and they shoot them out or something
like that.
And one argument for that was that there were some quasars that were very close to galaxies
of much lower redshifts.
So here's a quasar at redshift 1.17 that's very close to this galaxy at redshift 0.018,
at least very close in the sky, not necessarily physically close.
But these astronomers argued that, well, there even looks like there's an arm connecting
the two there, maybe.
Maybe they're physically associated.
Here's another one, redshift 1.05, right next door to a much lower redshift normal looking
galaxy.
So maybe these things are physically associated and maybe the quasars are shot out of these
galaxies.
Halton-Arp was one of the main proponents of this hypothesis of non-cosmological redshifts
and he found many apparent pairs of high redshift quasars next to low redshift galaxies.
But if quasars are emitted by galaxies through some ejection process, why are they all receding
away from us?
Why aren't any of them ejected our way?
They can't all know about us and want to go away from us.
That doesn't seem physically reasonable.
So that pretty much convinced most astronomers that these were just chance superpositions
of two physically unrelated objects having a very large separation in their distance.
It's like if you look across Times Square, someone near you may look like they're right
next to someone that's very distant.
They look like they're in the same place in your sky or in your field of view.
But they may have nothing to do with one another and we think that indeed the quasars have
nothing to do with these low redshift galaxies next to which they seem to appear.
How about new physics?
Maybe some sort of new physics explains the redshifts.
Well, then the burden of proof is on the person who wants to dream up new physics.
Is that new physics consistent with all of the other known physics that works?
So over the years, astronomers basically became convinced that quasars are at the distances
indicated by their redshifts.
That is, they're cosmological.
And there's a number of arguments now which pretty much seal the case.
I've mentioned a few already.
There's the galaxy of stars surrounding the quasar that we now see and it has the same
redshift and galaxy redshifts are believed to be due to the expansion of the universe.
We see lensing of quasars by foreground galaxies, meaning that the quasars are farther away.
Quasars are sometimes found in clusters of galaxies having the same redshift.
So there's a plethora of evidence now that quasars really are far away.
So if they're that far away and they produce a huge amount of energy, remember you know
L and L is huge, the oomph for power is enormous in these things, what can produce it?
Could chemical energy do it?
Could you have a bunch of burning candles do it?
No way in the world.
You couldn't fit enough candles into the volume from which the energy of a quasar is produced.
Could you do it with nuclear energy?
Could it be a bunch of stars or even supernovae which are blowing up?
Nope.
Can't fit enough of them into such a small volume.
By the process of elimination astronomers concluded that what must be going on is that
the central regions of galaxies have black holes that are huge, a million to a billion
times the mass of our sun and they are swallowing or accreting gas from their vicinity at a rate
of perhaps one to ten solar masses per year and it's that accretion process that leads
to a tremendous amount of emitted radiation.
As the gas swirls down toward the black hole it forms a secretion disk and the gas rubs
against other little particles and that rubbing action can turn the kinetic energy of the
particles into radiated light, much like in the X-ray binary stars that we've already
discussed.
The more luminous quasars are bigger black holes that are accreting at a faster rate
than the less luminous ones and this accretion process can turn something like 10% of the
rest mass of material into emitted energy.
So you start out with one solar mass of material, 0.9 solar masses goes into the black hole
but a tenth of a solar mass gets radiated as E equals MC squared, that's the energy
radiated according to E equals MC squared.
So here's the picture, you've got this black hole surrounded by an accretion disk and while
the material is outside of the event horizon of the black hole it can emit a lot of radiation
and because you have a spinning black hole and a spinning accretion disk you have a natural
axis of rotation and there may be energetic processes that are going on that funnel some
material along the axis of rotation producing the observed jets that are coming out of some
active galaxies and quasars.
So there's the heart of darkness there, the black hole but in its vicinity is the accretion
disk and some mechanism, we don't yet quite understand how, that charged particles are
ejected at relativistic speeds, close to the speed of light along these two oppositely
directed jets.
And because the accretion rate is variable, clumps can form in the accretion disk and
they get eaten by the black hole, well those clumps release different amounts of energy
at different times and that can lead to the observed variability of quasars.
Their brightness varies with time because of a non-uniform accretion rate by this black
hole surrounded by the accretion disk.
Well I've mentioned several times that quasars appear to be surrounded by starlight.
Recent images from the Hubble Space Telescope show that very clearly, here's the fuzz associated
with the quasar and here's the fuzz associated with another quasar.
You might think that fuzz is not a very scientific sounding term but that's actually what astronomers
use to describe the glow of apparent starlight around a quasar and in this one it almost
looks like you're seeing part of a spiral arm here with a nebula right there, an HT region.
Well spectra sealed the case, spectra of the fuzz show starlight.
So here's the quasar spectrum itself, it shows these broad emission lines but then the spectrum
of the fuzz or the surrounding glow shows absorption lines produced by cool or only relatively
hot atoms in the atmospheres of stars.
Here's singly ionized calcium, here's neutral magnesium, the fuzz is clearly starlight and
when you look at the nearby quasars you often find that not only is there starlight surrounding
the quasar but near the quasar there's often another galaxy.
So here's a quasar and here's another galaxy right next to it and in this case the two
objects have the same redshift so they're at the same distance and they even seem to
be physically interacting because here are the tidal tails reminiscent of those computer
simulations I showed you in a previous lecture.
Here's another one where a galaxy appears to have merged with a quasar forming a rather
chaotic scene with some residuals of tidal tails there and so what we think is happening
is that galaxies can interact with the central regions of other galaxies that have black
holes and that can fuel the black hole that exists in one galaxy.
So if there's a black hole in one galaxy and another one comes along and interacts with
it and even merges with it that can channel a lot of gas into the black hole and so even
relatively nearby quasars the vicinity of the black hole being relatively devoid of
gas normally well they can be rejuvenated by these interactions.
So in this animation here you can see Centaurus A a peculiar active galaxy relatively near
to us we think it has a black hole in the middle if we peer down into this object at
optical wavelengths we see a rather chaotic structure but in the infrared the situation
clears up a lot and you can see a bright nucleus now at x-ray wavelengths you see a jet coming
out as well and then if you do a numerical computer simulation of what might be going
on it appears as though this is a galaxy whose peculiar optical appearance is caused by a
recent merging event with another galaxy and gas from that other galaxy and in the original
galaxy got channeled toward the central region and is now spiraling into this black hole.
So most quasars are denizens of the distant past they seem to have formed long ago and
they used up most of their fuel long ago they used up most of the material in their surroundings
but now in more recent times those quasars can be rejuvenated through interactions with
other galaxies so we see some nearby quasars glowing and those nearby quasars tend to be
in interacting systems and then we see far more high redshift quasars when there was an
abundance of gas surrounding the supermassive black hole. Here's an image of the Hubble
Ultra Deep Field South imaged with the Chandra X-ray Observatory and you can see all these
little dots which are X-ray sources and most of them have optical counterparts but the ones
that have squares around them are glowing at X-ray wavelengths yet have no optical counterparts
here are the optical pictures superposed there's nothing obvious there so these are probably
black holes that have so much stuff around them accreting in that the optical view is
blocked by you know gas and dust and other things that blocks our view but the X-ray
satellites can see these active objects and in the in something like the Chandra Deep Field
South there there are many many little dots that are that are X-ray objects probably quasars at
at high redshifts there's an incredible number of them at high redshifts I mean how did they
form we we're not sure how massive black holes could have formed so early in the universe but
but clearly they did here's a plot of the relative space density of quasars as a function of time
back into the past now there are basically no quasars a few billion years ago you see that
there were some quasars most of those are interacting with companion galaxies driving
material to their centers but by far the majority of the quasars are very very distant corresponding
to times 10 11 12 13 billion years ago I mean that's really incredible so most of them formed
long ago what happened to them they faded probably they faded with time as the central
black hole used up material in its vicinity so here's a quasar with a supermassive black hole
swallowing lots of surrounding material as it uses up that material there's less to feed on
so it fades because it's the accretion disk that glows and as the accretion disk gets depleted
of material it glows less and less so it may be only an active galaxy for a while and then the
accretion disk gets used up all together there's very little gas and dust left and so then the
object looks like a normal galaxy so we think that quasars the bright beacons of the distant past
faded with time and became regular active galaxies like this one and then normal galaxies that aren't
even active at all like the one at the left so they faded with time and if they fade in this way
and if each quasar is just a short stage in the evolution of most galaxies then you would conclude
that most galaxies probably have a supermassive black hole in their center which long ago used to
be feeding on the accretion disk glowing brightly as a quasar and then less brightly as an active
galaxy and then even less brightly as a normal galaxy so if this hypothesis is correct many if
not most big bright galaxies of today should still have a giant black hole in their center
and our quest then is to find evidence for those supermassive black holes
