the discussion of extra dimensions in the
previous lecture, rekindles our interest in the shape, size, and future of the universe.
Is the universe like some sort of a bubble embedded in some higher dimensional space,
a hyperspace, as represented here for example?
Or is it infinite?
Is its extent infinite, regardless of whether it is embedded in some higher dimensional hyperspace?
Will it expand forever, or will it re-collapse some day?
And if it does expand forever, or at least for a very, very long time, what's in store
for us?
What kinds of physical processes will occur far in the future?
Let's start with the shape and size.
We have learned that measurements of the apparent angular size of small variations in the temperature
of the microwave background sky indicate that the universe is nearly flat, the apparent
size of the most typical, strongest fluctuations tells us the geometry overall of the universe,
and it looks really flat.
We think that these little fluctuations are a certain physical size, and to appear the
size that they have, light rays must travel along Euclidean straight lines.
Now if the universe is flat, then omega total, the ratio of the total mass and energy density
of all kinds to the critical density is one, and indeed the WMAP 2003 results suggest that
omega total is 1.0 plus or minus 0.02, and in 2006 they seem to confirm that basic conclusion.
So on the largest scales, the universe is spatially flat as far as we can tell, as far as we can
see.
Does that mean that it's infinite, as suggested by the simple Friedman solutions to the equations
of general relativity that were derived by Alexander Friedman in the 1920s?
You will recall that a flat universe in his solutions are infinite, but it turns out that
it may not be this way for us because though we measure omega total to be 1.0, it might
be actually slightly bigger than 1.0, right?
What if it's 1.01 or 1.005 or something like that?
And it looks for all intents and purposes flat from our perspective, and so we would
think it would be infinite according to Friedman.
But really it's some gigantic beach ball.
The omega is slightly bigger than 1.
So the universe wraps around itself like a beach ball, but in three dimensions, okay?
And we see an apparent flatness just because we're observing only a tiny fraction of all
that there is.
The universe may be much, much bigger than just those parts that we can see, and indeed
we now think that that's the case.
So it's kind of like being on the earth on a flat desert or something or on the plains
of Kansas or Nebraska.
It looks flat, the earth looks flat, but you know that it's just part of a much larger
roughly spherical shape, which you could see if you were in a spacecraft or something,
or if you were in an airplane, you could travel all the way around.
From a limited perspective, you don't notice that it's curved.
You think it's spatially flat.
The other reason that the universe may be observed flat but not exactly flat is, suppose
the universe is really large, and overall it's incredibly flat, let's say, but on smaller
scales over, say, an observable volume, there are variations, slight variations, in the
overall density.
In that case, in small regions, well, about the size of the observable universe, but small
compared to the whole universe, but anyway, in these small regions, omega total might
be a bit bigger than one, in which case it's positively curved, and in other regions it
might be a little bit less than one, in which case it's negatively curved, like a horse
or saddle, overall, the universe would be flat, but there are these small variations
on a size scale comparable to the observable part of the universe, just caused by statistical
fluctuations in the density over such volumes, and this is known as cosmic variance.
So if that's actually occurring, if there are variations in the overall density of the
universe over scales as big as those that we can see, then we may never know the true
geometry of the universe, because our visible part is just one of the small volumes in this
much larger structure, and our visible part might be slightly over dense or under dense,
but in that case, we don't really know what the true shape of the universe might be.
If it's that close to one, you may never know what it really is because of statistical
variations around one.
Oh boy, that's kind of depressing.
I always wanted to know what the shape of the universe is, and we might not know because
of this simple cosmic variance idea.
Well, suppose the overall geometry of the universe is exactly flat, zero curvature everywhere,
or suppose it's negatively curved, okay, some sort of a hyperbolic space.
In those two cases, is it necessarily infinite, as suggested by the Friedman equations?
Remember, the negatively curved and the flat universes were supposedly infinite, and the
positively curved ones were the ones that curve around, okay, and are finite.
Well, it turns out that flat and negatively curved universes can be finite.
If you have the case where space looks locally isotropic, that is, from a given point, it
looks the same in all directions, but if you chose other points, you might find some
from which the universe doesn't look isotropic, in other words, it wouldn't be globally isotropic.
Then in that case, you can have finite, positive, and negatively curved universes embedded in
a larger, multi-dimensional space.
We only know that the universe is isotropic as viewed from our direction.
How do we know that from some other point, it might not look isotropic, okay?
It might or it might not look isotropic if we could view it from somewhere else.
So for example, if you have a donut like this, it's kind of crinkly, but if you had a smooth
surface, you might think that it's isotropic, but it's not, because if you look at this
ring here, the torus or a donut, and you place yourself at a point right there, looking in
this direction, you see one sort of curvature for the universe, looking along another direction,
you see a different amount of curvature, so you can distinguish between those two directions.
This is a universe which from that point is not isotropic.
Indeed, a torus like this, embedded in three dimensions, is technically not isotropic from
any vantage point along that universe.
You can make a torus in four spatial dimensions that looks isotropic, but you can't embed
one in three spatial dimensions that looks isotropic.
But in any case, such universes that violate global isotropy may exist embedded in a higher
multi-dimensional space, and they are finite in this case.
And so you get these additional topologies that are possible.
You get a donut that's flat globally, or negatively curved, yet it's finite.
That's different from the infinite space that Friedman came up with when he did his work
in the 1920s.
So what would we actually see if we were to try to observe a universe that's finite like
this?
Would we see it evolve any differently from a flat or a negatively curved infinite universe?
No, they expand forever.
This thing might be a negatively curved or a flat universe that's finite, but it still
expands forever, so you wouldn't notice any difference there.
And you would still see a positively curved universe, for example, re-collapse, even if
you have a kind of geometry where that positively curved universe no longer looks spherically
shaped.
Mathematicians who are now coming up with dodecahedron universes that have sort of 12
faces or something.
That's another kind of a universe that violates global isotropy, but might look isotropic
from some particular point, and the result is that it's not a spherical shape.
It's some dodecahedron or some other weird thing.
All these universes evolve in the same way.
You can't really tell the difference between them and a standard Friedman universe.
So what do you do?
How do you distinguish whether we live in an infinite universe or some finite torus or
something like that, or a dodecahedron universe?
How do you figure out the global topology that is the overall shape of the universe,
how it wraps around itself?
Carl Schwartzschild in the year 1900 figured out a way.
Now this is the same Schwartzschild of Schwartzschild radius fame for a black hole.
He realized that in a finite universe, one that wraps around itself, light can go around
in principle several times if the universe is sufficiently small.
And so you might get different views of the Earth, for example, if you were to look out
in one direction.
You would see light from the Earth from long ago wrapping around the universe and coming
and hitting your eye, and you might see Earth from even longer ago if the light from it
wrapped around twice and then hit your eye, and so on.
So you see multiple images of the Earth, and it might even depend on which directions
you look because some directions might not wrap around, or at least not on the same size
scale like here.
This dimension is definitely shorter in space than that one.
So anyway, if you look in different regions, you might see copies of yourself back in time.
And the image that you might get is analogous to putting a bunch of Earths in cubes like
this and joining them all up end to end, and what you're seeing are different snapshots
of the same Earth at different points back in time.
And this is similar to a Hall of Mirrors effect that you might get in the department store,
for example, where you're putting on a shirt, testing it out, and you look at yourself in
between two mirrors.
Have you ever noticed how you can see many, many versions of yourself in those mirrors?
Well, light takes time to go back and forth, back, forth, back, forth between these two
mirrors.
So you're actually seeing your image at slightly different times in the past for each individual
image.
They're not all the same snapshot of time.
And I did this kind of a thing with the mirror segments of the tech telescopes.
Normally, they're all in the structure here, collecting light of distant supernovae or
galaxies or whatever.
But there are some spare segments that are kept in a room, and they're occasionally coded
with a new coating of aluminum.
And sometimes you can find these segments put upright and facing one another.
So one day I was giving a tour to some colleagues of the Keck Mirror Lab, and the segments
happened to be upright like this and pointing at each other.
And I walked in between two of them and saw a beautiful Hall of Mirrors effect like this
and took a snapshot of myself.
But this is not one instant of time.
The light from the more distant images actually had to have been emitted slightly before the
light from the most nearby image, because it's bounced around more times.
Now, that effect is very small, billions of a second in this case, but it illustrates
the idea that you might look back in time in a space that wraps around itself.
And you would see the same galaxies or the same planets or whatever at different times
in the past.
Well, the best test of this idea has been with the cosmic microwave background radiation.
The WMAP data of 2003 have been extensively analyzed, trying to find hotspots that are
two different images of the same density fluctuation early in the universe.
And you can't tell with any single pair of spots, but if you do a statistical analysis
of all the spots, you might come to the conclusion that you're seeing some of them twice or three
times or whatever.
Initially some astronomers who did this analysis thought they had seen two or more spots twice,
but a better analysis now suggests that in fact we're not seeing any of the spots twice,
and the universe, if it does wrap around itself, only does so on a scale larger than 78 billion
light years.
Now that's a pretty darn big universe, okay?
I'm waiting for the analysis of the 2006 WMAP data.
It'll be interesting to see if they come to the same conclusion that there's no evidence
that the universe actually wraps around, but if it does wrap around, it's on an awfully,
awfully large scale, okay?
So for all intents and purposes, as far as we can tell, we live in either a very, very
large universe or possibly even an infinitely large universe.
All right, well that's size and shape.
What about now the distant future?
Though the expansion is accelerating with time right now, it might reverse sign and
collapse someday in the future, although Linde and others suggest that that won't happen
for 30 or 40 billion years.
Well 30 or 40 billion years sounds like a long time, but it's not very long compared
to trillions or quadrillions of years, you know?
I mean the universe might actually live much, much longer if it were to not re-collapse,
and many more interesting things might happen to it or into the objects within it if it
never re-collapses, or at least if it re-collapses in more like a Google years or something like
that.
So let's just assume so that we can look at physical processes in the universe that the
universe will never collapse or will re-collapse only someday very, very far in the future,
okay?
And let's consider what will happen at various eras or stages or ages in the future of the
universe.
There's a very interesting book published in the year 2000 by astrophysicists Fred Adams
and Greg Loughlin.
It's called The Five Ages of the Universe, Inside the Physics of Eternity, and they discuss
their view of possible and probable events in the future of the universe, what will happen
to stars and black holes and things like that.
I'll summarize their conclusions, which are very interesting, and I'll revise their conclusions
a little bit because we now know more about the acceleration of the universe and other
things than we did when they wrote their book in the year 2000.
Now to avoid writing lots of zeros, in this case up to 110, to identify various stages
in the evolution of the universe, they introduced the notion of a cosmological decade.
Now at the beginning of cosmological decade N, the universe is 10 to the nth years old.
So for example, at the beginning of the cosmological, not the real decade that begins at one billion
years, the universe is 10 to the ninth years old, and so N equals 9, so we call that cosmological
decade 9.
And in general, cosmological decade N means the beginning of the 10 to the nth year in
the universe's future.
So there are five major eras in the universe's past and future.
The first is the primordial era, which they said is any time below N equals 6, that is
below a million years, and a million years is roughly the timescale of the recombination
time when the microwave background was first set free.
That time is actually more like 380,000 years, but that's close enough to a million for order
of magnitude type arguments.
So they call the primordial era N less than 6.
I call it N less than 8 because all the way up to about 100 million years, there still
weren't any stars.
It took a while for stars to form.
So I'll call the primordial era any time up to N equals 8, 100 million years.
Then there's what we call or they call the Steliferous era, an era filled with stars
from a time 100 million years to a 100 trillion years after the Big Bang.
At that time, stars dominated the visible portions of the universe.
So this is cosmological era or Steliferous era that goes from cosmological decade 8 through
14.
Then there's the degenerate era from N equals 14 to 40 when there's white dwarfs and brown
dwarfs and neutron stars, all sorts of degenerate objects.
And then after 10 of the 40th years, it turns out there's only black holes, the black hole
era.
And that lasts all the way up to cosmological decade 100, a Google years, okay?
And then there's the dark era, cosmological decade 100 and beyond, when there are only
electrons and positrons and neutrinos and photons.
All right, well, our current era is the Steliferous era.
We are roughly at N equals 10.
The universe is about 10 billion years old.
During the Steliferous era, there are lots and lots of stars that are born and fuse
their way to death.
This continues until hydrogen gas is no longer available to generate new stars or to fuel
the existing stars.
Most of the interesting events in this era will occur shortly after, right now, shortly
after 10 billion years.
Not that much is going to occur that's interesting at 10 to the 13 or 10 to the 14.
A lot of the stuff from our perspective that's interesting is going to occur soon.
For example, the sun is going to get enough brighter in the next half a billion to a billion
years to evaporate our oceans.
And shortly after that, our atmosphere will get evaporated after a few billion years.
And then in five billion years, the sun will bloat into a red giant, encompassing probably
the orbit of Mercury, maybe going all the way out to Venus.
In any case, its stellar wind will be denser than it is now, and Earth's orbit within that
stellar wind will cause it to lose energy and spiral into the sun, and so the Earth eventually
will actually get vaporized by plunging into the sun.
So that's not going to happen that long from now on this cosmological decade way of thinking
of things, you know, by 10 to the 11th or 10 to the 12th years, that will happen.
And the Milky Way Galaxy and the Andromeda Galaxy are heading toward each other and will
collide in about six billion years.
And we can tell from computer simulations, like the one shown here, that the collision
of two spiral galaxies leads to the formation of one galaxy, typically an elliptical galaxy.
But during that process, lots of stars are flung out in tidal tails, and many of these
stars escape from galaxies altogether.
See these ones at the tail end here of this tail, they're not going to become, they're
not going to remain gravitationally bound to the central structure that's forming.
So you know, in just six or seven billion years, we're going to collide with Andromeda,
and within a few billion years after that collision, we will be seeing something that
resembles this, an amorphous structure gradually becoming more regular and forming an elliptical
galaxy with a lot of stars flung out in the process, becoming lone wanderers in the universe,
no longer bound to a galaxy.
Well as the universe continues to expand, we think at an accelerating rate, only groups
of galaxies and closely bound clusters will be visible from any particular vantage point.
For example, we will only see galaxies that are very close to us, if any remain at that
point.
But in fact, our galaxy is going to eat all the galaxies in the local group before that
time has reached.
So you really have to put your perspective in some other group.
They will only see galaxies that are sufficiently nearby to have remained gravitationally bound.
Those that are too far away are unbound to whatever group you're viewing from and will
be whisked away by the acceleration of the universe beyond distances to which anyone
can see.
So if you want to look at clusters of galaxies like this one, like the Coma Cluster, you would
better do it in the next 100 billion years for sure, but even 30 or 40 maybe, because
beyond that time they will have been whisked away to distances that are not observable.
Now the end of the Soliferous Era is marked by the endpoint of the hydrogen-burning stars.
Once they all burn out, there's nothing remaining, they're dead, they're degenerate.
But some clouds of gas might form some new stars and those will burn or fuse for a while.
But eventually all the hydrogen in the typical galaxy will get used up and then those stars
will fuse for a while, but there will be no new stars forming.
All the action will cease by about Cosmological Decade 14.
That is 10 of the 14 years, 100 trillion years from now.
Stars will have burnt out, even the red dwarfs will have burnt out, and there won't be enough
hydrogen around to form new stars.
The Soliferous Era will end at Cosmological Decade 14.
We will enter then the Degenerate Era, which lasts a long time from n equals 14 to 40.
The universe at this point will consist of brown dwarfs, failed stars in a sense, degenerate
objects, white dwarfs, neutron stars, the remnants of dead stars.
There will also be some stellar mass black holes, which are not strictly speaking degenerate,
but we'll talk about them later.
They're sort of common to many of the stages of the universe, whereas the degenerate objects
like white dwarfs and neutron stars are the representative objects during the Degenerate
Era, so that's why they call it the Degenerate Era.
And there will be supermassive black holes, still remaining in galactic nuclei, and of
course there will be some planets, which are not degenerate, and some dark matter and dark
energy, which are not degenerate, but the Degenerate Era is marked by this abundance
of white dwarfs, neutron stars, and brown dwarfs.
What will be the action during the Degenerate Era?
Well, the universe will look a lot different from its present appearance.
There will be very little visible radiation.
There won't be any stars, you know, at least not normal ones.
Only two brown dwarfs might meet each other, become massive enough, after coalescing, to
fuse hydrogen, and they will turn into a low mass star that will shine for a while.
Or two white dwarfs bound to each other by gravity might merge and form a supernova.
So in this otherwise dark universe there will be this tremendous flash of light, a type
1A supernova.
Or white dwarfs can collect dark matter.
They gravitationally attracted in the dark matter particles, the little wimps and things,
can congregate within white dwarfs, and particles of wimps and antiparticles can meet up with
one another and annihilate each other, releasing a tiny amount of energy, letting cold, dead
white dwarfs glow ever so slightly.
So there will be this faint glow in galaxies from dark matter that was collected by the
gravity of white dwarfs and is now annihilating.
But it will be really a pretty dark universe at this point.
By about cosmological decade 20, most of the stars and planets in a galaxy will have been
flung out through gravitational interactions, kind of like the one I showed where you had
two colliding galaxies, but also individual stars moving near each other can fling stars
and planets out of galaxies.
So galaxies will contain less and less and less material as the stars and planets are
flung out.
Many stars and planets that aren't flung out will eventually be captured by the supermassive
black holes inside of galaxies.
So by cosmological decade 30, 10 to the 30th years, galaxies will have essentially been
destroyed and what will remain are supermassive black holes and lone wandering white dwarfs
and neutron stars and things like that.
Now they will eventually disintegrate because of proton decay.
We don't know how long protons last.
Scientists thought that they last perhaps 10 to the 40th years.
The experimental lower limit from the supercomioconda device in Japan is that they live at least
10 to the 33 years, maybe 5 times 10 to the 33 years, but they might live all the way
up to 10 to the 42 or 10 to the 45 years according to theories.
We just don't know.
So let's take n equals 40 as a reasonable compromise as to when protons decay and all
the degenerate objects then disintegrate.
After the degenerate objects have disintegrated, what's left?
Black holes.
That's the only discrete type of massive object that still remains.
There are the stellar mass black holes from the collapsed stars and the supermassive black
holes that used to be in the centers of now defunct galaxies.
But even black holes don't last forever.
Recall in lecture 64, I talked about Hawking radiation where particles and antiparticles
can come out of a black hole as long as their partner particles and antiparticles go in
with negative energy as viewed by us.
And I discussed this Hawking radiation and how I talk about it in my class at Berkeley.
And this lecture happens to be right during the day of Halloween or one or two days earlier.
So I dress up in my Halloween costume, which is this black hole with an alien hanging from
my neck.
And I throw out celestially appropriate candy like Mars bars and orbit gum and eclipse gum.
And that's my evaporation.
Interestingly I'm dressed in black today as well.
So maybe I'm an evaporating black hole.
But I dress up not just to become an evaporating black hole, but also because it happens to
be Halloween.
Well the stellar mass black holes take about to cosmological decade 65 to evaporate.
One solar mass black holes will last all the way to ten to the 83 years, cosmological
decade 83.
And the largest supermassive black holes, the ones that are billions of solar masses,
will last all the way up to a Google years, ten to the one hundredth power, cosmological
decade 100.
But even those black holes will eventually evaporate away.
The survivors are elementary particles, electrons, positrons, neutrinos, and some very long wavelength
photons.
Very long wavelength because by this time the universe will have stretched to such vast
sizes that all the electromagnetic radiation, all the photons will have stretched as well.
Beyond cosmological decade 100 we thus enter the dark era.
There's no new source of light, other than the occasional meeting and annihilation of
an electron and its antiparticle, the positron, that can happen.
Or there can be an intermediate stage where the electron and positron become electrically
bound to one another in an atom, quote unquote, of positronium.
Now here's one schematically, but in this very old low density universe these positronium
atoms might be millions of light years in size because there's hardly anything hassling
them, disturbing them.
They're just sitting there all alone.
Every few million years you find some weakly bound atom of positronium where instead of
a proton and an electron you have a positron and an electron.
But even they gradually decay away.
The two particles meet, they merge, they produce a little tiny burst of energy, a couple of
gamma rays, and by cosmological decade 110 even the positronium will have annihilated.
You'll be left with long wavelength photons and occasional charged particles that haven't
met up with their antiparticle because of the vastness of empty space and some neutrinos
and things.
That'll be it.
Probably no life then.
Indeed, life is hard to conceive of beyond cosmological decade 14 because that's when
the stilliferous era ends and if you don't have stars what's your source of heat, what's
your source of light going to be?
Well though most of us think that life will definitely end by cosmological decade 14,
there's the interesting hypothesis advanced by Freeman Dyson of a cosmological time principle.
That is, we don't live, he thinks, at a special time which was alone in being conducive to
the formation and support of life.
Maybe life could form at many different cosmological decades.
It's just not the kind of life that we know of.
Maybe these particles separated by vast distances can interact in a way that resembles life.
Now you might think, oh they're so far apart from each other, millions of light years.
True.
But think of the vast time scales available to them for interaction.
You've got all these huge distances but by this time, who cares about the distances,
you have a huge amount of time as well over which these particles can interact.
It's really highly speculative but it's fun to think about it.
So in the end, after the evaporation of black holes, the universe will be made of elementary
particles and radiation.
It'll be huge but too old for anything else to exist.
Any more complex matter will have decayed away.
Now we will next consider the beginning of the universe shortly after creation and at
that time as well, the universe consisted primarily of elementary particles and radiation,
similar to the conditions at the end.
But in the beginning, the conditions were produced by a very young, hot universe.
Nothing else could exist.
In the end, it's an old, huge, cold universe.
Again, nothing else but elementary particles could exist.
So you start with elementary particles, you end with them.
Ashes to ashes, dust to dust, particles to particles, such as our fate.
