So, I'll sort of be trying to provide an introduction or an overview about gauge theory and geometric
langlines, but I don't want to give it the same talk I would have given a decade ago,
so it can't be as systematic as that one would have been.
Also, I expect that the audience is highly varied in your point of view and what you
already know about it, so I'll give an overview of sorts, and I hope you'll all get something
out of it.
So, the story starts in six dimensions.
In six dimensions for each type of simply laced Lie group, A, D, or E, and here we specify
only the Dinkin diagram, not the group.
There is a six-dimensional super conformal field theory, well, the conformal group in
six dimensions with the SO2-6, SO2,6 would be the group of conformal notions of six-dimensional
Minkowski space.
So here we're going to have a supergroup which contains SO2-6, and it's actually, well,
it's sort of an orthosymplectic supergroup, OSP2-6-4, what I'm going to call it, SO2-6.
And the tilde refers to a triality.
So SO2-6 is a version of, as a complex Lie group, the form of SO, it's a different form
of the Lie group, SO8, and you have to remember that SO8 has triality.
So here, in the physical realization, it's extremely important that SO8 has triality,
so this is a version of, it might be less unfamiliar if I wrote OSP8-4, but the part
of an infinite family of orthosymplectic supergroups, but here it's important that you can make a
triality transformation on the SO8 factor, so that the odd generators become spinners
of SO8.
The reason I'm mentioning this triality is simply to help you understand that six dimensions
is going to be the maximum for super conformal field theory, because we have to use the last
of the exceptional isomorphisms among Lie groups.
So this is sort of the ends of the line for super conformal field theory, and it's the
starting point from which one understands gauge theory and geometric Langlands.
So all I've said so far is that the starting point for gauge theory and geometric Langlands
is this exotic six-dimensional super conformal field theory, and it has two properties that
classically with the incompatible.
The first is that if you abelianize it, you get not gauge fields, but gerbs, which means
for physics that you get two form connections, you get gauge fields that are two forms rather
than one forms of the maximal torus, and the second is that if you reduce on a circle,
you get gauge fields of G, which is the group of type A, D, or E. So G here is any simple
Lie group of type A, D, or E. If you reduce on a circle, you see non-abelian gauge theory
of G, but if you abelianize, then you see instead two form gauge fields of the maximal
torus.
What does abelianize mean?
For physicists, it means moving on the Coulomb branch.
I understand that in the mathematics of geometric Langlands, there is an analogous operation
of considering support at a semi-simple, at a regular semi-simple element.
Assuming that one of those two statements made sense to you, this six-dimensional theory
can be abelianized, and when you abelianize it, you see two form connections rather than
ordinary gauge theory, but instead if you reduce on a circle, you get gauge fields of
a simple non-abelian Lie group.
If you're following me, these two facts should sound hopelessly incompatible, because there
are two ways to simplify the theory by either abelianizing or by decategorifying, reducing
one dimension, leading in one case to two form connections, and in the other case to
one form connections of the non-abelian group.
As a classical physicist or mathematician trying to reconcile these facts, you'd say
that if you didn't simplify it, it must have had two form fields of the non-abelian group,
but that's precisely what doesn't exist classically.
If you're a physicist, you know that there's no Yang-Mills theory for two form gauge fields,
or at least if you don't recognize that fact, you should try to convince yourself later,
and if you're a mathematician, you probably know that H1 has a non-abelian version that
has to do with vector bundles, but H2 does not have an analogous non-abelian version.
But this theory descends from the mist, from the quantum world, in one of two ways where
you can simplify it and understand it better, in a way that from a classical point of view
would have implied that it started life with what doesn't exist, the non-abelian theory
of the gerb, or two form gauge field.
So that's the underlying mystery, if you like, of the six dimensional super conformal field
theory, and it's that which leads to geometric languines and all kinds of other crazy things.
So to continue with two, to be more specific, we take our sixth manifold to be a five manifold
times a circle of radius r, or circumference 2 pi r, and then the effective action that
we get in five dimensions, well, it's what you'd expect for Yang and O's theory, where
f is the curvature, and the action as usual is the integral of the square of the curvature,
except for one completely crazy fact, that instead of the action being proportional to
r, as it would be in classical dimensional reduction, where you would integrate over
the fiber and get a factor of the volume of the fiber, here you get a factor of the inverse
of the volume of the fiber.
Now the fact that you get the inverse volume is a completely elementary fact that follows
from conformal invariance.
The sixth dimensional theory was conformal invariance, so if we rescale all lengths in
six dimensions, we'll leave this effective action invariant. Rescaling lengths would
multiply r by constant, but it would also multiply the five dimensional lengths by constant.
And because f squared has dimension four, but we're in five dimensions, remember a curvature
has a derivative, the connection naturally scales like a derivative, so f scales like
a second derivative, so here we in fact have four derivatives but five integrals, so this
scales like length, so it has to multiply inverse length.
So the scaling of the effective action with inverse length simply follows from six dimensional
conformal invariance, but it also shows that this is not coming by a classical operation
of integration over the fiber, it's coming from some kind of quantum duality and going
from six to five dimensions.
It's that quantum duality by which what didn't really exist classically, the non-ibilion
gerb theory, manages to materialize in five dimensions as a concrete non-ibilion gauge
theory.
Now, there's a variant which I want to briefly mention of step two, which is a twisted reduction
on a circle.
I'm going to mention it just because I want to explain how Lie groups that are not simply
laced come in.
So if G is not, so in six dimensions we only had an ADE classification, so what happens
what I've described so far will give us gauge theory of ADE groups in five dimensions, gauge
theory of simply laced groups, how are we going to get a non-simply laced group?
Well, non-simply laced groups are related to pairs, I'm not sure what to call it, where
G is simply laced and I'm just calling star an automorphism of G. For example, the group
G2 with the related to spin 8 and triality, here you can take an automorphism star whose
cube is 1 and G2 is a fixed point set of spin 8 under that operation.
So there are certain pairs consisting of a simply laced group and an automorphism, and
for such pairs this six dimensional theory actually has an automorphism. And therefore
when you compactify on a circle there is a twisted automorphism and when you make the
twisted compactification you get in five dimensions gauge theory, not of the H that would classically
be associated to the pair G on the automorphism, but gauge theory of the Langland's GNO dual
group. For example G2 is self-dual, so if you want to get G2 gauge theory in five dimensions
you'd start with D4 in six dimensions and on a circle you'd make a twisted compactification
by this automorphism of order three. So that's the cast of characters in five dimensions,
those are the basic constructions. Now we want to discuss topological field theories.
Where I've put the words which I'm going to abbreviate as TQFTs, topological quantum
field theories, but the first T is going to be in quotes because our topological field
theories do not truly satisfy all the axioms of topological field theory. They fail because
of a lack of compactness, so there isn't time to discuss it, there won't really be
time to explain it properly, but none of the pseudo-topological field theories that we
construct truly obey all the properties of the topological field theory because at certain
crucial stages lack of compactness will cause difficulties. So also we're going to only
take a sort of shortcut to loosely explaining how they're constructed. So in n dimensions
well, so we have this OSP 2,6 slash 4 whose Bosonic subgroup had this factor of sp4 which
is the same as spin 5 by another one of the exceptional automorphisms of league groups.
In dimension n, this is, this is called the r symmetry group. In dimension n you construct
these almost topological field theories by using homomorphisms from spin n to the r
symmetry group, which here is spin 5. So such homomorphism should have some properties which
we won't try to work out today, but for example the trivial one won't be any good. So in dimension
6 we'd need a homomorphism from spin 6 to spin 5, there are no interesting ones. So we're
out of luck. In dimension 5 there's one because now we're taking spin 5 to spin 5 and the
identity homomorphism works fine. So we have some good fortune there and there's one construction.
In dimension 4 we have, we're trying to map spin 4 to spin 5, but we have another exceptional
automorphism which is called spin 5. In dimension 4 we have, we're trying to map spin 4 to spin
5, but we have another exceptional automorphism that spin 4 is s u 2 times s u 2. Well, first
of all we can do the same thing which we did before, embed spin 4 and spin 5 in the obvious
way, just using the fact that 5 is 4 plus 1, spin 4 is a subgroup of spin 5. There are
a couple more things we can do because there are, this exceptional isomorphism gives us
more freedom. So there are more things we can do. And there actually are three choices
that lead to almost topological field days. And they are associated respectively to geometric
Langlands, what people sometimes call Vaffa-Wittentheory and to a version of Cyber-Wittentheory with an adjoin
type of multiple, also sometimes called N equals 2 star. So for today we're interested in the
route that leads to geometric Langlands. But the same exceptional isomorphism that enable
two more theories to exist in four dimensions leads to this theory having additional properties.
We actually get a one complex parameter family of theories, parameterized by what a person
and I called psi. And we actually get a one complex parameter family of theories, parameterized
by geometric Langlands duality, well I think I should first say why there is a non trivial
duality. So remember we went from six dimensions to five dimensions. Something concrete materialized
out of the mist, but R was in the denominator telling us that that was a highly non-classical
operation. Now we're going to compactify on a second circle. So we're compactifying on
a second circle. So we're compactifying on a second circle. So we're compactifying on
a two torus, a product of two circles. And to make things simple we could think of it
as an orthogonal product of two circles of circumference 2 pi R and 2 pi S. So we build
it from a rectangle. In a moment we'll allow a parallelogram but you could start by compactifying
on a rectangle. If you compactify on a rectangle, well the first compactification was non-classical
and gave us a factor of one over R. But now that we understand what we're doing since
we have a classical action, the second step will be simply classical integration over
the fiber. So now the length will appear in the numerator. So when we reduce to the four
dimensional effect of action, we're going to get S over R times D4X trace F squared.
So you see there was a complete symmetry between S and R microscopically. The combined
operation was to compactify on a rectangle whose length in one direction was proportional
to S while its length in the other direction was proportional to R. So that joint operation
is completely symmetrical under S and R. It was up to us to do it in two stages where
the first stage we couldn't understand classically and the second stage we could understand classically.
The first stage gave a one over R that followed from conformal invariance and the difficulty
of explaining that step classically is the underlying difficulty in understanding geometric
Langlands. But the second step was classical and gave us simply a factor of S. So we conclude
that the underlying symmetry between S and R, well I guess I should remind you that in
gauge theory you usually write one over the coupling constant squared. But you see one
over, what's behaving as a coupling constant is R over S. So the underlying symmetry of
exchanging S and R means that the four dimensional theory is invariant under inverting the coupling
constant. So this is an operation that exchanges weak and strong coupling. So small e is the
semi-classical region where classical physics is a good approximation and you can understand
it. Large e is the opposite, strong coupling where the dragons live. But this theory will
have a symmetry between weak and strong coupling. Now I've explained it for the case of a parallel
ground, sorry, a rectangle but more generally we could compactify on a genus 1 Riemann surface
with any flat metric corresponding to a parallelogram in the plane. So you could think of it as
the, you take in the plane a parallelogram with corners 0, 1, tau and 1 plus tau where
tau is any point in the upper half plane. And then the S going to R symmetry becomes tau
to minus 1 over tau. But more generally you would argue that what we have here fundamentally
is a rank 2 lattice in the plane. Our genus 1 surface is the quotient of the complex plane
by rank 2 lattice generated by 1 and tau. But we could have picked any other basis for
the same lattice and that would have had the effect of tau going to A tau plus B over C
tau plus D. And in the gauge theory tau then is interpreted. If you're a little bit more
precise than I've been with the formulas. The gauge theory has a coupling constant e
which I wrote down but didn't normalize quite carefully. It also has a theta angle that
multiplies a second term in the action. And the precise statement about the duality is
the SL 2 Z surface of symmetry of the genus 1 Riemann surface acts on tau as tau going
to A tau plus B over C tau plus D where A, B, C and D are in SL 2 Z.
So this description is for simply laced Lie groups. Remember that if the Lie group isn't
simply laced then in the first step we made a twist. So in the non-simple laced group
we don't simply have a Riemann surface of genus 1. We have a Riemann surface of genus
1 with a twist around one cycle. Where the twist was by an outer automorphism that's
of order 2 or 3. For example if we're doing G2 the outer automorphism was of order 3. So
in the non-simple laced case we have a genus 1 surface that is endowed with a flat bundle
of order 2 or 3. And you could define SL 2 Z but it will permute the different flat bundles.
If you want a symmetry of the particular construction you have to look at the subgroup of SL 2 Z that
obeys a congruence condition. So it leaves fixed that flat bundle.
So what, so. I'd like to stress that in the non-simple Laced
but this SL 2 Z is a symmetry of the complete physical theory, not just of the twisted almost
topological field theory such as the one that enters geometric langlines.
OK, so what's called classical geometric langlines. One studies the case that psi is infinity
or zero. They're exchanged. I should say that psi transforms the same way that tau does.
So infinity and zero are exchanged by psi to minus 1 over psi.
So the first case is just that the other case is that psi transforms the same way that tau
does. So the other case is that psi transforms the same way that tau does. So infinity and
zero are exchanged by psi to minus 1 over psi. So that's the classical geometric langlines
duality and people in that field also study what they call quantum geometric langlines
that corresponds to generic psi. Well, so far in the discussion we've compactified
to four dimensions but geometric langlines is usually defined by further specialization
which is to compactify further on a Riemann surface C. So you take your four-manifold to
be of the form of a two-manifold times C and if you think of C as being fixed then you
have a two-dimensional effective theory on M2. Now in two-dimensional topological field
theory the basic things you consider are boundary conditions. Boundary conditions in two-dimensions
form a category and geometric langlines is a statement about the categories of boundary
conditions that you get for fixed C at psi equals zero or infinity and more generally
at generic psi if you want to study quantum geometric langlines.
Now, some of the most interesting boundary conditions can be defined universally independent
of C and David and I studied such boundary conditions about 10 years ago and I'd like
to tell you a few words about the boundary conditions that are defined universally. So,
actually I do want to but there's one more thing I want to say. So remember that in
five dimensions we had one theory. In four dimensions we had a family of three dimensions
and a family parameterized by psi. So, given this you should ask whether among any of the
four-dimensional theories there's one that actually can be lifted to five dimensions.
Well, it's actually almost obvious there must be because whatever the five-dimensional
theory was if we reduce it in a circle we'll get some four-dimensional theory. So, it'll
have to be either in this family or else in one of the other families that I briefly mentioned.
So actually psi equals infinity is the one that descends from five dimensions. So that
means that among the categories studied in geometric langlines the one that naturally
lifts to a two-category meaning it comes from five dimensions is the one that psi equals
infinity and according to essentially the analysis by Kapustin and Selina that two-category
is a Rosanski written deformed version. Unfortunately, if you took the, it's very hard to make a brief
statement that's illuminating so maybe I should resist the temptation to try to. The psi
equals infinity category is a certain category of coherent sheaves and in general for complex
symplectic manifolds Kapustin and Selina described a lift of that to a two-category that's z
two graded and that is supposed to be the g equals five, the lift to five dimensions
of the psi equals infinity case of geometric langlines. Anyway, where are we going to go?
So we're going to discuss boundary conditions. Oh, this one, okay.
Are you saying a cyclone infinity is the only point where this should be possible? Yes.
The only one that comes from a five-dimensional theory. Sorry. The only one that comes from
a five-dimensional topological theory in the same sense. So of course the physical theory
comes from six dimensions. In six dimensions there wasn't a topological twist. In five
dimensions there was one topological twist and it descends to psi equals infinity in
four dimensions. Okay. I want to tell you about universal boundary conditions but there's
another building block I wanted to tell you about which is that we should discuss defects.
So what a defect means in general is that somehow in D equals six when some sub manifold
are theory can be modified in an interesting way. That depends on a choice of discrete
data on that sub manifold and on the co-dimension of the sub manifold. And here there are two
classes of, there are two important classes of defects. There are two-dimensional defects
and there are co-dimension two defects. The two-dimensional defects are labeled by representations
of G and the co-dimension two defects are labeled by roughly speaking by Nulput and
Conjixy classes. We'll get to that in a bit. So both of them play an important role in
geometric Langons and although there won't be time for a proper explanation I want to
at least briefly mention the role of the two-dimensional defects go before getting to boundary conditions
where the co-dimension two defects will be important. So for the two-dimensional defects
the two-dimensional defects play at least two roles. So first of all we had our six manifold
was a two torus times a four manifold. Now one thing which we can do when we're going
to discuss a two-dimensional defect we have to pick a two manifold in six dimensions and
there are different choices. One choice is to take a circle inside the two torus times
a one manifold, I'll say M1 inside M4. Of course now there are different choices because
there are different topologically unequivalent ways to embed a circle in a two manifold.
And if you remember that the basic electric magnetic duality exchanged the two directions
in the very basic case where the torus is rectangular, the case we started with, the most
obvious embedded circles are going to be vertical or horizontal. Those will correspond
to what are called Wilson and Toft operators in the gauge theory. And remember the basic
duality exchanged the two directions in the torus. So they will exchange Wilson and Toft
operators. We could make more general SL2Z transformations and they will map those two
options to other options. But these are the basic cases to keep in mind. Then when we
specify to M2 times C we can embed M1 and M2 times C in various ways but one choice
which is important in geometric Langlands is to take a point P and C and simply embed
M1 and M2. And since geometric Langlands is concerned with boundary categories of boundary
conditions we take M2 to be a Riemann surface with boundary. The discussion is only local
along the boundary so we don't care what the rest of M2 is. All that we care is that it
has a boundary that is endowed with some boundary condition corresponding to an object in the
category of boundary conditions. And then we take M1 to be a line parallel to the boundary
living at a point in C which isn't drawn. Well with M1 being parallel to the boundary
you see that from a topological point of view you could move M1 up to the boundary and the
boundary with another Wilson line parallel or a tough line, another line operator parallel
to it is just a composite boundary condition. So in this setup we get what, well to use
language I don't know is a functor on the category of boundary conditions. So the electric
magnetic duality will map the functors on the category of boundary conditions that come
from Wilson lines to the corresponding functor that comes from a tough lines. And that leads
to what's called the geometric Pecky operators. The Wilson operators are something you can
understand classically. The Huffed operators as you might guess from their rather subtle
definition in quantum field theory are more subtle objects that are the more subtle part
of the geometric Langlands correspondence. So the fact that Wilson operators are mapped
Huffed operators is one of the main statements about geometric Langlands. Now we specialized
the construction a lot to get to this story and obviously there are different ways we could
have embedded a two-manifold in T2 times M4. But just for fun I'm going to consider
one more option which is I could take a point in T2 times a two surface which I better not
call M2 because I've used that name. I'll call it sigma inside M4. And then in geometric
Langlands we specialize to the case that M4 is M2 times C. And again there are different
sigmas we can use but I could simply take sigma to be M2 again times a point in C. So that's
another thing which we can do with the same code I mentioned to the effect. And if you
do that then as explored by Gukov and me that leads to the ramification in geometric Langlands.
Ramification around the point that we picked in C. So I think that that's as much as I'll
say about two-dimensional defects but we're left with the co-dimension two defects. What
are they good for? So to explain what they're good for I should get to what I promised I
was going to discuss. I promised we would discuss some boundary conditions that can be
constructed in a universal way irrespective of the compactification on C. So in geometric
Langlands you compactify on C and consider the category of boundary conditions when you
specialize to M4 equals M2 times C. But certainly any boundary condition you could define for
any M4 will also make sense in this situation. So if we want to understand categories of
boundary conditions we should first understand the ones that are universal in that sense.
They don't depend on the choice of C. And a lot of important operations in geometric
Langlands have to do with things that are universal in that sense. They don't depend on C. So
let's just start in six dimensions. Well how would we construct knowing nothing about a six-dimensional
theory? How would we nevertheless construct a boundary condition in that theory? That might
be hard. But if we're willing to reduce on a circle we can do it. So I don't know what to tell you
in D equals 6. So we'll make it easier and specialize to M5 times a circle. That's an
easier problem. So knowing nothing about a theory in six dimensions how would you construct
a boundary condition for that theory when specialized to six manifolds of the form M5
times a circle? That you actually can do because a circle is a boundary. So you just draw this
picture. So near its boundary, near a boundary M5 looks like some M4 times a half line. And
the picture I've drawn maps to a half line with the fiber being a circle. So if you take
this two manifold I've drawn and multiplied by M4, you can see that it's a half line.
So I'm going to draw a half line. So I'm going to draw a half line. And then I'm going to
take its Cartesian product of M4. First of all that's a smooth six manifold. So if you
had a six dimensional theory you don't need any more information to define it, to define
the theory on that six manifold. But secondly from the point of view of the reduced theory
on M5 it looks like a boundary condition. Because away from the tip of the cigar, you
have a circle vibration over a five manifold. But the reduced five manifold has a boundary.
So this picture represents a boundary in five dimensions and it's a boundary that we can
construct universally. What I've said was so elementary that I'm terribly sorry if I've
confused you. And if I have I don't know how to straighten it out. I can try to say the
same thing again.
M4 times r plus isn't a manifold of course. It's a manifold with boundary. But if there's
a hidden circle that you don't know about when you're doing your theory on M5 that means
that away from the boundary you have not this interval but the interval times a circle,
a cylinder. And while the half line, while the line can't end smoothly the cylinder can.
So any theory reduced on a circle has a universal boundary condition. Now there are a lot more
universal boundary conditions which we can make. Because as I told you the theory has
co-dimension two defects. And if you have a theory with a co-dimension two defect then
you can make more boundary conditions in a universal way. Namely the tip of the cigar
is a co-dimension two manifold. And by placing your defect at the tip of the cigar without
spoiling any symmetries of the problem you modify the picture. So in any theory with
a co-dimension two defect that means that compactified on a circle you can construct
boundary conditions in a universal way. So this theory has got a lot of defects so there
are a lot of universal boundary conditions in five dimensions. I also told you there
was a twisted almost topological field theory in five dimensions. But this boundary condition
actually does not make sense in that twisted theory. The reason it doesn't is that although
this picture made sense in six dimensions the Hohenome group no longer has a spin five
sub, no longer reduces to spin five. Because this reduction to spin five was because the
circle factored off but now it doesn't factor off. So this is a, for physicists a completely
sensible boundary condition in the six dimensional theory. What it doesn't make sense in the
five dimensional topological field theory I told you about. However we can reduce on
another circle. So now we're going to, first of all we'll take, we'll work on M four times
a product of two circles which is closer to where geometric langons actually is. So we're
going to discuss universal boundary conditions in four dimensions. And now you see, I'll draw
this picture. It's a product of two circles but the first one is the boundary of that cigar. So this
is now a universal construction of boundary conditions in a four dimensional theory. Again
there might be a defect at the tip of the cigar. And by the way if there was a twist around the
circle there are defects that match that twist. The twist forces us to have a defect. But there's a
family of defects compatible with the twist. So that's how you would get non-sympilased
league groups. Anyway since there was more freedom in constructing twisted topological field
theories in four dimensions this picture is compatible with geometric langons at psi equals infinity.
At psi equals infinity assuming that the circle that's the boundary is the first one, the one that
we used in descending from the mist. So therefore for every defect we get an object in geometric
langons that exists universally independent of C. Independent of three months of the C because
we could define it without picking a C. So you can ask what are these objects in geometric
langons. If we do compactify on a circle. Sorry, I don't know if you can see. Well geometric
langons loosely speaking has to do with homomorphisms from the fundamental group to the dual group.
Well the gauge group here is usually called the dual group. But actually there's something called
the arthur s l 2. So number theorists would say that you have a homomorphism from pi 1 times
s l 2. So unfortunately I'm telling you one or two sentences about something I know essentially
nothing about just to match with the physics statement here. But there's really a homomorphism
from s l 2 arthur times pi 1 to G. And if we're going to do something which is universal independent
of C, it had better map pi 1 of C to nothing because we don't know anything about C. So
these will be homomorphisms that are trivial in C. But they correspond to homomorphisms
from arthur s l 2 to the dual group. So all such possible rows arise for suitable defects.
So the obvious one, which was the case of no defect, in other words the one I would have
told you about, had we not known that there are co-dimension two defects we had precisely
one universal boundary condition. That actually corresponds to what's called a principle embedding.
So if you don't know the phrase principle embedding for G equals s l n, it means that
the image of s l 2 is irreducible in the n dimensional representation. So at one extreme
you get the principle embedding and then there are all kinds of other embeddings and at the
other extreme is row equals zero. So row equals zero, okay. Row equals zero is actually the
most obvious one in the gauge theory. So row equals zero corresponds to Dirichlet boundary
conditions for gauge fields. And as explained in my work with David I found a long chain
of physics papers. The other ones have to do with Dirichlet modified by a non pole. The
non pole means that some of the scalar fields have a pole they diverge along the boundary.
The principle embedding which corresponds to not having a defect is the case that the non pole is as
big as possible. So on one side of the duality these are the basic objects that you can see in a
universal way, irrespective of the choice of c. So this corresponded to the non pole with
Dirichlet at the bottom. Dirichlet is the case that the non pole is zero. But we could consider
the dual boundary conditions where you take the second circle instead in the same construction
to be the boundary of the tube. So we sort of worked out what were the duals. So the regular
non pole, the regular non pole corresponds to the principle embedding. So it's called regular
because without getting into too much technicality. Given that I have 8 more minutes it's hopeless to
give a proper explanation. But the sort of the most generic pole, the maximal pole turns out to be
the dual of Neumann boundary conditions in gauge theory. Neumann boundary conditions for gauge
fields means that the gauge field on the boundary is arbitrary, it's not constrained. There is a
constraint on its normal derivative. And then all the other fields obey various boundary conditions
that are related to what I said by supersymmetry. So Neumann and Dirichlet are the most classical
boundary conditions. But here Neumann is dual to the one that's farthest from being classical. It's
the regular non pole. And the other is, okay, the following fact is important as background to
what David will tell you. Unfortunately, I'm not going to have time to give a very useful
introduction to what he'll say. When a gauge field obeys Neumann boundary conditions that means on
the boundary it's unconstrained. And therefore you can introduce on the boundary an arbitrary set of
degrees of freedom that interact in some way with that gauge field. So you can more generally
imagine Neumann plus any 3D quantum field theory with g symmetry. By the way, it's g and not g
dual because we're on the psi equals zero side of the duality. But here it's fairly natural to
consider not arbitrary quantum field theories but super conformal field theories with a lot of
supersymmetry. And these universal constructions I've told you about will lead to that because they
preserve a lot of supersymmetry. So while the regular non pole corresponds to Neumann, the other
ones correspond to Neumann coupled to some super conformal field theory with g symmetry. And that's
true for all of these. David and I said what we were able to about these super conformal field
theories but they're hard to study because they have symmetries that aren't visible. And I'll tell
you in a second why that's important. So a lot of what David has done more recently with various
collaborators is to introduce a new method to study these super conformal field theories. And
although I'd hope to give a better introduction than I'll be able to, I'm running out of time too
much so I won't say much. But I want to say something that'll make it clear why it's important for
geometrical angles. At the top we have the regular non pole and the dual is simple Neumann. As we go
down the non pole becomes simpler but the super conformal field theory grows. And at the bottom
on one side we had Dirichlet and on the other side we have Neumann coupled to a theory that David
and I called t of g. And t of g is an extremely interesting theory because it actually is, I hate to
throw this assertion out at the very end of a talk. But t of g is actually the universal kernel of
geometric lines. So why does it have that status? Well Dirichlet can be defined universally independent
of c. But now suppose we do reduce on c. Then we can, from a global point of view we can twist
Dirichlet because Dirichlet means the gauge fields are required to be zero on the boundary. But that
statement would be invariant under making a constant gauge transformation on the boundary. So
Dirichlet boundary conditions of G-dual gauge theory has G-dual as a group of global symmetries.
That's what you would say in four dimensions. But now when you compactify on a circle, for
example on a Riemann surface, but really if you compactify on anything, when you have global
symmetries you can make twists in going around noncontractable loops by elements of the global
symmetry group. So because Dirichlet has G-dual as a group of global symmetries, when you compactify
further you can make boundary conditions that are simply Dirichlet locally what globally are
modified by twisting by an almond of the automorphism group. So to reflect this fact,
T of G actually has G times G-dual global symmetry. So the fact, my description, Neumann
coupled to something, the something has to have G symmetry in general. Just so that you can
couple it to gauge fields with Neumann boundary conditions. But if it's dual to Dirichlet,
Dirichlet admitted G-dual as a group of global symmetries. So in that special case the something
will have G times G-dual symmetry. And T of G not only has G times G-dual symmetry, but at least
in the simple ace case it even has an automorphism that exchanges the two. That's an automorphism
that exchanges the Higgs and Coulomb branches. So if you understood T of G you would calculate the
dual to any G-dual local system simply by taking Neumann coupled to T of G twisting it by a G-dual
flat bundle. And that would be the answer, possibly a slightly abstract sounding answer. But what
David has been doing is putting that in a more concrete form. Now the difficulty in understanding
it is that although T of G has G times G-dual symmetry, that fact is difficult to see explicitly.
So in our paper we saw G times the maximal torus of G-dual inside G times G-dual. And by symmetry
we also could have seen T times G-dual. So since the symmetry that was manifest was only G times T-dual,
with such a description we would have been able to describe the dual of a local system of the dual
group whose structure group is actually a billion. But you need better methods to have hope to
describe, to use this method to describe the dual of a non-a billion local system of G-dual. And
David has worked at least there are some steps in the direction of being able to do that.
There's another word I want to say but maybe I'll stop right now for questions.
What kind of mathematical structures would you expect to, how would you try to see T of G?
Well it's actually a special case of the theory you study. So for example T of SU2
you take U1 times two hypermultipleths of charge one. So because there are two of them there's
an SU2 or SL2 symmetry of the Higgs branch. And because the gauge group is U1 there's a U1
symmetry in the Coulomb branch. But at the origin of the Coulomb branch there's a singularity. And
the singularity is an A1 singularity. And the A1 singularity actually has SU2 symmetry. So the
hidden, for the case of T of SU2 there's an easy U1 dual times SU2 global symmetry. But in the
infrared it's enhanced to SU2 dual times SU2 because of the nature of the singularity of the
Coulomb branch. Or at least that's how you would see it or part of it mathematically in your work.
Any other questions?
Yes of course that statement makes complete sense. What that statement means is the following.
So T of G has G times G dual symmetry. So I emphasized, a special case of what I was
saying is that anything with G symmetry can live on a boundary of a G gauge theory. But likewise
anything with G dual globals and she can live on the boundary. So we work on C times M2. But we
divide M2 in two halves. There's M1 inside M2. We're going to do G gauge theory on one side and G
dual gauge theory on the other side. So here the gauge group is G. Here it's G dual. And to complete
the picture along the defect we need a theory with G times G dual globals symmetry. The theory
with that property is T of G. So here lives T of G coupled to G on one side and G dual on the other
side. This is a symmetrical description. But if you like, if you want to concretely see the map
from a G dual boundary condition to a G boundary condition, you end the picture over here with
any boundary condition of G dual. And as I said earlier, the microscopic details are different,
but the logic is the same as when we were discussing line operators. In the effect of two
dimensional theory here we have a lined effect that we move up to the boundary. It gives an
effective boundary condition in the G theory. So the functor from G dual boundary conditions to G
boundary conditions is provided by T of G. Of course the picture was symmetrical. If we read it
backwards we would have gotten the functor in the opposite direction. Any other questions?
There will be discussion sections. There is something else I'd wanted to explain a little bit.
I'll stop if there's another question. There's something I'd wanted to explain a little bit,
but it's hopeless. Is there a discussion session now? I don't want to be responsible for people
missing the refreshments. I think I'll have the discipline to only say a word or two. When I was
working on geometric languines, which was mostly 10 to 12 years ago, there was something I was not
able to adequately understand. So in mathematical work it's important that certain things are
described in terms of two dimensional chiral algebras. That was not at all clear in any of the
papers that I and Anton Kapustin and Sergei Gukhov wrote at the time and it was just beginning to
become clear when I was working with Davide. Davide just said it much more deeply later. So why do
two dimensional chiral algebras enter in this story? I've described universal boundary conditions
on a four-dimensional theory. But you could try to divide the boundary into pieces and produce
interfaces between those boundary conditions. So we could look at corners where we, for example,
we could put Dirichlet here. Well, to make sense of this picture it takes more than I'm telling you,
but you could take a look at the fourth dimensional theory on a four-mount fold with
the corner where you put one boundary condition here and another boundary condition here. Well,
what's turned out is that in that situation you very frequently find that there's a chiral
algebra that lives at the corner, the two-dimensional chiral algebra. Remember in four dimensions
the corner is going to be two-dimensional. So this is a natural way that chiral algebras arise in
this story. I can't promise it explains everything, but it explains much more than what I just said
previously, certainly. Now apart from locking time, I can't really offer much of an introduction to
Davide's work, because I don't know it very well. But if I'd had more time, I at least would have
told you about what I did. So really, I will have the discipline not to try to explain this,
but there is a story that has to do with the Jones polynomial co-op homology and quantum groups
and how all that stuff will come into this story. And if you make the connection of all
those things with what I've been telling you today, you end up learning that you'd better
have chiral algebras living at corners. So disciplining myself to not spoil your refreshments,
that's the best I'll be able to say right now. Thank you.
